The Federal Aviation Administration announced award of a $3 485 861 contract to Westinghouse Electric Co.’s Aerospace and Electronic Systems Center to design, fabricate, install, and test one prototype air-route-surveillance radar, designated ARSR-3. The radar would include the latest technology to improve coverage area and target detection and to reduce clutter, (faa Release 73-26)
A real estate boom apparently would replace the space boom with the end of the Skylab program at Cape Canaveral, the Atlantic Journal Constitution said. Layoffs following Skylab’s end would reduce aerospace employment on the Cape to its lowest point in a decade; a total work force of less than 10 000 had been projected for December 1974. But unlike the cutbacks in 1969 and 1970, there was no panic. An influx of retirees from the North and from southern Florida had caused a shortage of homes. Unemployment in Brevard County was down to 4.2%; the area had once led the nation with more than 8% unemployed. (Hesser, Atlanta JC, 12/2/73) ences—discussed vestibular disturbances and the characteristics of human blood circulation under space flight conditions and developed recommendations for using common biomedical procedures. The Soviet delegation reported on pre- and postflight cardiovascular evaluations with lpwer-body negative pressure during the Soyuz 12 mission (launched Sept. 27). The report would permit the first direct comparison of Apollo, Skylab, and Soyuz data. The Soviet delegation visited JSC Mission Operations Control to observe facilities for monitoring the health of Skylab crews, Skylab one-g trainers, and the Skylab mobile laboratories. The Group’s recommendations would be forwarded to the NASA Administrator and the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences for confirmation, (nasa Release 73-273)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved a favorable report on S.J.R. 37—to change the name of NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Tex., to Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center—after hearing testimony from Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. (CR, ‘1/1/13, D71)
The National Academy of Sciences held its annual meeting and participated with the Smithsonian Institution in a joint program to honor the Copernican Quincentennial. Dr. Philip Handler, NAS President, announced that Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., retiring Secretary of the Air Force, would become president of the National Academy of Engineering in May and that the nae council had voted to sever NAe’s affiliation with NAS. NAS elected 95 new members. During the program devoted to cosmological questions and humanistic aspects of scientific research, Dr. Stephen Toulmin, Provost of the Univ. of California at Santa Cruz, said he had detected a lack of purpose among younger scientists that might be leading to the end of the intellectual era inaugurated by Copernicus. Dr. John A. Wheeler, Princeton Univ. physicist, said the collapse of the universe into a single, great “black hole” with the annihilation of all matter and all physical laws seemed inevitable. Black holes— superdense objects in space—had been predicted as end products of the collapse of large stars when they no longer produced sufficient heat to counter the weight of their own material. Black holes could serve as examples of what would happen if the universe ceased its expansion and began to fall back upon itself. Since its expansion did not have sufficient momentum to continue indefinitely, the universe could reach its maximum size in 40 billion yrs. Dr. Alan R. Sandage of the Hale Observatory said a five percent decrease in the brightness of galaxies for each billion years of their lifetime would alter the calculation and indicate indefinite expansion of the universe, (nas Memo to Press; Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/73; 4/28/73, 48; NYT, 4/26/73, 74; 4/29/73, 47) April 23—26:	The American Physical Society held its annual meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Edward H. Teller, Univ. of California physicist and atomic scientist, urged legislation to declassify all Government scientific secrets after one year. He predicted the action would force the U.S.S.R. to take similar action “in maybe 10 years,” because U.S. science and technology would advance faster without secrecy. Naval Research Laboratory scientist Dr. Herbert Friedman said most astronomers who believed that creation began with a “big bang” also believed that at least as much gas and dust had been left behind when the stars were formed as had been consumed in star formation. Recent findings had been that two clouds moved out in opposite directions from an exploding galaxy to form equally shaped spheres and that radio galaxies left wakes as they plowed through space. “In both cases you need great quantities of gas to put enough pressure on the clouds or the galaxies to slow them down. Galaxies moving through empty space leave no wakes or trains behind them.” (W Post, 4/25/73, A3; LA Times, 4/26/73) April 23—27:	A symposium at Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station presented ideas of NASA engineers on new uses by business, industry, labor, other Government agencies, and universities of Plum Brook facilities available because of NASA’s imminent shutdown of the station for budgetary reasons [see March 6]. (lcrc Release 73-21; LeRC pio) April 24:	The first Skylab prime crew—Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz—and backup crewmen Russell L. Schweickart, Dr. F. Story Musgrave, and Bruce McCandless, II, began the 21-day preflight isolation period at 8:30 am est in preparation for May 15 launch. Isolation would continue for seven days following their return from Skylab. Crewmen would be restricted to specific areas and limited in the number of approved personal contacts allowed during the immediate preflight and postflight periods. During the isolation only Skylab food and water would be consumed by the crew members. This diet would also continue for 18 days following the return from the mission, to obtain baseline data for Skylab medical experiments in nutrition and musculoskeletal evaluation series. (NASA Releases 73-84 & unnumbered, 4/30/74)
The General Accounting Office released its study Cost Growth in Major Weapons Systems made at the request of the House Committee on Armed Services. Cost overruns on 45 major weapon systems in the U.S. arsenal had totaled $31.3 billion. Each of the 45 systems had incurred an overrun. (Text) March 26—27:	Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, delivered the report United States Military Posture for FY 1974 to the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Defense Appropriations: Strategic parity existed between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. “While the Soviet Union has a substantial advantage, not only in the numbers of strategic missiles, but also in missile throw-weight, the United States still has a substantial advantage in other areas of key importance to the overall strategic balance—e.g., missile accuracy, MIRVs [multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles], submarine quietness, sonars, and numbers of bombers and bomber payload. And, while the Soviet Union has enormous advantage in air defense, without an extensive ABM [antiballistic missile] defense . . . the air defense could be substantially undercut by ballistic missile attack, particularly ... a large number of mirvs.” The U.S. advantages were transitory, resting on a “technological lead that has been steadily narrowing over the past decade.” With the momentum of the Soviet offensive research and development program, “we cannot preclude the possibility that our technological lead in this area may further diminish or disappear altogether during the current decade.” Adm. Moorer believed “that the Soviet Union will soon succeed in its efforts to develcrp an effective MIRV system for its strategic missiles. Thus, the Soviet Union may be able to challenge our lead in both missile guidance and mirvs . . . , and thereby pose a significant threat to our Minuteman force.” (Text) In a statement confirmed later by Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim, Adm. Moorer said the U.S.S.R. was actively testing three new intercontinental ballistic missiles and might deploy 60 improved multiple-warhead versions of an existing missile during the summer. He said the People’s Republic of China was expanding production of weapon-grade nuclear materiel and slowly but steadily building a stock of strategic and tactical nuclear weapons. (Beecher, NYT, 3/28/73, 4; dod pio) March 27:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Fernando de Mendonca, Director General of the Brazilian Institute for Space Research (inpe), signed a Memorandum of Understanding to extend the NASA—inpe cooperative project in remote sensing using the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite launched by NASA July 23, 1972. The project’s purpose was to advance applications of spacecraft and aircraft remote sensing to monitor environmental conditions. INPE would establish a data-acquisition station at Cuiaba, central Brazil, and a data-processing facility in Sao Paulo state. There would be no exchange of funds; both agencies would share all data and information necessary for the conduct of the program; and inpe would make available to NASA, cost free, copies of erts data it acquired and processed. The data would be available to the domestic and international community. (nasa Release 73-82)
The Thomas D. White Space Trophy Award of the National Geographic Society was presented in Washington, D.C., to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force [see April 28], Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson said at the award ceremony: “Bob Seamans is a distinguished scientist and administrator. He was formerly the Deputy Administrator of NASA and, for the past four years, has led the Air Force through a period marked by operational innovations and the initiation of a large number of essential modernization programs. Under his leadership a number of major advances have been made in the Department of Defense space programs, while the world has been mindful that United States operations in space do not pose a military threat to any country.” Dr. Seamans had ensured “a close working relationship” between dod and NASA, “including Defense support of NASA space operations and close cooperation in the design of the Space Shuttle.” (dod Release 213-73)
The General Accounting Office released Comptroller General!s Report to the Congress: Analysis of Cost Estimates for the Space Shuttle and Two Alternate Programs. The review, made by GAO at the request of Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), said gao was “not convinced that the choice of a launch system should be based principally on cost comparisons” and “not certain that the Space Shuttle is economically justified (is less costly when the time value of money is considered), even though NASA’s calculations show that it is.” Payload cost was the major element in program cost estimates for both the shuttle and alternate use of existing expendable launch vehicles. NASA had estimated $30.2 billion for the shuttle and $50.1 billion for the expendable systems. The $19.9-billion difference was due to estimated low-cost design of shuttle payloads which could be recovered, refurbished, and reused. GAO recommended that Congress “consider the future space missions used in NASA’s economic analysis ... to determine whether these missions are a reasonable basis for space program planning at this time” and “review the estimates for the Space Shuttle annually, giving due consideration to the appropriateness of the missions used in making those estimates.” {CR, 6/8/73, S10703^1)
President Nixon sent to the Senate the nomination of Dr. Gerald F. Tape to be the U.S. Representative to the International Atomic Energy Agency with the rank of Ambassador. Tape would succeed Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, who had resigned. The nomination was confirmed by the Senate June 7. (PD, 5/14/73, 658, 669; Tape Off)
Alexander P. Butterfield was sworn in as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration by Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar. Butterfield succeeded John H. Shaffer, who had returned to private life after four years as faa Administrator, (faa Release, 3/22/73)
President Nixon congratulated recipients of the 1973 Federal Women’s Award at the White House. Among the recipients was Marjorie R. Townsend, Project Manager, Small Astronomy Satellite, Goddard Space Flight Center [see Feb. 22], (PD, 3/12/73, 233)
Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield presented honorary faa Airframe and Powerplant Mechanic’s Certificates with an especially established “spacecraft rating” to Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Butterfield said: “The in-flight repair job you performed on the Skylab orbital workshop was one of the most spectacular achievements of the entire space program. It transformed a potentially disastrous mission into an outstanding success and demonstrated once again man’s ingenuity in the face of adversity. I’m sure every aviation mechanic in the country is proud to have you as honorary members of their select and highly skilled fraternity.” The awards were sponsored by the Aviation Maintenance Foundation in cooperation with faa and the aviation industry, (faa Release 73-173)
NASA launched two Aerohee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment to a 169.0-km (105-mi) altitude. The second, launched 45 min later, carried a Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy experiment to a 174.6-km (108.5-mi) altitude. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 11:	Four of eight damaged stabilizing fins discovered on the Skylab 4 Saturn IB launch vehicle Nov. 6 had been replaced hy Kennedy Space Center ground crews, Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said at a KSC press briefing. Despite rain and high wind the work was accelerating to meet the Nov. 15 launch date. (Transcript) November 12:	Kennedy Space Center ground crews working to replace eight damaged fins discovered on the Skylab 4 Saturn IB launch vehicle Nov. 6 discovered additional cracks in seven of eight structural beams in the aft intersection of the rocket. Because of the new discovery and the subsequent necessary examinations and evaluations of other susceptible sections of the rocket, Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced at a KSC press briefing a further postponement of the Nov. 15 launch. A new launch date would be set after the situation was assessed. Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that the newly discovered cracks might have been the “result of residual stresses left in the forgings from the fabrication process.” (Transcript)
President Nixon announced the designation of Robert D. Timm Chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board, effective March 2. He would succeed retiring Secor D. Browne. The President also accepted the resignation of the first NASA Administrator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, as U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency. He submitted to the Senate the nomination of Alexander P. Butterfield to be Federal Aviation Administrator. (PD, 2/26/73, 189, 244; 3/5/73, 192) February 26-March 3: The nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine met in Moscow to exchange information on preliminary biomedical results of the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7—9, 1972) and Soviet research in weightlessness modeling. The Group agreed on common procedures to test body negative pressure, to make active orthostatic evaluations, and to make biochemical blood and urine studies, permitting comparison of pre- and postflight data on body functions. The Group also discussed biological experiments in space and countermeasures to weightlessness. The U.S. delegation—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences— visited Soviet medical research facilities and the Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training. They examined spacecraft trainers, medical equipment used for cosmonaut training and evaluation, and medical instrumentation used on Salyut spacecraft. The Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. R. N. Gurovsky. The next meeting would be held in the U.S. in late 1973 or early 1974. (nasa Release 73-79) February 27:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 4567, House version of the $3.016-billion NASA FY 1974 authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said the “historic accomplishments of the Apollo program” were “an open record and an enduring tribute to a basic belief in human progress. The Apollo flights, in three short years, gave us an order of magnitude increase in our knowledge of the solar system. Although the epic Apollo voyages have ended, the results of these missions will provide the scientific, the technical, and medical, and the managerial communities with a rich store of data that will be studied and analyzed for many years to come.” NASA had completed the Apollo program and “moved from the era of learning how to live and work in space to a new plateau, where this Nation can utilize space and its unique capabilities for expanding its horizons in science and in applications, in defense, commercial activities and in international cooperation at reduced costs.” Skylab—scheduled for May launch—would be the “first post-Apollo step into the intensive utilization of space” and toward reorienting manned space activities to earth orbit. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) , scheduled for July 1975 launch, would be “a major step forward in meaningful and beneficial international cooperation in manned space flight” and a significant step in space safety and in reducing costs by cooperation. Later, the space shuttle would provide “ample additional opportunities for meaningful technical and economic cooperation in space.” One opportunity would be to carry sortie, lab being developed by group of European nations using their own funds. Closing out of Apollo activity would include “very careful screening of available production tooling for applicability to future shuttle or other NASA requirements.” Available flight articles included two Saturn V and two Saturn IB launch vehicles, one completed command and service module, two partially assembled csms, and a backup Skylab cluster. This hardware would he placed in storage for potential use. (Transcript)
NASA turned off Oao 2 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory at 10:40 pm EST during the 22 000th earth orbit by the spacecraft launched Dec. 7, 1968. Oao 2, designed to operate for one year, had “far exceeded the fondest hopes” of NASA officials by operating more than four years. (NASA prog off; AP, SD Union, 2/14/73)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt arrived in Pakistan to discuss the U.S. space program with Pakistani President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and present a Pakistani flag they had taken to the moon during their Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. (upi, W Post, 6/20/73, A18)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, presented 104 Skylab awards to employees from nasa Hq., Johnson Space Center, Kennedy Space Center, and Marshall Space Flight Center during an msfc ceremony attended by Skylab 2 crew Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz. Also participating were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, and Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider, (nasa Release 73—156; Marshall Star, 10/31/73, 1)
A specially equipped United Air Lines, Inc., 727—200 jet transport aircraft was testing two-segment landing approach procedures to reduce noise levels near airport landing patterns in an Ames Research Center and Federal Aviation Administration cooperative program. The aircraft first descended at a steeper than usual glide-path angle. As the aircraft neared the runway and intersected the normal, shallow-approach flight path, the glide-path angle was decreased and the final landing made normally. A 67% reduction in the area disturbed by objectionable landing noise was expected to be achieved, (nasa Release 73-113)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, compared the nasa FY 1974 budget program with FY 1973 plans in testimony before the opening session of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization: “Last year Congress approved $3.4 billion, the full amount of the President’s recommendations. In presenting the budget last year, I was able to state to the Congress that the planning associated with the $3.4 billion budget request was configured so as not to require an increase in future NASA budgets above the $3.4 billion level, . . . except as necessary to meet the effects of inflation, or unless new decisions were made to expand the program.” NASA then had had “a balanced and productive program which did not include any ‘built-in’ commitments that would require a higher total level of NASA funding in future years.” nasa’s FY 1974 budget represented a change in this plan. “To meet the necessary constraints on total Government spending in FY 1973 and FY 1974 we have had to reduce our budget plans below the $3.4 billion level by a total of almost $400 million for the 2-year period.” But program objectives were generally the same, “even though some of them will necessarily be achieved at later dates. For this reason, NASA budgets in future years will have to increase. . . . This need is recognized in the preliminary projections for FY 1975.” NASA was “handling the reductions in our FY 1973 and FY 1974 budget plans in a way that will not increase the levels of future funding required above those projected last year.” Dr. Fletcher believed this to be minimum level for space and aeronautics program U.S. should support. The program’s major elements—space shuttle, unmanned planetary and scientific missions, space applications and aeronautics program components, and others—“are ones that have been presented and approved in previous years.” nasa had “squeezed and stretched the program about as far as we can. In some of the reductions we have made in FY 1973 and FY 1974 we may have gone too far. Any further significant reductions would mean a real loss in a key element of the program.” NASA was requesting FY 1974 funds for an advanced supersonic technology program to provide technology for future military supersonic aircraft, data to assess environmental and economic impacts on the U.S. of present and future foreign supersonic aircraft, and a “sound technical basis for any future consideration that may be given by the United States to the development of an environmentally acceptable and economically viable commercial supersonic transport.” The request did not include funds for initiating SST development and did not commit the U.S. to development. Dr. Fletcher was accompanied by Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Charles Conrad, Jr., as well as other NASA officials. (Transcript)
The retirement, effective Dec. 31, of Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator, and Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science, was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Dr. Newell had transferred to nasa in October 1958 from the Naval Research Laboratory, where he had been Science Program Coordinator for Project Vanguard, the Nation’s first satellite program, and Acting Superintendent of the Atmosphere and Astrophysics Div. He served four years as nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications before becoming Associate Administrator in 1967. Dr. Newell held the American Institute of Aeronautics’ Pendray Award, the American Astronautical Society’s Space Flight Award, the President’s Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service, and the nasa Distinguished Service Medal, among other honors. Dr. Fletcher said:	“Dr. Newell’s efforts in the space program antedate the birth of nasa. He has served this agency with distinction and dedication and he will be sorely missed.” Johnson, who had joined NASA from the Navy in 1960, had served as Deputy Associate Administrator of the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1970. He had assumed his present post in 1971. “Mr. Johnson has been an able and conscientious leader in advancing our unmanned space programs and we are sorry to see him go,” Dr. Fletcher said, (nasa Ann; nasa Releases 74^4, 74-5)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) introduced S. 734 for himself and Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) and Sen. Lawton M. Chiles, Jr. (D-Fla.), “to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to establish a Man in Space National Historic Site at Cape Kennedy.” The bill would establish a site on the area comprising Launch Complexes 5 and 6, which had been used for the Redstone, Jupiter C, Juno I and II, and Mercury-Redstone launches, as well as Little Joe II in support of the Apollo program. (CR, 2/1/73, S1798; Draft icsc Hist Note, 2/72) February 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA’s outlook for the future in a letter to the NASA staff: “I regret that we have not been able to stabilize NASA’s budget at about the $3.4 billion level . . . and that our reduced program workload necessitates a further reduction in . . . NASA employees. I am pleased, though, that we can proceed with most of our mainline programs and schedules for this decade with little change.” With the May launch of Skylab “we should be able to give the world a very impressive demonstration of the tremendous new capabilities we now have for using manned and unmanned spacecraft in Earth orbit. I believe that Skylab will awaken public interest throughout the world in the usefulness of scientific and practical observations to be made from Earth orbit, and in the ‘space manufacturing’ experiments. I am also confident that the reports from Pioneer 10 as it swings past Jupiter in December will stimulate strong public interest in expanded programs to explore the planets. Our joint flight with the Russians in 1975 will stress the potential of large-scale international cooperation in space. The Viking Lander on Mars may produce the first evidence of life in the universe beyond the confines of our home planet Earth; and it may suggest to Americans the real potential of space exploration as a continuing and expanding activity during our third century as an independent and democratic nation.” Dr. Fletcher forecast a favorable NASA future: “With another year of excellent performance in 1973 like we had in 1972, and continued strong bi-partisan support in Congress, this forecast is bound to become a reality.” (NASA Activities, 2/15/73, 26-8)
Demonstration electromechanical devices developed for emergency aid to astronauts in space had been adapted, tested, and installed in a Huntsville (Ala.) Hospital room by Marshall Space Flight Center, nasa announced. The devices permitted remote control by severely handicapped or paralyzed patients of communications systems and appliances for comfort and recreation, (nasa Release 73-169) August 25:	A New York Times editorial praised Skylab 3 (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14) as the mission passed the 28-day mark set by Skylab 1—2 (May 14-June 22), to become the longest manned space mission to date: The Skylab 3 astronauts “already have much more than mere longevity in space to their credit. Their two long walks in space have permitted them to do more useful work in orbit outside their vehicle than human beings ever have done before. Their scientific observations and experiments—particularly the study of the sun—have added much to human knowledge.” With its midpoint near, Skylab 3 had already “proved itself one of the most productive manned space missions since the first sputnik went into orbit almost a generation ago.” (NYT, 8/25/73, 22) August 26:	Albion, Mich., police had reported the recovery of a spacesuit worn by Astronaut Alan L. Bean during the Apollo 12 mission (Nov. 14-24, 1969), the Associated Press reported. The suit, valued at $6000, had been on loan from the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum when it was taken from the Kingman Museum in Battle Creek, Mich., a week earlier. (W Post, 8/27/73, A22) August 27:	nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center was officially rededicated as Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in ceremonies at jsc, attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator; Texas Gov. Dolph Briscoe; and Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson. A bust of the late President Johnson by sculptress Jimilu Mason, donated by the Houston Chamber of Commerce and the Albert Thomas Space Hall of Fame, was unveiled. A Johnson Room opened in the jsc Visitor Center displayed the original U.S. copy of the Treaty for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, signed in 1967 during President Johnson’s Administration. At the dedication Dr. Fletcher said that President Johnson had needed “great political courage” 1965-1967 to fight for funds for NASA programs of the 1970s such as Skylab and Viking. “The decision to continue with a strong space program after Apollo may . . . prove to be the most important of all the decisive actions Lyndon Johnson undertook on behalf of space progress.” Earlier in the day Astronaut Alan L. Bean, commander of the Skylab 3 crew orbiting the earth after July 28 launch to join the Orbital Workshop for 59 days, had radioed: “We think the work in which we are engaged right now would not have been possible except for [Johnson’s] strong support and leadership in the Senate and the Presidency.” President Johnson himself had said—on a March 1, 1968, visit to msc—referring to the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958: “The one legislative enactment that I suppose I am proudest of is the bill that I wrote and introduced that made possible NASA, that brought into existence this great facility and others in the program throughout the nation.” President Nixon had signed the law making the name change Feb. 17. Mr. Johnson had died Jan. 22. (Transcript; jsc Roundup, 8/17/73; 8/31/73; McElheny, NYT, 8/28/73, 24)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt) were held in Geneva. (fbis-Sov, 11/19/73, AA1) November 7:	A five-day delay in the launch of Skylab 4, third and final manned Skylab mission, was announced by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider at a Kennedy Space Center press briefing. The delay was caused by the discovery of cracks in the Saturn IB launch vehicle fins [see Nov. 6], The earliest rescheduled launch time would be 9:27 am est Nov. 15. Director of Launch Operations at icsc Walter J.	Kapryan said the 3.8-cm-long (1.5-in-long) cracks probably were caused by stress erosion—exposure of the material to the elements combined with stress from the weight of the fueled vehicle—and would have caused the breakup of the vehicle at 12 000 m (40 000 ft), where the rocket underwent maximum aerodynamic stress. All eight fins would be replaced. New fins were being shipped from Michoud Assembly Facility for replacement on the launch pad. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 11/8/73, A3)
The Skylab 3 astronauts rested aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans following their splashdown [see July 28—Sept. 25], Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, told the press at Johnson Space Center that their 59-day mission had proved man’s usefulness in earth orbit as the Apollo missions had proved his use of the moon. “In the 15 years since its founding, nasa has successfully placed more than 250 payloads in earth orbit. Of all these, the mission that we completed today will perhaps prove to be the most fruitful of all.” Skylab 3 had proved “how great an advantage it is to have the human mind on the scene to make judgments, to observe, to respond to unexpected developments, and to effect corrective measures. All these were demonstrated on Skylab.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said the Skylab 3 astronauts had surpassed their scientific objectives by 150%. “The mission can only be described in superlatives.” (O’Toole, W Post, 9/26/73, 1A; AP, B Sun, 9/26/75)
The National Science Foundation released National Patterns of R&D Resources: Funds & Manpower in the United States 1953—1973 (nsf 73-303). Total U.S. research and development spending was expected to reach $30.1 billion in 1973, 3% above the $29.2-billion 1972 level. R&D was expected to account for 2.4% of the gross national product (gnp) in 1973, down from 2.5% in 1972 and 3.0% in peak year 1964. The Federal Government would support 53% of U.S. R&D in 1973, with about 70% concentrated in defense and space programs. Almost 40% of R&D spending in the U.S. was for research, with 1973 basic research expenditures estimated at $4.5 billion and applied research at $6.8 billion. Development spending was estimated at $18.8 billion. Colleges and universities would perform nearly three fifths of U.S. basic research, with industry leading in applied research and development. An estimated 525 000 R&D scientists and engineers were employed in the U.S. in 1972, 1% fewer than in 1971. Of these, nearly 70% were employed by industry. (Text)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the statement given out at the nasa FY 1974 budget briefing held Jan. 27: “The budget the President has approved for NASA for FY 1974, like those of other agencies, has been reduced substantially below previous plans and expectations to hold total government spending to the targets set by the President. At the same time, the budget will permit NASA to carry forward a substantial and significant program in space and aeronautics.” The budget provided for continuing the major projects in the schedule announced Jan. 5 and for starting two new projects: Nimbus-G, “another in NASA’s series of experimental earth oriented satellites, which will be directed at environmental pollution and oceanographic measurements, and LAGEOS, a new geodetic satellite for extremely accurate measurements of movements of the earth’s surface.” In addition to reductions in programs announced Jan. 5, the budget required “that we stretch out schedules in a number of ongoing projects. The second Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-b) will be delayed two years, until 1976. This will allow it to carry an additional sensor. Tiros-N, the prototype of a new series of operational meteorological satellites for the National Weather Service, will be delayed by about one year to 1977. “We will also undergo another belt-tightening in NASA. By the end of FY 1974 our civil service complement will be reduced 1880 positions below the FY 1973 end strength approved in the FY 1973 budget. This reduction includes the previously announced reductions related to the termination of our nuclear programs.” Despite a “sharp decrease from the level budget anticipated last year,” Dr. Fletcher was “very pleased with the program content we were able to retain. Clearly from what has been said today and on January 5, we will have to curtail several activities that are of major importance to the nation.” But “we have been able to keep NASA’s main line program essentially intact and each of the programs curtailed will still be done, either at a later date than anticipated or in an alternate way to that planned last year. Although I, personally, would like to see a higher NASA budget, I believe we can capitalize on the belt-tightening required to produce even greater yield for the tax dollar in future years.” NASA was “making substantial efforts to reduce future costs . . . while still giving the nation a strong program in space and aeronautics.” Additionally, a prime object of the space shuttle program was to reduce costs of operating in space. NASA intended to “develop and introduce new design concepts and management approaches which, together with the relaxed weight and size constraints of the Space Shuttle, will result in substantially lower development and operating costs.” NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly discussed personnel cutbacks necessitated by the new budgetary limitations. The total NASA Civil Service reduction of 1880 positions would include a Marshall Space Flight Center cut of 650; Goddard Space Flight Center, 158; Kennedy Space Center, 100; Manned Spacecraft Center, 75; Wallops Station, 17; Lewis Research Center, 660; nasa Hq., 150; and Ames, Langley, and Flight Research Centers, a total of 70. From a peak Civil Service complement of more than 34 000 in 1967, nasa would be reduced to under 25 000 employees by June 1974—a drop of 30%. Total employees from all sources—contract and in-house—would drop from the 1966 peak of 420 000 to about 100 000. (Text; Transcript)
A Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the supersonic transport effort: Environmental and economic problems and order cancellations had created a bleak outlook for the French and British Concorde. The modest budget request for research into the environmental impact of the U.S. SST by the Nixon Administration was realistic and should be approved by Congress “for the nation’s protection.” But the Administration should be “resigned to its defeat of 1971 in the building of an SST prototype.” (W Star & News, 2/8/73, A10) February 9:	Aspects of President Nixon’s FY 1974 budget requests were discussed in a Science article: The space program seemed “alive and well as it makes the transition into the post-Apollo era, despite recent fears . . . that its activities might be cut back severely.” NASA officials seemed confident the space shuttle would be built. The President had supported the project “although his new budget message contained no mention of the space program” and, “in Congress, it has survived handily all past attempts to kill it. The fact that the project helps sustain an aerospace industry that has suffered grievously from layoffs is a point lost on no one. And then too, NASA has going for it the fact that, both in Apollo and in the unmanned programs, it has generally met its goals and stayed within its budget.” Evidence existed “that the President does indeed look to a possible revival” of the supersonic transport “but not until later in the 1970’s. The new NASA budget contains $28 million—more than twice as much as last year’s budget—for research and development on supersonic technology. The work focuses on problems of noise, pollution, and efficiency of configuration.” (Carter, Science, 2/9/73, 551-2)
The resignation of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as Secretary of the Air Force was accepted by President Nixon with deep regret and appreciation for his years of outstanding public service to the Air Force and to nasa. He had served nasa as Associate Administrator 1960-1965 and as Deputy Administrator 1965—1968. Dr. Seamans became President of the National Academy of Engineering, succeeding Clarence H. Linder, nae president since 1970. {PD, 5/21/73, 682; nae Release 5/16/73; nasa Biog; A&A 1968)
Science & Government Report commented on results of the March 19-21 Washington, D.C., meeting of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation: “What is clear is that after two postponements of the Commission’s debut and a good deal of indecisiveness, at least on the Washington end, concerning how much R&D [research and development] cooperation to offer the Soviets, both parties are approaching the relationship with caution and no evidence of haste. We will no doubt be seeing more Soviet researchers than ever before, and access to labs in the USSR will be eased a bit for American visitors, but the politically inspired match of the two research communities should not be mistaken for a raging love affair.” (Sci & Govt Rpt, 4/1/73, 3)	... April 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified on nasa’s role in supersonic transport aircraft development before the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans during FY 1974 appropriation hearings: “I don’t think we can turn our back on supersonic technology. This is a fact of life. Military planes are flying supersonically in this country; ssts are flying in Europe and Russia. We can not just say we don’t want to build a transport ourselves and therefore we should turn off all technology in this area. What we are doing in NASA is trying to address ourselves to the main problems with supersonic flight, both military and civilian. The main problems include the economic factors involved, the pollution of the stratosphere, and the noise.” NASA was the only agency qualified to investigate these problems but “I do think that the Congress has responsibility to determine any future development of a supersonic transport in this country, at least as far as the Government’s support of such a program, and it is not our intention to in any way change that decision.” (Transcript)
The European Space Research Organization had settled on “Ariane” as the name for the European L-3S launcher, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported, esro previously had selected “Vega,” but some member countries had objected that Vega was a French beer. (Av Wk, 10/29/73, 9) October 29-November 2:	NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration flight-tested a United Air Lines 727 transport aircraft at West Coast airports to evaluate the effects of wing tip vortex trailing during two-segment instrument landing approaches. The tests were part of a continuing NASA and faa study of wing wake vortices, invisible flows of turbulent air streaming from aircraft wing tips in circular or funnel motion. The UAL 727 was flown under contract to Ames Research Center. (nasa Release 73-237)
Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, U.S.S.R. director of cosmonaut training, denied Western press reports of recent Soviet space failures and said there would be manned Soviet launches before the 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission, during a Moscow interview with U.S. correspondents. Of Soyuz 2 (launched April 3 and reported to have disintegrated in space) he said, “This craft this time was not intended for manned flight. The experiment was successfully completed and we are satisfied with the results.” Salyut 2 had had a “much more narrow purpose” than Salyut 1 (launched April 19, 1971, as a space station). Salyut 2 was “intended to finalize some design peculiarities. As soon as it fulfilled its task, it finished its existence.” Several manned space flights were planned as part of the Soviet space program and to test design changes in the Soyuz spacecraft for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp). The U.S.S.R. was considering admitting Western journalists to their space facilities for the first time and the establishment of a press center at Baykonur Cosmodrome, but newsmen would not be permitted beyond 7 km (4.3 mi) of the launch site, (upi, Inti Herald Tribune, 6/27/73; B Sun, 6/27/73, A2)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, outlined Apollo program achievements in a speech before the National Security Industrial Assn, in Los Angeles. The Apollo program had reasserted U.S. technological leadership, exploded theory that only a controlled economy and Communist society could succeed with large scientific and technological undertakings such as space exploration, demonstrated “that we could respond effectively to a totalitarian challenge without resorting to totalitarian methods,” and produced the kind of Government-industry cooperation on large-scale research and development programs needed to make the American system work and keep it competitive with any other systems in the world. Apollo had reinforced “Can Do attitude that has made America great,” met national security requirements in 1960s for rapid progress in manned space flight technology and wide experience in the field, obtained valuable scientific knowledge obtainable no other way, “discovered” planet Earth on the way to the moon, forced creation of new technology “as no peacetime enterprise in history has done—or could do up to now,” contributed spiritually to lives of all Americans, “and stayed within estimated cost bounds.” The program had cost $25 billion, or $11 per person per year from 1961 through 1972. “Who or what could have produced more security, more economic benefits, more pride in achievement, more confidence in our future as a free people—for $11 per year?” (NASA Activities, 2/15/73, 29—30)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah), Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee Chairman, urged in a letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher that the NASA Administrator “promptly appoint an investigative board to make a detailed inquiry” into the malfunction of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop—as ground crews at Marshall Space Flight Center studied options for overcoming the loss of the spacecraft’s protective shield, torn away during its May 14 launch, and of augmenting its electrical power, (upi, NYT, 5/17/73; Marshall Star, 6/13/73, 1)
Award of separate $10 000 contracts to nine aerospace companies for studies leading to advanced technology for highly maneuverable aircraft was announced by Flight Research Center. Boeing Co., Development Sciences, Inc., General Dynamics Corp., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Lockheed-California Co., ltv Aerospace Corp., Northrop Corp., Rockwell International Corp., and Teledyne Ryan Aeronautical Corp. would have three months to define design concepts and prepare a preliminary plan for developing design technology. Several contractors might then be selected for further contracts of $200 000 each for preliminary design of their concepts, (frc Release 10-73; frc pio)
NASA’s hydrogen injection program—to decrease automobile and aircraft engine pollution by injecting hydrogen gas into the gasoline and air mixture before combustion—was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in a speech before the Economic Club of Detroit. The program, being carried out by Jet Propulsion Laboratory with assistance from Lewis Research Center, was “an exciting experimental effort to bring old and new technology to bear on one of the major problems of modern society.” In Phase 1, begun in April for conclusion in December, small amounts of hydrogen gas were being injected into a lean gasoline and air mixture to be burned in a standard automobile engine, first in a laboratory and later in an operating automobile with bottled hydrogen carried in its trunk. Preliminary laboratory tests had shown “a significant reduction in pollution without an increase in fuel consumption. In fact, our preliminary figures indicate that hydrogen injection may even produce a fuel saving. This comes both from the direct effect of the hydrogen on the combustion process and from the better atomization of the fuel mixture.” Work was progressing at LeRC on a laboratory model of a generator in which the hydrogen would be produced from gasoline and water. Phase 2 would attempt to solve engineering problems in integrating the hydrogen injection system, generators, and fuel controls into a smooth-running automobile. (NASA Activities, 10/15/73, 183—4)
Former nasa scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Hampshire College astronomer, criticized manned space flight spending in a New York Times article: “The spectacular problems of the $2.5-billion Skylab mission and the failure of the first three Soviet Salyut space stations may have dealt a death blow to manned space flight. The enormous expense, the high risk, the much-ballyhooed and grossly exaggerated claims about the pertinence of manned earth orbital flights to the quality of life on earth are creating an ever-widening credibility gap between the public interest and a vested interest inherited from the space of the nineteen-sixties. The result is the squandering of public funds.” He suggested “indefinite postponement of the space shuttle program, a reduction in excessive NASA management costs and the establishment of a moderate unmanned space program emphasizing space science and applications” on a less than $2-billion budget. (NYT, 6/5/73, 39)
Exclusive astronaut writing contracts with Life magazine and other media had harmed the press, the public interest, the space program, and the astronauts themselves, Robert Sherrod said in a Columbia Journalism Review article released in advance of its May/June publication date. The contracts had brought relatively little money to all but a few astronauts and had distorted their individuality and diversity into a “deodorized, plasticized, and homogenized” image. Under the contract system, NASA could censor whatever the astronauts signed. “Even though this censorship was rarely invoked, it was inhibiting; so was the necessity of Life's making the astronauts look good, and vice versa." President Kennedy had originally opposed the contracts, but had been persuaded in their favor by Project Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. Former President Johnson had supported the contracts in a letter Sherrod received a few months before Johnson’s Jan. 22 death. Sherrod said the contract system had had no adverse affects on the flow of space news. “Due in large part to the exclusion policy, many members of the working press deeply resented NASA.” (Text)
The Federal Aviation Administration and industry Area Navigation Task Force issued the report Application of Area Navigation in the National Airspace System. It recommended a 10-yr program to establish area navigation as the primary method of aircraft navigation in the U.S. The program called for a total overhaul of the airspace route structure above 5000 m (18 000 ft) and redesign of high- and medium-density terminal areas. Small airborne computers would enable pilots to fly designed courses by extrapolating signals from ground navigation aids, freeing them from the necessity of flying directly between ground stations and allowing greater flexibility in route selection, (faa Release 73-45)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, continued testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization. Dr. Fletcher explained the decision to cancel the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program because of FY 1974 budgetary restrictions. “The Air Force STOL program turned out to use some of the advanced concepts that we had developed in NASA and some of which we were planning to use on the QUESTOL.” The main difficulty with the Air Force advanced medium STOL transport (amst) “is that it doesn’t have the proper engine—you couldn’t operate a noisy transport like that for commercial uses, especially in a city—and we are proceeding post haste with the advancement of technology for an engine for missions such as that, in the quiet, clean, STOL experimental engine (qcsee) program.” It was not clear when the STOL would be phased into the current fleet. “The technology would be developed by and large for commercial aircraft, with quiet engines and at some later date either we or more probably a commercial company can put these technologies together and develop that STOL as the need requires.” (Transcript)
President Nixon sent a $268.7-billion FY 1974 national budget request to Congress—an increase of $18.9 billion over FY 1973. The budget projection for the succeeding fiscal year was included for first time, with the FY 1975 budget estimated at $288 billion. The national total for FY 1974 included an R&D budget of $17.4 billion (an increase of $300 million), with $3.1 billion requested for civilian and military space programs. Emphasis was on practical, immediate results from R&D rather than expanding scientific knowledge, with reduced priority for space research. The total request for NASA new obligational authority of $3,016 billion (1.2% of the total U.S. budget) was $391 million less than the FY 1973 noa of $3,407 billion. FY 1973 funds of $91 million were to be carried over to FY 1974. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase $74 million, from $3,062 billion in FY 1973 to $3,136 billion. The FY 1973 increase of $11 million had been largely for space shuttle engine and airframe design and development. Of the FY 1974 budget request, $2,288 billion would go for R&D, $112 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. In manned space flight, elimination of Apollo funding reflected successful completion of the Apollo program with the Apollo 17 mission. Manned space flight operations—including $233.8 million for Skylab; $90 million for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) ; $220.2 million for development, test, and mission operations; $21 million for space life sciences; and $15.5 million for mission systems and integration— would decrease from $879 million in FY 1973 to $580.5 million. The decrease reflected removal of space shuttle funding from the manned spacecraft operations category to separate program status. The FY 1974 budget request allocated $475 million to the space shuttle program for the orbiter, main engine, solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tanks, technology and related development, and vehicle and engine definition. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring the total for manned space flight (including the shuttle) to $1,057 billion, down $100 million from FY 1973. Funding for space science programs would decrease $95.2 million, from $679.2 million in FY 1973 to $584 million in FY 1974. The decrease reflected suspension of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program, in which two flights had originally been scheduled during 1976-1978. The physics and astronomy program would receive $95 million, down from $126.2 million; lunar and planetary exploration would receive $312 million, down from $331.9 million; and launch vehicle procurement would receive $177 million, down from $221 million. NASA’s space applications programs would receive $153 million (a decrease of $35.7 million), including $51 million for weather and climate research with satellites, meteorological soundings, experimental instruments and techniques, and for the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $13.9 million for pollution monitoring, including $9 million for Nimbus-G oceanographic and air pollution observation satellite; $42.6 million for earth resources survey; $10.7 million for earth and ocean physics; $3.1 million for space processing; $22.1 million for communications, including a multi-use communications experiment satellite (ats-f) and a Canadian Cooperative Satellite (cas-c) ; $3 million for a multidisciplinary Earth Observing Satellite (eos) ; $4.5 million for shuttle experiment definition; and $2 million for application studies. The total requested for NASA’s aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $232.5 million in FY 1973 to $240 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $150.6 million in FY 1973 to $171 million, including $22 million for experimental engine programs, $9.3 million for flight experiment programs, and $30 million for system technology programs. Space research and technology would receive $65 million, and nuclear power and propulsion $4 million (a drop from $17.1 million). Tracking and data acquisition funding would rise from $248.3 million in FY 1973 to $250 million. The Dept, of Defense FY 1974 budget of $85 billion was at an1 all-time high,	$4.1	billion above the	FY 1973 budget	authority, but was 28.4% of	total Federal outlays for	FY 1974 (a	percentage decrease from 29.0% in FY 1973 and the lowest proportion since 1950) and 6.0% of the	gross	national product	(the lowest	GNP	percentage in 24 yrs, down	from	6.2% in FY 1973). The dod	total	included $8.7 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation (rdt&e), a $600 million increase over FY 1973. Of the requested rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, the first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, a prototype satellite to demonstrate precise navigation capabilities, continued flight experiment programs, and technology programs in advanced navigation, guidance, sensors, cooling, reentry, and propulsion—would receive $604.6 million (up $169.9 million). Military sciences would receive $509.8 million (up $13.7 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,787 billion (down $86 million), and missiles rdt&e $2,245 billion (up $143 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for the Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile system ($1,712 billion, up $917 million), new Air Force F—4J jet fighter aircraft ($131 million), CVN-70 aircraft carrier ($657 million, up $358 million) and F-15 air superiority fighter ($1,148 billion, up $240 million). Decreases of $198 million in funding for the Safeguard antiballistic missile system, $208 million for the Poseidon missile, and $64 million for the short-range attack missile (sram) reflected a modernization program, as dod continued the transition from combat support in Southeast Asia to strengthening baseline forces. The Dept, of Transportation budget request of $9,025 billion was a decrease of $2,302 billion from FY 1973. dot funding would continue a 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration funding of $2,126 billion would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect the upper atmosphere, and design a safer and more productive airport system. The Atomic Energy Commission FY 1974 budget request of $3,066 billion, up $382 million over FY 1973, would cover production of nuclear materials to make electricity and for use in nuclear weapons and as nuclear reactor fuel, research into availability of source materials, operation safety, and development of techniques for long-term storage of radioactive waste. The National Science Foundation FY 1974 budget request of $582.6 million was down $63.1 million from FY 1973, but r&d funding would increase from $510.3 million in FY 1973 to $554.1 million. Programs would emphasize research into domestic problems, problems of long-range national interest, and effects of R&D on the economy. Priorities would include development of solar power as an energy source and of tunneling technology for urban use under the Research Applied to National Needs (rann) program and development of a very-large-array radioastronomy facility. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (in the Dept, of Commerce) budget request of $343.0 million, down from $366.7 million in FY 1973, would permit continued improvements in weather monitoring, prediction, and warning; continuation of its polar orbiting satellite system and implementation of a two-geostationary satellite system in the weather satellite program; major hurricane modification research; and expansion of research on marine ecosystems analysis to determine effects of ocean dumping. The Environmental Protection Agency budget request of $148.7 million was down from $173.1 million in FY 1973. (omb, Budget of the US Govt, FY 1974; US Budget in Brief; Special Analysis; nasa budget briefing transcript; DOD Release 44-73; AIAA Release 73—3; nsf Release 73-106)
Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.) became a Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator. He would also serve as Acting Assistant Administrator for dod and Interagency Affairs. Gen. Holloway, former Commander of the Air Force Strategic Air Command, had joined NASA as a consultant to the Administrator Aug. 13. (NASA Ann)
The Senate confirmed the nomination of l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Director of the National Security Agency and former NASA Apollo Program Director, to be an Air Force general. Gen. Phillips became Commander of the Air Force Systems Command. (CR, 8/1/73, S15382; dod Release 368—73)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, gave personal views on the existence of extraterrestrial life in a speech at the Univ. of Maryland: “There is no hope of finding intelligent life elsewhere in the solar system. As far as this particular corner of the universe is concerned, we are it.” Chances were that primitive life forms would be found on other planets or in their atmospheres, “and this will still be one of the great discoveries of all time. This discovery will shed light on how life arose on Earth. It will strengthen our conviction that intelligent life must exist on the planets of millions, or even billions, of other star systems in the universe.” Dr. Fletcher doubted that any other civilizations would exchange visits with the earth because of the great distances. “We could not begin to build the kind of spaceship that would be needed. But who can say what new technologies, what new understandings of the physical laws of the universe, future generations will develop ■—or hear about on the inter-galactic radio network?” He was “very optimistic” about long-range chances of communicating with very advanced civilizations in the Milky Way or other galaxies: “When you think how many stars there are which could have planets like Earth, and how long they have been in existence, it is quite easy to believe that there must be many advanced civilizations broadcasting in our direction. And I am sure we have the technology needed to intercept such signals and eventually answer them.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. scientists had named a newly discovered mineral “armstrongite” after the U.S. astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to set foot on the moon, the Associated Press reported. The mineral, belonging to the zirconium-silicate compounds, had been found by a joint SovietMongolian expedition in the Gobi Desert. A sample of the mineral had been sent to Armstrong. (AP, NYT, 4/29/73, 53) April 29:	Los Angeles International Airport banned all landings and takeoffs over populated areas between 11 pm and 6 am and became the first U.S. airport with regular two-way traffic in the same airspace. The measures had been taken in response to community protests over aircraft noise. Federal Aviation Administration air controllers would regulate the two-way traffic, called nose-to-nose operations, and had said there would be no safety problem. (Lindsey, NYT, 4/29/73, 58) April 29-May 2:	The First International Conference on Offshore Airport Technology was sponsored by the New York Section of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Federal Aviation Administration in Bethesda, Md. Director W. D. Brinckloe of the Univ. of Pittsburgh’s Graduate Center for Public Works spoke on the multipurpose use potential of offshore airports: “Experience suggests that what should be planned is a terminal, mating all possible transportation modes, and complete with all the facilities and services needed to make the Terminal City thrive.” Multiple use of the island airport “should be given equal attention with more conventional aspects of airport design and ocean construction. In the end, it may be the element that makes the project economically feasible.” (aiaa Release, 3/1/73; Text)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Program Director Chester M. Lee testified on the status of the joint 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission, during the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization. Activities were being directed to identify and define candidate astp experiments to provide data for U.S. and Soviet scientists, provide for coinvestigators in both countries, require active cooperation by Soviet cosmonauts, and use existing hardware where possible. Experiments would be discussed at the March meeting of U.S.-U.S.S.R. working groups [see March 15-30]. No launch vehicle work specifically for ASTP had begun, but modification, testing, and checkout would begin during the coming year at Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39 and other facilities. The program was “on schedule and moving well toward our current mission date of mid-July 1975.” (Transcript)
Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), former Commander of the Air Force Strategic Air Command, joined nasa as a consultant to the Administrator. (nasa Ann, 9/10/73) August 14:	An Apollo command module atop its Saturn IB launch vehicle was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center. Vehicle readiness had been ordered by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider for a possible rescue mission of Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28) when two of the four quadrants of the service module’s reaction control system, used for maneuvering the command and service module, failed and raised doubts about the ability of the CM to return safely to earth. If a rescue system were not ordered, the vehicle would carry Skylab 4 astronauts—Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—to a Nov. 9 rendezvous with the Skylab Orbital Workshop. (Marshall Star, 8/15/73, 1; Thomas, Today, 8/14/73)
The “deeper meaning” of Apollo 17 (Dec. 7-19, 1972), the last manned lunar landing mission in the NASA program, was discussed by author William I. Thompson in a New York Times article: The mission had represented a “sunset” of rocket technology. “Apollo 17 turned the night into day, but elsewhere smaller lights were going on as men began to discover relationships between consciousness and the growth of plants . . . , between enzyme change and faith healing . . . , and between mind and matter in psychokinesis. . . . The space program was an important scaffolding, but now that the building of the new human culture is up, we no longer need the scaffolding.” To spend a fortune on rockets now “would be the same as spending a fortune on dirigibles in 1916. There are other forms of space travel to be invented, and these forms are more likely to spring from the new paradigms emerging in science than from the hardware of the old technology. The era of the rocket has climaxed in Apollo 17; if we push on and ignore the sense of an ending, we shall find only the bitterness and disappointment of the anticlimax.” (NYT, 1/1/73, 3:13) January 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, expressed gratification in his monthly letter to the staff “with NASA’s excellent performance in 1972, and with the successful transition . . . from the completed programs of the Sixties to the new programs and new challenges of the Seventies. In 1972, Phase I of the national space effort of the United States was completed and Phase II well begun.” NASA’s first year with all launches and missions successful underlined that it was NASA’s custom “to do the unprecedented and then quickly make it routine.” Zero failures could now be the goal year after year. Dr. Fletcher also noted that of 18 space launches in 1972 half had been for other organizations or countries, with 8 being reimbursed. On another “important front,” the NASA-wide payload cost-reduction campaign begun in 1972 had gone well, with valuable suggestions from Centers and contractors. The effort “was not a routine cutback exercise and not a threat to anyone’s security. It is, instead, a creative effort to expand our usefulness even though funds are limited. And you can be sure it has a lot to do with NASA’s long-range survival as the instrument of the U.S. Government to handle most kinds of space and aeronautical r&d and other related assignments.” (NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 2-3)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, toured Ames Research Center and was briefed on the status of the Pioneer Venus mission. The mission was in the conceptual design state and, if approved in FY 1975, would lead to Venus orbiter and multiprobe launches in 1978. Dr. Fletcher said NASA intended to proceed with the dual Venus mission if possible and intended to make it one of NASA’s most cost-effective programs. (arc Astrogram, 6/21/73, 1)
Reference to the U.S. space program was made in the editorial “In Praise of America” by Canadian commentator Gordon Sinclair, reprinted by the Washington Post. Sinclair had said over Toronto radio: “You talk about American technocracy, and you find men on the moon—not once but several times—and safely home again.” The editorial defended the U.S. against foreign critics. (W Post, 12/13/73, A18)
The 16th Annual Goddard Memorial Dinner was held in Washington, D.C., with Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt among the honored guests. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. The citation read: “To the Honorable George M. Low who has held key positions in the space program since its beginning, and has played a vital role in putting men into space and later, on the moon. Among Dr. Low’s outstanding contributions was, as acting NASA Administrator in 1971, the negotiation of the space agreement with the Soviet Union which provided the foundation for the Apollo/Soyuz flight in 1975 and other joint space endeavors.” The National Space Club Press Award was presented to Ralph Morse of Life magazine for “his ingenuity in photographically interpreting the dynamics of the United States Space Program and for his resourcefulness in portraying the human experience in its larger dimension.” The Astronautics Engineer Award went to Wilfred E. Scull of Goddard Space Flight Center for “outstanding leadership—from decision to fruition—of the Earth Resources Technology Satellite Project.” The Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to The General Electric Co. for “outstanding accomplishment” as prime contractor to nasa for the Earth Resources Technology Satellite and ground data handling system. (Program)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released a statement on private communications of crews of the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), after meeting with the Deputy Administrator, Dr. George M. Low; Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers; and Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. A May 3 memorandum had authorized private communications for morale purposes (weekly calls from Skylab astronauts to their families), for “extreme” operational emergencies, and for medical reasons (to permit private doctor-patient relations). Following objections from some newsmen to the May 29 Charles Conrad, Jr., private conversation on operational matters, Dr. Fletcher had decided to instruct Mission Control’s Capsule Communicator to query the seriousness of a situation before permitting a private conversation from Skylab. Dr. Fletcher said in his new statement that he would rescind this instruction because “we believe it would be imprudent to discourage requests by the crew for private operational communications.” Paraphrases of the communications would he released to the press. “We will continue to leave it entirely up to the flight crew as to when to call for such a conversation, and will send no new instructions or clarification of instructions. This decision was reached so that we would in no conceivable way inhibit them from calling for a private conversation when they believe a need exists, and so that we will not jeopardize the safety of the mission.” (NASA Release 73—110)
A Baltimore Sun editorial commented on NASA’s problems with the Office of Management and Budget: omb had promised NASA about $3.4 billion annually, but omb impoundment of funds had cut NASA’s FY 1974 budget to about $3 billion and “it appears OMB will hold the space agency to about $3,235 billion in fiscal 1975.” Inflation had aggravated nasa’s problems and $85 million had been cut from the FY 1974 shuttle development budget. “But now NASA is suggesting what some aerospace contractors are stating explicitly: That if the OMB squeeze stays on, then NASA will have to cut back on new starts in scientific programs. This is an odd irony, indeed, since the very purpose of the shuttle is to serve these new programs.” The Sun felt “that if NASA accountants are told to sharpen their pencils they can keep the shuttle alive as well as provide for initiation of the new scientific programs. The Nixon OMB consistently has given science short shrift, however, and it would be sad indeed if the space program were hobbled at the very time it is beginning to show immense scientific promise.” (B Sun, 9/10/73, All)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, testified on long-term objectives during the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization. Among effects of space and aeronautics on “all Americans and, to a degree, people throughout the world, in 1985,” he foresaw a rise in air cargo revenues from the current $1.6 billion per year to $14 billion per year, with development of automated handling and compatible aircraft. Trade and tourism would flourish with the use of hypersonic jet aircraft, “which we will be thinking about in 1985 and maybe other nations will have developed.” Such an aircraft could fly from Washington to Peking in l1/^ hrs. Hydrogen fuel that produced water rather than pollutant fumes would replace present aviation fuels. In space, Dr. Fletcher saw a proliferation of domestic satellites leading to economic use of long-distance telephone calls for “discussing almost anything.” Large-scale digital computers—spinoffs of the space age—would be used educationally; “computer-aided instruction is the coming thing. This is the quickest way to learn if we can afford to build the system, and by 1985, we think We can.” Other NASA objectives to be realized within the next 10 to 15 yrs were a satellite-operated search-and-rescue system that picked up signals from pocket-sized radios aboard life rafts, the use of space age sensors in preventive medicine and for rapid diagnosis, a global disaster-alert and relief-control system to monitor major disasters, biological space processing to separate viruses or bacteria in the production of vaccines, an international space laboratory, an international lunar expedition, and expanded planetary exploration. Dr. Fletcher said NASA could be called an environmental agency. “It is not just that space is our environment, but it is rather that . . . virtually everything we do, manned or unmanned, science or applications, helps in some practical way to improve the environment of our planet and helps us understand the forces that affect it. Perhaps that is our essential task, to study and understand the earth and its environment.” (Transcript)
An era of global scarcity had begun, a Science editorial noted. “The advanced countries are vulnerable in one or more respects.” Japan had been enjoying a boom but needed to import raw materials, fossil fuels, and food. In Mexico people lived under conditions like those of 100 yrs ago, “with a disregard for sanitation,” but with “Coca Cola signs and transistor radios everywhere.” Much of the world was aware of U.S. living standard and gadgets. “They yearn for both, while the population explosion continues. We are soon going to witness dramatic and miserable confrontations of aspirations, expectations, and limitations.” (Abelson, Science, 7/27/73, 303) July 28-September 25:	The Skylab 3 Apollo spacecraft carrying a threeman crew was launched into near-earth orbit, rendezvoused with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), and docked with the space laboratory for the second manned mission in the Skylab program. A series of problems threatened to disrupt the mission, but corrective actions and workarounds permitted it to proceed successfully, setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Sept. 25. The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee at 10 min 2 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the csm separated from the stage as planned. The galactic x-ray mapping experiment mounted in the instrument unit (iu) was deployed. At 5 hrs 19 min 53 sec after launch the S—IVB/iu deorbit maneuver was commanded, and the stage impacted the predicted Pacific Ocean area after planned maneuvers. During CSM maneuvers to rendezvous with the Workshop, a leak was detected in the CSM reaction control system (rcs) quad B thruster, one of four assemblies of rockets used to stabilize the spacecraft or to change its velocity and also used as a backup for bringing the CSM back from orbit. Analysis indicated the oxidizer valve was stuck open or partially open. Quad B was isolated; analysis showed that all deorbit mission rules could be satisfied. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 3:38 pm edt on the fifth orbit. Rendezvous, fly-around, and docking were covered by 23 min of TV. The crew entered the multiple docking adapter (mda) at 4:00 pm edt and began Workshop activation, but activation was curtailed because the crew quickly began to feel motion sickness. Lousma was experiencing nausea and Bean and Garriott were uncomfortable. Bean said he and Garriott tended “to be fairly careful of how we move. And since we are moving rather slowly, then it’s taking a little bit longer than we’d planned.” Motion sickness continued the second day, July 29, and the astronauts were taking scopolamine-dexedrine tablets. Bean communicated, “We feel okay, except in the stomach. . . . And our thinking is that we’re not going to be able to work much faster than we are right now. . . . There’s a desire to maybe take a break for an hour or two and get in the bunk and stay still for a while.” Flight Director Neil B. Hutchinson told the press at JSC that extravehicular activity (eva) to install a new sun shield and retrieve and install Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) film probably would be delayed from July 31 to Aug. 1 at the earliest. Four to five hours of work were carried over from July 28 and 29. Still suffering from motion sickness, the astronauts continued Workshop activation July 30 (Mission Day 3). The first EVA was delayed to Aug. 2 and later rescheduled to Aug. 4 to ensure the astronauts’ complete recovery. Activation was completed July 31 (MD-4) and research began as the crew improved slightly. Bean told ground control: “We’re getting better; it’s just taking a little longer than we thought. . . . Everybody feels pretty good between meals. Then mealtime comes, and we’re caught ... in the squeeze. We’re trying to decide whether we ought to eat all we have to ... to keep our strength up, or eat about what we want to, which isn’t very much.” A TV broadcast from the space station July 31 showed minnows for a biomedical experiment swimming in their plastic aquarium in tight spirals and sometimes apparently trying to swim toward the surface, but with their heads pointed straight down. Garriott said, “Apparently they can’t make up their minds which way is up and down, either.” He also turned a spider named Arabella loose in a plastic cage to observe her web-spinning abilities in zero-g conditions. Later in the mission Garriott reported baby minnows hatched in space performed in water “as if they’d already adapted while they were still in the egg.” They “felt right accustomed to zero-g.” August 1-September 24:	Bean told ground controllers after breakfast Aug. 1 (MD—5) : “This is the first morning we’ve been up here . . . that after a meal everybody felt good. Everybody feels real good right now. Best since we’ve been here.” During live TV the astronauts ate a hearty lunch to music. Bean demonstrated his proficiency in eating while hanging upside down. A medical briefing below at Johnson Space Center suggested that moving quickly from the confined cm to the large Workshop might have contributed to the motion sickness. The milder nausea experienced on the May 25—June 22 Skylab 2 mission could have been caused by a more gradual transition into the Workshop. “I think that it is merely a matter of room in which you can exercise your vestibular mechanisms, and that the workshop simply presents more of that space. . . . perhaps it was too much too soon.” On Aug. 2 a master alarm buzzer awakened the astronauts at 6:45 am EDT. Pressure and temperature were falling rapidly in the CSM reaction control system quad D because of an oxidizer leak. Because of quad B’s July 28 leak, only A and C of the four quads remained fully operational. The quad D leak lasted two hours, losing an estimated 5 kg (12 lbs) of nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer. Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney said at a morning press briefing that the spacecraft was flyable with the loss of the two quads but “it would be flown in a mode which is not entirely standard.” The main concern was “that we have had two problems which are related, at least they seem to be related.” A flaw common to the whole RCS could necessitate the crew’s immediate return to the earth or accelerated preparation of the Skylab 4 spacecraft to make it available as a rescue vehicle should the CSM become unusable. Full activation of Skylab-rescue-vehicle preparation was authorized. Launch and checkout crews began working a 24-hr-day, 7-day-week schedule, preparing two additional couches and other equipment for installation. Earliest possible date for a rescue mission was established as Sept. 5. The EVA rescheduled for Aug. 4 was again postponed, for 24 to 48 hours to free the crew for system checks, to free ground controllers to troubleshoot the problem, and to give time to work out EVA procedures for the new spacecraft configuration. While reentry procedures were being rewritten for the new configuration, the astronauts continued scientific experiments. By the afternoon of Aug. 2 Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, was able to tell the astronauts that troubleshooting the RCS had indicated no apparent generic problem, but two unique quad failures, and there was now confidence that the two remaining quads would ensure attitude control should immediate reentry become necessary. “We’re proceeding ... as if we’re going to have a normal mission.” Astronaut Bean replied: “Fine. You just said the right words. . . . we’re pretty happy with the way things are going, at the moment . . . and we agree 100 percent with what you just announced. . . . everybody’s happy up here.” On Aug. 3 Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said at a JSC press briefing that continuing investigation indicated the two quad failures were unrelated and reexamination of reentry capabilities showed three ways of returning to the earth: using the primary service propulsion system, using the RCS with the two operational quads, and using the hybrid RCS in the cm. “We’re feeling considerably better than . . . yesterday morning.” A slowdown was ordered in the emergency rescue preparations. The Apollo cm would be outfitted in a Skylab 4 configuration, with three astronaut couches rather than the five needed for a rescue mission. The slowdown would delay rescue readiness until Sept. 10. Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma conducted their first full day of experiments and prepared for an earth resources experiment package pass. Garriott held the TV camera at the window to telecast a good view of the U.S. from North Dakota to North Carolina. Later the first of 26 erep passes was made, to gather data for oil exploration, ocean temperatures, mapping, land use surveys, crop inventories, and pollution studies. A master alarm sounded in the CSM Aug. 4, later attributed to a short-circuit in Skylab’s solar telescope system. The short knocked out one of the two TV systems in the atm but did not afFect Skylab’s main power system. Ground crews investigated problems in the primary and secondary coolant systems Aug. 5. One had been slowly leaking since the Skylab 1 launch May 14 and was expected to become inoperative in 16 to 20 days. The secondary loop was thought to have a small leak, begun during the Skylab 2 mission and giving the loop a predicted 60-day lifetime. Possibly additional coolant would have to be carried up by the next manned mission, Skylab 4, but Program Director Schneider said there was “no immediate danger to the crew.” By Aug. 6 evaluations showed that only the primary loop was leaking; the second was sound and could operate for the rest of Skylab 3 as well as for Skylab 4. Flight surgeon Paul Buchanan’s nightly bulletin said Aug. 5 that the crew “continues to report good health and optimistic outlook” and had asked about an increase in their menus “to match their growing appetites.” Fluid intake and output was “optimal.” The first EVA was performed Aug. 6. Garriott and Lousma stepped outside the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm edt to install the 3.6- by 7.3-m (12- by 24-ft), paper-thin, aluminized Mylar awning over the Workshop to reflect the sun’s rays away from the spacecraft skin, damaged when the meteoroid shield was torn ofF during the May launch. Garriott, standing in the Skylab’s open hatch, pieced together the two 16.8-m (55-ft) poles from metal sections and handed them to Lousma. Lousma attached them to a bracket to form a “V” over the Workshop. The sunshade was slowly pulled up by a system of pulleys. One rope kept twisting around the poles and the sunshade folds did not straighten immediately, but after four hours—twice the time expected—the sunshade was successfully deployed. Workshop temperatures were lowered before the EVA ended. Astronaut Bean said Garriott and Lousma worked “at a slow and steady pace” and were not tired. Lousma retrieved and replaced film in four ATM experiments, installed two new cameras, removed a door latch from an atm experiment, and fixed the particle-collection experiment to the rim of the atm. Lousma also inspected the two leaking quads in the CSM RCS and looked for coolant leaks. He noted some evidence of micrometeorite pitting but no clues to causes of the malfunctions. The astronauts completed the eva at 8:01 pm edt, after 6 hrs 31 min, surpassing the 3-hr 30-min record set June 7 by Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin. Garriott, first solar physicist in space, focused the atm cameras on the sun Aug. 7 for the first time during the mission. TV audiences watched him work at the ATM panel. By Aug. 8 Dr. Lawrence F. Dietlein, jsc Deputy Director for Life Sciences, reported the astronauts were “in excellent spirits and have no health problems.” They had completely recovered from motion sickness. Their weights had stabilized after a loss of 1.8 to 2.3 kg (4 to 5 lbs) each. Data obtained on the rotating chair indicated their sensitivity to motion had lifted. Since deployment of the sunshade, temperatures in the Workshop had dropped to 296 K (74°F). The crew photographed a coronal transient with the ATM camera two hours Aug. 10. It was the first time a transient—protons and free electrons expelled violently from the sun’s limb at a speed of about 312 km (194 mi) per sec, a phenomenon that occurred two or three times a year—had been observed at that range and time resolution. Program Director Schneider announced Aug. 14 that Skylab 3 would continue its full 59-day mission. From analyses of the CSM and Workshop, he had “concluded that there is no imminent need for rescue, and ... we have made the decision to proceed with a normal test flow on an accelerated basis at Cape Kennedy.” Skylab 4 was being prepared for a normal mission but would be available for a rescue mission if necessary. The earliest launch date could be Sept. 25. Schneider said, “We’re reasonably confident that [csm] 117 is a good vehicle.” “Looks like they got a renewed burst of confidence down there,” Bean said when told of the decision. “We feel that way up here.” JSC announced Aug. 21 that the astronauts would install a new “six-pack” of gyroscopes during an Aug. 24 EVA, to replace faulty ones. The six-pack had been carried up on the Skylab 3 cm. Meanwhile the crew continued with experiments, requesting more work Aug. 14 because all had spare time and “you just can’t sleep 8 hours up here.” They photographed tropical storm Brenda Aug. 19 as it moved across theYucatan Peninsula toward the Gulf of Mexico. On Aug. 21 Astronaut Bean discovered and photographed through ATM telescopes what Skylab principal investigator Dr. Robert MacQueen called “certainly one of the biggest solar events” seen on the Skylab missions. Bean said the complex series of events on the solar limb looked “like a big bubble” sitting on the edge of the disc. He observed it with the white light coronagraph and x-ray instruments and reported it to be three fourths the size of the sun. NASA scientists alerted other facilities to make observations from ground instruments and other satellites. Dr. MacQueen said the event might have been caused by an explosion on the back side of the sun. “It was a beautiful event.” The crew “did a fine job.” Schneider announced Aug. 23 (MD—27) that the Skylab 3 crew had been given permission to continue the mission for another seven days. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, told the press that he saw nothing in the medical data thus far “that would indicate that we could not press on with the mission, and ... we feel we can go the full 59 days as planned.” EVA—2 began at 12:24 pm edt Aug. 24 with am depressurization by Lousma and Garriott. Lousma completed installation of the six redesigned gyros mounted inside the spacecraft by connecting cables to a computer system outside, and the new gyro system was put into operation. The astronauts installed a sail sample on a hand rail to test durability, replaced ATM film, retrieved and stored cassettes from one experiment, and removed the aperture door ramp latch from two ATM experiments, concluding EVA-2 at 4:31 pm EDT, after 4 hrs 30 min. At 8:01 am edt Aug. 25 (MD—29) the Skylab 3 astronauts surpassed the single-mission endurance mark of 28 days 50 min set in June by Skylab 2. They had completed 404 earth orbits and had traveled 18.5 million km (11.5 million mi). And at 6:11 am edt Sept. 5 (MD-40) Astronaut Bean surpassed the space flight record for one man of 49 days 3 hrs 38 min 36 sec, set in June by Charles Conrad, Jr., on Skylab 2. EVA-3 began at 7:18 am edt Sept. 22. Bean and Garriott moved through space to retrieve and replace atm film and retrieve experiments and parasol samples. EVA operations ended at 9:59 am edt, after 2 hrs 41 min. During the mission, spiders Arabella and Anita first spun webs in corners of their cage, without the normal circular pattern. Each day, however, each improved web formation, adding more radials, adjusting to weightlessness. Garriott said of Arabella Aug. 9 that “she learned very rapidly in zero-g without the benefit of any previous experience.” She “figured out a very nice solution to the problems of zero gravity.” Later ground controllers told Garriott to share his filet mignon with the spiders to keep them alive for the entire mission. Anita, however, was found dead Sept. 16, possibly from inadequate diet. The astronauts righted the cm and remained inside until the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans maneuvered alongside and a crane lifted the cm aboard. Immediate medical examinations found the crew in excellent spirits and surprisingly good condition. Blood pressures and heart rates were within normal range. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for physical checks and would fly to Houston Sept. 26. They would be quarantined for one week. The Skylab 3 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing unmanned Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. Despite mission problems, 150% of scheduled atm observing time was accomplished and erep sensors were operated on 39 Z-axis local vertical data runs and 5 solar inertial data runs, completing 218 of the 386 earth resources task sites. All medical experiments were successfully carried out. All but one of the corollary experiments achieved or exceeded objectives. Of 13 student experiments, 9 were completed. Added unscheduled tests and experiments had significantly increased the data yield above premission planning and Skylab was left in an excellent position to complete the final SL-4 mission. Skylab 3 was officially adjudged a success Oct. 11. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 59 days 11 hrs 9 min; the longest cumulative time in space for one man, 69 days for Bean (who had spent 10 days on the Nov. 14-24, 1969, Apollo 12 mission) ; the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 41 000 000 km (25 500 000 mi) ; the longest EVA, 6 hrs 31 min on Aug. 6; and the longest cumulative orbital EVA time, for one astronaut, 13 hrs 40 min for Garriott. In the first mission to man the Orbital Workshop May 15-June 22, Skylab 2 astronauts had conducted medical, solar, and earth resources experiments for 28 days, as well as repairing the Workshop to salvage the mission. The Workshop would be operated unmanned until the November Skylab 4 launch for a third and final mission. (NASA prog off; jsc pao press briefing transcripts, 7/28/73-9/25/73; NYT, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Post, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Star-News, 7/28/73-9/27/73; B Sun, 8/16/73, A5; 8/20/73, A3) July 28:	NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment to a 120.2-km (74.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed successfully but the experiment data were saturated and not useful, (gsfc proj off) July 29:	Fifteenth anniversary of the signing of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The act provided for the establishment of NASA, which officially came into being Oct. 1, 1958. (nasa Release 73-134) July 30:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, praised NASA’s successful efforts to save the Skylab 1—2 mission during testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Science hearing to review the Skylab Investigation Report [see July 13]: “We were able to save Skylab because of the tremendous depth and breadth of the NASA team and the dedication and skills of thousands of people on that team. There certainly isn’t another country that could have reacted as we did. I doubt whether there is another team within this country that could have reacted in this manner. Our team could do it because of years of training, working hard on highly exacting projects, and working as a team to drive toward a technical objective. The performance of the team on the ground, and of course the magnificent performance, skill and courage of the astronauts, saved Skylab. I would hope that this is remembered as the real story of Skylab, not the failure which caused it to happen.” NASA was “taking all the steps we know how to prevent a future failure due to similar causes in other programs.” Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center testified that, throughout six years of reviews and certifications, “the principal attention devoted to the meteoroid shield was that of achieving a satisfactory deployment. Never did the matter of aerodynamic loads on the shield or aeroelastic interactions between the shield and its external pressure environment during launch receive the attention and understanding during the design and review process which in retrospect it deserved.” The omission had not been surprising. “From the beginning, a basic design concept and requirement was that the shield be tight to the tank.” The question of whether the shield would remain tight against the tank under the dynamics of flight through the atmosphere “was simply not considered in any coordinated manner.” Possibly contributing to the oversight “was the basic view of the meteoroid shield as a piece of structure.” No full-time subsystem engineer had been assigned to the shield. “While it is recognized that one cannot have a full-time engineer on every piece of equipment, it is . . . possible that the complex interactions and integration of aerodynamics, structure, rigging procedures, ordnance, deployment mechanisms, and thermal requirements of the meteoroid shield would have been enhanced by such an arrangement,” (Testimony)
The Federal Aviation Administration had set 1975 as a target date for phase-out of its seven DC—3 aircraft, United Press International reported. FAA was still using the aircraft—known as the workhorse that carved out much of U.S. aviation history—to check aerial navigation aids on the West Coast. Manufactured by the Douglas Aircraft Corp., the DC-3 had carried 95% of U.S. airline traffic by 1938. A 1966 survey had shown that one third of the world’s transport planes were still DC—3s. The aircraft, nicknamed “The Gooney,” had been designated the C-47 in World War II and the Korean war. By 1945 10 000 DC-3s were in military service. Built to carry 29 passengers in civilian configuration, the DC—3 flown by Gen. James H. Doolittle from China after his 1942 Tokyo raid had carried 72 persons. The DC-3 had been redesignated the AC-4.7 and armed with heavy machineguns for service in the Vietnam war. Scores of the aircraft were still flying in the U.S., in private hands and with Government agencies. (Clifford, UPI, W Post, 5/6/73, F15) May 6—8:	The Commission on Education of the National Academy of Engineering held a Washington, D.C., symposium to examine the problems of recruiting minority students in engineering to alleviate an impending engineer shortage. Only one percent of engineering students were members of an ethnic minority, (nae Release 5/2/73, NAE pio)
Appointment of David R. Scott, former astronaut, as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center was announced by frc. Scott had flown on Gemini 8 (March 16—17, 1966) and Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) missions and was commander of Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, he had served as Technical Assistant to the Apollo Program Manager and as Special Assistant for Mission Operations and Government Furnished Equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Office at Manned Spacecraft Center (which became Johnson Space Center Feb. 17). He held two nasa Distinguished Service Medals, the nasa Exceptional Service Medal, two Air Force Distinguished Service Medals, the Air Force Distinguished Flying Cross, the David C. Schilling Trophy of the Air Force, and the Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1971. (frc Release 21—73)
Award of a $20 543 500 fixed-price-incentive contract for equipping two Boeing 747-200B advanced airborne command post aircraft with electronic equipment was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 240-73) May 12:	A press briefing on the earth resources experiment package (erep) to be launched on the Skylab Workshop May 14 was held at Kennedy Space Center. NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said the 150 erep investigators included 50 from foreign countries, erep included six sensors, two camera systems, a spectrometer, a multispectral scanner, a radiometer, a scatterometer, an altimeter, and a thermal data channel: erep was similar in function to Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) and could discriminate colors more completely, compare electronically and photographically derived imagery, and put up microwave instruments to operate in the different regions of the frequency spectrum, which would allow a look through clouds and under the surface of the earth. Thomas L. Fischetti, erep Project Manager at nasa Hq., said that if erep failed the crew would have equipment to make corrections, modifications, or replacements. The flight plan could also be modified at the last moment for unfavorable weather conditions or new phenomena occurring on the earth. During the three missions erep would return 40 000 photos and 25 magnetic tapes of data. Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, erep project scientist at Johnson Space Center, said erep had 9 major investigative areas with 47 subtasks, including stock and crop inventory, surveys of crop damage from insects, land-use classification, and water-resource and geologic mapping. A major effort would be made in sea state analysis. (Transcript) May 13:	NASA held a Skylab prelaunch press conference at Kennedy Space Center, nasa Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that Skylab hardware was “in good shape and ready to go.” The countdowns for Skylab 1 and 2 launches were on schedule for May 14 and 15. The power transfer tests and fuel cell pressurization of Skylab 2 had been completed and the crew “is in good shape.” Schneider said that the network, operational, and recovery forces were “in place and ready to go” and the weather was satisfactory. Col. Alan R. Vette, U.S. Air Force recovery forces, said that the training of the recovery forces had been completed and they were “prepared for any type of landing.” (Transcript)
Dr. Philip Handler, President of the National Academy of Sciences, told newsmen in Moscow that he had informed President Mstislav V. Keldysh of the Soviet Academy of Sciences that there would be a time when the U.S. would need “more definitive information” about the Soviet space program. Dr. Handler had referred to the 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Concluding a two-week tour of Soviet scientific establishments as head of an NAS delegation, Dr. Handler said U.S. science was “a cut ahead” of Soviet science but the distance between the countries was “not very great.” (Reuters, W Post, 7/4/73, A24)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data through 1972 and a Forward Look. The report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—was the latest in an annual review series and first to use the metric system in all quantitative measurements to conform to nasa and Soviet practice. The U.S. expected to have spent $70 billion by June 30 on combined civilian and military space programs. Physical evidence of Soviet space activity indicated the U.S.S.R. had committed a similar amount. There had been no manned Soviet launches in 1972. Moscow had been “filled with rumors” in late July of an impending “more ambitious Salyut-Soyuz manned mission,” but press reports had indicated later that tracking ships which usually supported such missions were returning to port. NASA employment—peaked at 400 000 in 1966—had dropped to 150 000. Soviet space employment might be close to 600 000 because the “effort today seems to be at least equal to our 1966 peak” of a total 600 000 space employees in the U.S. The state of the Soviet effort toward a space shuttle was unknown but the “Soviet effort to maintain a position of leadership in space, and the continued high level of Soviet flight activity of more than double that of the United States” in(Heated the U.S.S.R. “may have even more compelling reasons to develop a reusable shuttle as a cost saving device.” (Text)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, with other NASA officials, testified on the FY 1974 NASA authorization request in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the NASA request of $3,016 billion was down $400 million from FY 1973 but said the agency program was significant. In 1972 NASA had completed the transition from manned exploration to a focus on practical benefits, unmanned exploration, and development of the space shuttle “as the means to make more practical and more economical all future uses of space, unmanned and manned, especially for applications of economic, commercial, international, or national security significance.” Work on uses of the shuttle was “reinforcing our view that the Space Shuttle system will not only provide the launch capability needed for future space activities of all types but will revolutionize the ways in which space is used as well. The more the specialists in various fields look at the shuttle’s capabilities, especially in the sortie mode, the more they see how its weight and volume capacity and flexible operations will permit them to carry out experiments and useful applications in a much simpler and economical manner.” Assistant Administrator for Institutional Management Joseph F. Malaga testified that NASA Hq. would have 1581 permanent positions in FY 174 after agency reduction in force, or 6.3% of the total NASA Civil Service employment. “This is down 600 positions from the 1968 peak, when it represented 6.7 percent of the NASA total. Headquarters has thus kept its size consonant with agency size.” NASA’s policy on disposition of manpower and equipment necessitated by FY 1974 budget cuts was described by Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, in a prepared statement: “We are already well into the organization and operation of a comprehensive program to identify specific employee preferences and abilities and corresponding suitable potential employers. We have set up training for staff members in gathering job information and in counseling employees, and have arranged for a coordinated flow of information about job openings throughout NASA, and other Federal agencies, state and local government units, educational institutions and private industry. . . . Rut even more basic ... is our recognition that these people represent a virtually irreplaceable national resource.” He referred not only to “this highly talented and trained professional-technical work force but also to the complex of sophisticated plant and equipment which must be partially idled. ... It would be unconscionable to permit key elements of America’s aeronautics and space capability to be disbanded or retired without making every effort to keep them available for further service to the nation.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on “practical returns from our space investment,” including the work of NASA Applications Teams in the technology utilization program. Teams assisted local, state and Federal Government agencies in biomedicine, air and water pollution, fire safety, transportation, housing, law enforcement, postal service, and mine safety. “Those teams work with the user to explore important technical problems in his specific field and then, often with the help of specialists at NASA field centers, search for aerospace technology which can be used in the solution of the problems.” A technique used by NASA to inspect space vehicles had been adapted to improve the x-ray diagnosis of tumors and cardiovascular problems, with a tenfold reduction in radiation dosage. (Transcript)
NASA released details of Langley Research Center’s planned program to heat and cool a 5000-sq-m (53 000-sq-ft) Systems Engineering Building by solar energy. The program had been announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in Nov. 13 testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy. The program was to obtain realistic engineering and operating experience with a source of clean power as an alternate to fossil fuels and other conventional energy sources. Planned for mid-1975 completion, the building—believed to be first of its size for which solar energy would provide a significant part of its heating and cooling system—would use a 1400-sq-m (15 000-sq-ft) solar collector to provide most of the heating and some of the cooling requirements. It also would test energy-storage capacity. NASA believed the solar collector to be the pacing component in the system and had established heating and cooling cost goals of $1 to $2 per 0.09 sq m (1 sq ft) over a 15-yr life span, (nasa Release 73-282)
Rep. Thaddeus J. Dulski (D-N.Y.) introduced H.R. 4927 to amend Title 5 of the U.S. Code to make Level V of the Executive Schedule applicable to three additional NASA positions. The action was taken following receipt by the House Speaker of a letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, requesting legislation to double the number of NASA Level V positions. Dr. Fletcher requested authority to establish titles of Associate Administrators “in a manner consistent with evolving functional responsibilities as they may develop and be altered . . . ; and to add three such positions to provide salary equality among all Associate Administrators having comparable responsibilities and authorities. Legislation was required because reorganization of NASA offices had created six offices headed by Associate Administrators, rather than three. (CR. 2/28/73, H1244)	'
Problems of the European space program were described in a Science article by Dominique Verguese of Paris Le Monde: Since 1964 the European Space Research Organization and the European Launcher Development Organization had spent $1 billion on space. One third had been used for the successful launchings of seven satellites but the remainder had been spent on an expensive and yet unsuccessful booster. Interest in the booster had dissipated despite the French desire to continue and the offer to pay for 60% to 70% of the costs. At two European conferences on space (December 1971 and December 1972) plans were made to merge ELDO and ESRO into a single agency and to allow member nations to cooperate with NASA on building a sortie lab for the space shuttle. France had threatened to leave ESRO unless more emphasis was placed on applications satellites and ESRO closed its plasma laboratory in Italy and its sounding rocket range in Sweden. France had also insisted that more use be made of national facilities and teams rather than esro’s technical center. Final agreements and objectives on a European applications satellite could not be made because of the conflicting interests of each nation. Nor could it be decided what role national programs should play. But Europe had successfully launched 26 satellites and had acquired an industrial competence which could easily provide a firm basis for more ambitious projects. (Science, 3/9/73, 984-986)
Appointment of Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.) as Program Director of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was announced by NASA. Lee, Apollo Mission Director for Apollo 12 through 17, would be responsible for direction of the U.S. astp effort, including management of the spacecraft and docking module, flight and crew operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, launch vehicle operations at Marshall Space Flight Center, and launch operations at Kennedy Space Center, (nasa Release 73-5)
The Apollo Honor Awards Ceremony at NASA Hq. celebrated the success of the Dec. 7—19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission and honored 47 persons for contributions to the success of the entire program. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a foreword to the ceremony that Apollo’s richest achievement might be the spiritual unity it provided “by enabling all Americans, and all the world watching our astronauts’ progress moonward, to discover the uniqueness of our beautiful yet fragile Earth as viewed from the perspective of the Moon. Unique in the solar system, it is the only home of the Family of Man; and seen from the perspective of the Moon, the common humanity that we all share becomes more evident than the temporal differences that keep us apart.” Dr. Fletcher and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Associate Administrator, presented awards, while Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt congratulated recipients. The NASA Distinguished Service Award was presented to Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences, and Director Chester M. Lee of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Program, who had been Mission Director for Apollo 12 through 17. Exceptional Service Medals were presented to 21 employees; the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 14 scientists from Government, industry, and universities; and the Group Achievement Awards to 10 teams from industry and Government. The Distinguished Public Service Medal, NASA’s highest award to nonGovernment personnel, went to: Dr. B. Paul Blasingame, Delco Electronics Div., General Motors Corp.; Joseph F. Clayton, Aerospace Systems Div., Bendix Corp.; Clinton H. Grace, International Business Machines Corp.; Robert E. Greer, George W. Jeffs, and Joseph P. McNamara, Rockwell International Corp.; Thomas J. Kelly, Grumman Aerospace Corp.; H. Douglas Lowrey, Chrysler Corp. Space Div.; Richard H. Nelson, Boeing Co. Space Div. Aerospace Group; and Theodore D. Smith, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. (Program; nasa Release 73-60; RI pro)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt attended an awards ceremony at Kennedy Space Center honoring icsc personnel and contractor employees for their contributions to the Apollo 17 mission (launched Dec. 7, 1972). (icsc Release 54-73)
Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, accepted for NASA a Silver Plaque presented by the British Interplanetary Society at the opening of the 13th European Space Symposium in London. The plaque was awarded in recognition of the Apollo program’s “triumphant achievements” and to acknowledge “the dedicated service of many thousands of scientists and engineers which culminated in this great result.” (SF, 10/73, 396)
The Federal Aviation Administration released Aviation Forecasts, Fiscal Years 1973—1984. Airline passenger traffic was expected to increase 10% annually, passing the 500 million mark in 1984. The number of hours flown by general-aviation aircraft would increase from 27.7 million in FY 1973 to 46.6 million in FY 1984 and the general-aviation fleet from 136 000 to 217 000 aircraft. U.S. airline passenger enplanements would increase from 200.4 million to 524 million in FY 1984, with international passengers increasing from 21.3 million to 62.8 million and domestic from 179.1 million to 461.2 million. Revenue passenger-miles recorded by U.S. air carriers were expected to reflect a continuing long-term trend of increased average passenger trip length; the FY 1984 total of 500.5 billion was expected to more than triple the FY 1973 figure of 162.1 billion. The air carrier fleet would increase by 1000 additional aircraft, bringing the total fleet to 3600, of which 60% would be wide-body aircraft accounting for 80% of available seat-miles. Operations at airport control towers were expected to rise from 56.8 million to 112.5 million. Annual production of U.S. civil aircraft would jump from 10 005 in FY 1973 to 24 465 in FY 1984, with general aviation accounting for most of the gain. Annual air carrier aircraft production would increase from 205 to 265, while the general-aviation figure would soar from 9800 to 24 200. (faa Release 73-60)
A New York Times editorial commented on the cost-benefit ratio of the U.S. Skylab missions. “Is the advantage gained by putting men into space worth the high price that must be paid?” Although bold, imaginative, and potentially useful, Skylab came at a time when Americans were “oppressively aware of the limits of the nation’s resources and of the consequent restraints and constraints on national policy.” Skylab would be most important “in providing practical evidence in determining the relative value of manned activity in utilizing earth’s immediate neighborhood to meet man’s needs on this planet.” (NYT, 5/13/73, 4:14) May 14-Ju.ne 22: The Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and—11 days later— the Skylab 2 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew were launched into near-earth orbit to establish the first U.S. manned orbital laboratory, in the four-mission Skylab program. Skylab i’s meteoroid shield was torn off and the solar array system damaged during launch, cutting power and raising temperature to threaten the mission, although the spacecraft achieved satisfactory orbit. Skylab 2, scheduled for May 15 launch, was delayed while damage was assessed and the flight plan modified. On May 25, Skylab 2 carried three astronauts to rendezvous and dock with the earth-orbiting Workshop. The crew boarded the Workshop, repaired spacecraft damage, and conducted medical experiments and studies in solar astronomy and earth resources for a record 28 days before undocking for a safe return to earth June 22. May 14-24:	Skylab 1 (SL-1) was launched on time at 1:30 pm edt from Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39, Pad A, by a two-stage Saturn V launch vehicle after a nominal countdown. Liftoff was witnessed by U.S. and foreign TV viewers and by an estimated 500 000 persons at ICSC, including U.S. and foreign dignitaries and 26 former prisoners of war invited by NASA. The Skylab 2 crew—Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Paul J. Weitz (pilot), and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot)—watched the launch from quarantine. Skylab’s Saturn Workshop (sws) cluster launched toward earth orbit included the Orbital Workshop (ows) with its Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), multiple docking adapter (mda), and instrument unit (iu). At 63 sec into the mission, indication was received that the meteoroid shield had deployed prematurely. The Workshop was placed in nominal, circular orbit with 438.2-km (272.2-mi) altitude, 93-min period, 50° inclination, and 7649.4-m-per-sec (25 096.6-fps) orbital velocity. The payload shroud was j ettisoned on time at 15 min and 25 sec after launch and the atm deployed at 21 min 34 sec with normal deployment of the ATM solar arrays at 26 min 38 sec, but ground controllers received no indication that the Workshop solar array system (sas), which was to have been released by an onboard computer, had been deployed. At 41 min, a ground command was sent to deploy the two SAS wings. They did not respond. The command was sent again 30 min later and a third time near the end of the first orbit, without result. During the first postlaunch press briefing, Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that if the arrays did not deploy “the mission will be seriously degraded.” The crew was not set up to perform a fix-it-yourself extravehicular activity (eva) and there were no controls for deployment inside the Workshop. Anxious officials and flight controllers began analyzing radioed launch data. Analysis and later inspection revealed that the meteoroid shield had been torn off by vibration of the vehicle just after passing through mach 1 speed, near the time of highest dynamic pressure. Some early measurements indicated that the shield separation straps were still satisfactory, but later measurements indicated failure. The failure had released the securing mechanism on SAS Wing 2 and the wing ripped off. A piece of shield had wrapped around SAS Wing 1 and kept it from deploying. Loss of the wings, which were to provide power to the Workshop, reduced power to 50% of its average 8000-w output; the remaining 50% would he supplied by the four atm solar panels. At 11:00 pm edt Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced the Skylab 2 launch had been rescheduled to May 20 to allow assessment of damage and development of a new flight plan to maximize scientific return from Skylab’s experiments with limited power. Fuel cells of the Skylab 2 command and service module (csm) would be used to produce electricity, after joining the Workshop, but the CSM oxygen and hydrogen for the cells would last only 16 to 21 days. It was too early to assess the effect on Skylab 3 and 4 missions, planned for 56 days each. On May 15 Skylab faced a new threat as temperatures inside the Workshop reached above 311 K (100°F). The lost meteoroid shield had also been designed to reflect sunlight and help cool the Workshop. “We think we can live with the electrical power shortage,” Schneider said, “but if we can’t solve this thermal problem we have a serious situation,” Schneider feared foods and film might be spoiled, plastic parts might begin to leak poisonous gases, and the laboratory might become uninhabitable. The entire Skylab team was mobilized—at Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Martin Marietta Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., trw Inc., and Garrett AiResearch Co.—in an all-out attempt to overcome the loss of the shield and solar arrays. Schneider said NASA was studying the possibility of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ putting “some kind of a thermal blanket around the spacecraft,” but that would require a delay of the Skylab 2 launch beyond May 20. Astronauts would also inspect the solar wings, but whether they could make repairs was uncertain. The Skylab 2 crew returned to JSC May 15 to help flight planners salvage the mission. Special attitude maneuvers were run to obtain temperature data on the Skylab cluster and to limit Workshop temperatures, as internal temperature soared as high as 325 K (125°F). Temperature was reduced by pitching the Workshop with the longitudinal axis pointed at the sun for one orbit and, on May 16, the Workshop was tilted 55° away from the sun, with sufficient sunlight on the working solar panels to charge the batteries but moving the space station out of the sun’s full glare. Teams continued to compute options to overcome the loss of the shield: astronauts could spray-paint Skylab Vs side to alter radiation properties of the gold foil coating the Workshop shell, could wallpaper the critical area, or could deploy a solar sunshade. Choice of the third option was announced May 16. The astronauts were trained in three possible methods of deploying the sunshade and in procedures to deploy the jammed solar panel. If they failed with the panel, a near-normal 16- to 21-day mission could still be realized by using the CSM power and curtailing some experiments. After that experiments would have to be severely cut back to reserve power for the CSm’s trip home. On May 17 NASA announced postponement of the Skylab 2 launch until May 25 to allow the astronauts to practice techniques for deploying the sunshade and mission engineers to design, fabricate, and test hardware. Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz flew to msfc to practice installing the sun shield in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator. On May 20 the Workshop was purged of any gases from the overheated insulation material and turned slightly to allow the sun to warm the airlock module and prevent water stored there from freezing and causing breakage. Components of the astronauts’ repair kit were shipped to MSFC for final testing before being installed in Skylab 2’s Apollo csm. On May 22 the Skylab 2 astronaut crew flew to KSC to prepare for the May 25 launch. Three thermal shields were decided on at a May 23 review: a parasol deployable from the Workshop through the solar scientific airlock, a backup twin-pole shield deployable by the crew during EVA, and a standup-EVA (seva) sail deployable by the crew from the CSM if both other methods failed. The Skylab 2 countdown resumed at 5:30 am edt May 23 at ksc. It had been halted eight hours after Skylab 1 liftoff May 14. On May 24 the three emergency sunshades and necessary tools were stored in the CM. Significant experiments—S015, effects of zero g on single human cells; S020, x-ray/solar photography; T025, coronagraph contamination measurements; M555, gallium arsenide crystal growth; equipment for S063, ultraviolet (uv) airglow horizon photography; and spare equipment for TV coverage of the ATM EVA—were removed to accommodate the additional 180 kg (400 lbs) of equipment. The crew would also carry an extra medical kit to replace medicines spoiled by high temperatures in Skylab 1. Lightning struck the Skylab 2 mobile service structure at 5:24 pm EDT May 24, but retests of the vehicle indicated no damage. At a May 24 press conference Program Director Schneider said there would be limited activity by the crew to deploy the partially opened solar panel. “We’re not too optimistic that we’ll be able to do too much, although we will give Capt. Conrad the option to try it if it looks like a reasonable job.” NASA was “very confident that ... we will be able to deploy a [thermal] shield, we will get the spacecraft temperatures back under control, and we will have a good 28-day mission.” May 25:	Skylab 2 (SL-2) was launched from ICSC Launch Complex 39, Pad B, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle into heavy dark clouds on time at 9:00 am edt. As Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz headed toward the Skylab 1 Workshop they were to attempt to repair in orbit and man for 28 days, Commander Conrad told Mission Control, “We fix anything.” The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee 9 min 56 sec after launch. Six minutes later the csm separated. The S—IVB stage deorbit maneuver was performed at 2:23 pm edt and the stage splashed into the Pacific Ocean. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 4:30 pm EDT over the Guam tracking station on the fifth orbit. During 15 min of TV coverage the CSM flew around the Workshop, within 1.5 m (5 ft) of it. The astronauts confirmed that the SAS Wing 2 was missing and that the SAS Wing 1, deployed only 15°, was restrained by a piece of the micrometeoroid shield wrapped around the SAS beam fairing. Portions of the gold foil laminated to the Workshop skin for thermal protection had been torn and heat and uv radiation from the sun had scorched the skin. The astronauts soft-docked the CSM with the Workshop, using only three capture latches; ate dinner; and undocked to attempt to deploy the jammed solar panel. Weitz stood in the open hatch of the CSM with Kerwin holding his knees to keep him from drifting into space. He tried to free the solar panel with a shepherd’s crook and a pole with pruning shears attached without success. Conrad told Mission Control that the panel appeared to be “hooked in there like it’s nailed on.” The repair attempt was ended at 8:12 pm edt. The crew made four unsuccessful attempts to redock with the Workshop. Working in bulky spacesuits and gloves, the astronauts evacuated the air from the Apollo cabin and hooked up an electric cable to override a suspected short in the docking probe. “Yea. We got a hard dock out of it [a docking using all 12 sealing latches to seal the two spacecraft together],” Conrad said at 11:50 pm edt. The crew found one of the capture latches had stuck in the retracted position, but troubleshooting procedures recommended by Mission Control restored the latch. May 26-June 21:	The Skylab 2 crew entered the multiple docking adapter on the Skylab Workshop at 12:45 pm edt May 26 and performed activation and Workshop preentry tasks. A chemical detection device inserted into the passage indicated no lethal gas was present. At 2:30 pm edt Astronaut Weitz entered the Workshop wearing a gas mask, gloves, and soft shoes to protect him from the heat. Weitz told ground control, “The ows appears to be in good shape. It feels a little bit warm as you might expect, like 90 to 100 degrees [F; 305 to 310 K] in the desert. I felt heat radiating from everywhere but I never felt uncomfortable. And nothing I touched felt hot to me. It’s a dry heat.” Kerwin and Conrad followed Weitz. After a quick inspection, the crew closed the hatch. At 4:30 pm edt the crew began to deploy the solar parasol—a mylar shade folded against a telescopic pole—through the solar airlock. As they readied the parasol, the astronauts looked out of the windows and identified landmarks across the U.S. Weitz recognized Seattle, Wash., and Conrad spotted both launch pads used for the Skylab launches at Conrad and Weitz popped open the shiny aluminum and orange canopy at 8:30 pm edt May 26 (Mission Day 2) while Kerwin took TV photos from the attached Apollo cm. Significant external temperature decreases were noted almost immediately after deployment. Internal temperatures decreased more slowly. The Workshop was headed back to solar inertial attitude. By May 27 the Workshop temperature had dropped to 309 K (97°F). The crew activated systems and experiments while their back-and-forth excursions through the Workshop were televised to the earth. The Washington Post later said they resembled “skin divers snorkeling through a cave in the Caribbean” or a scene from the film “2001” with astronauts “in orange flight suits and white T-shirts swimming like fish through the big workshop, floating backwards and tumbling like gymnasts.” On May 28 the astronauts began the first medical tests, taking and processing blood samples and checking the conditions of their circulatory and metabolic systems. Checkout and preparation of the (atm) was begun. During a seven-minute televised space-to-ground news conference beginning at 1:09 pm edt, Conrad said the crew had adapted rapidly. “None of us has had any motion sickness. ... It seems to be like the simulator except with the absence of gravity.” Kerwin concluded that the brain and eyes must override the body’s vestibule system in the inner ear. “You say to your brain, ‘Brain, I want that way to be up.’ And your brain says, ‘OK, then that way is up.’ . . . Your brain will follow you.” Conrad agreed, “We’re in good shape for 28 days.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said later in the mission that it was “rather amazing” that the crew had shown no signs of the expected motion sickness. Data received were preliminary, but prelaunch exercises in a whirling chair might have helped avoid nausea. Temperatures continued to drop slowly, reaching 304 K (88°F). At 8:50 pm edt a 69-sec trim burn put the Workshop into a repeating ground track about 96 km (60 mi) west of normal, to acquire earth resources data. On May 29 checkout of the ATM was completed and four passes were made. Kerwin trained an array of telescopes to observe x-ray emissions and examine the structure of the sun’s atmosphere. He photographed three regions of the sun considered active by solar physicists and made detailed observations of the full solar disk and the corona. Conrad and Weitz prepared the earth-oriented cameras for earth resources experiment package (erep) passes. Two biomedical runs were made. During a private conversation with jsc, Conrad reported that the internal temperature had stabilized near 304 K (88°F) and that, while this would be tolerable for the rest of the mission, he did not think the crew could carry out the full protocol on the bicycle ergometer (exercise device). On May 30 the solar telescopes were aimed at the active regions of the sun while scientists on the earth received excellent TV photos of the solar corona and the solar disk in the uv spectrum. The first erep photo pass was made over a 3200-km (2000-mi) strip from Oregon to the Gulf of Mexico. Good pictures were obtained of the Great Salt Lake, gypsum beds in New Mexico, and the soil salinity of the Rio Grande Valley, as well as microwave measurements of the Gulf of Mexico. After the erep pass, the batteries—at a reduced level of 45% to 50% capacity—tripped off line and ceased to produce electricity. They had been designed to trip off at 20% capacity. One battery also lost the regulator that allowed the solar panel to recharge it, decreasing the total Workshop power by 6%, or 250 w, leaving 4200 w. The Workshop required 3600 w for maintenance, leaving only 600 w for experiments. The second erep pass was canceled for a power evaluation. Sixteen batteries were brought back on line but two remained off line and were useless. Heat, fans, and lights were powered down. Workshop power continued reduced May 31 and erep experiments were canceled. The crew continued medical experiments, each taking a turn in a rotating chair to provide data on motion sickness and maintaining balance in zero g. Weitz repaired the mirror system on the uv stellar photography experiment. Temperatures had dropped to 301 K (82°F). The Skylab astronauts took their first day off June 1 (Mission Day 8) and their first shower in space. On a 15-min color telecast they performed housekeeping chores and—to the music from the film “2001”— did handstands, somersaults, and cartwheels in the zero-g atmosphere. Conrad led the crew in a run around the watertanks. Centrifugal force overcame weightlessness, so the men could keep their feet on the track. On the ground Skylab officials announced the decision to make a second attempt to free the jammed solar panel, while engineers and the backup astronauts, led by Russell L. Schweickart, tested EVA procedures. On June 2, Conrad and Weitz made a 10-min erep photo pass from California to Central Mexico to gather data on earthquakes, volcanoes, pollution sources, mineral resources, and land-use patterns. On the ground Schweickart successfully tested three ways of freeing the jammed solar panel using a bolt cutter, a prying rod, and a surgeon’s bone saw. The astronauts completed the third erep pass over North America and the fifth ATM pass on June 3. The nuclear emulsion experiment, the transuranic cosmic ray detector, and the neutron analysis detector were deployed. Astronaut Conrad set a new world record for time in space at 1:17 am EDT, surpassing the 715-hr 5-min mark set by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. The first ball game in space was held in the Workshop. Conrad said a ball thrown in weightlessness “goes straight as an arrow.” The fourth erep pass was made June 4, as well as five hours of atm solar viewing. Dr. John Zeiglschmid, Skylab Flight Surgeon, told a JSC press briefing that the physical condition of the Skylab crew was excellent. They were consuming the proper amount of food and getting adequate rest. Conrad and Kerwin had lost only 0.5 kg (1 lb) ; Weitz had lost 1.8 kg (4 lbs). Top Skylab officials at msfc agreed that solar wing deployment techniques developed by Astronaut Schweickart were feasible, without unusual safety hazards. On June 6 preparations were made for the next day’s EVA. Conrad said, “I guess we have a fifty-fifty chance of pulling it off.” The 16 Workshop batteries were producing 4200 w—only 600 w more than the minimum necessary for the astronauts’ survival. One battery was down to half charge and others were believed to have been damaged by the heat. The astronauts photographed hurricane Ava during an erep pass, made an atm pass, and photographed uv spectra of stars. Conrad and Kerwin opened the am eva hatch at 11:23 am edt June 7 and extended their umbilicals and a rigged-up 7.6-m (25-ft) pole fitted with cutters for releasing the jammed solar wing, as Weitz took TV photos from the Skylab and the csm. Outsid Kerwin had difficulty keeping a firm footing, with only makeshift andholds and foot restraints, as he secured the end of the pole to antenna mount. His heart rate rose to 150 beats per minute and he \s burning energy at 2000 to 2500 BTUs an hour. Finally he extended the pole to the beam holding the wing and—with Conrad repeatedly telling him to “take it easy” and “cool it”—managed after several tries to fit the cutters around the small bolt that restrained the wing. Conrad moved hand over hand along the pole to the wing. Tangling of the 10.6- and 18.3-m (35- and 60-ft) flexible umbilicals linking the astronauts to spacecraft life support systems complicated their movements. Kerwin pulled a lanyard to snap the cutters and sever the bolt and then extended the wing using a rope attached to the upper surface. Conrad pulled a rope to break a frozen actuator. Two of the sections making up the wing were 40% deployed and the other about 30%. The two astronauts also changed a film magazine in a telescope camera and latched open a balky door on an x-ray telescope before reentering the Workshop and closing the am eva hatch at 2:53 pm edt, concluding 3 hrs 30 min successful eva. The Workshop was pitched up to expose the panels to more direct sunlight and unfreeze the hydraulic system that deployed them. After a few hours one section was 90% deployed, another 40%, and the third 29%. By the next day the sections were fully deployed. Additional electric power of 3000 w was obtained and all eight batteries supplied by the solar panels were charged and in good working order—paving the way for a full Skylab mission. From Mission Control Schweickart said, “Everybody’s shaking hands down here and we just wish we could reach up and shake yours.” President Nixon sent a message: “On behalf of the American people I congratulate and commend you and your crew on your successful effort to repair the world’s first true space station. In the two weeks since you left earth, you have more than fulfilled the prophecy of your parting words, ‘We can fix anything.’ All of us now have new courage that man can work in space to control his environment, improve his circumstances and exert his will even as he does on earth.” On June 12 the ninth erep pass was made. Weitz said he could see pollution flowing into Lake Erie and he couldn’t find Washington, D.C., because of haze. Conrad melted an aluminum alloy to study the behavior of molten metal in weightlessness and used an electron beam for welding inside a small vacuum chamber. On June 13 Dr. Hawkins told a JSC medical review that Kerwin and Weitz were no longer able to perform at preflight levels on the bicycle ergometer, indicating their cardiovascular systems had been weakened by weightlessness. The condition was not at dangerous levels and was not interfering with their normal day-to-day performance. Weitz photographed a massive explosion on the sun with the atm solar telescopes June 15. The flare had erupted from the center of the sun’s side facing the earth and covered an area 40 200 km (25 000 mi) wide. Conrad checked out the Apollo CSM for the return trip to earth, while Kerwin initiated the growth of bacteria in a culture medium and photographed its behavior in the space environment. On June 17 a trim burn corrected a cross-track error and positioned the vehicle for the start of the Skylab 3 mission. President Nixon telephoned the astronauts from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “I guess the way I could summarize this project is that it proves that man still matters. With all the technical machines . . . that you had to work with, it proved that when there were difficulties the ingenuity of men in space was what really mattered, and you have made us all very proud with the way you handled some difficult problems in this project.” The President invited the three Skylab astronauts to visit him at San Clemente, Calif., after splashdown. At 3:22 am edt June 18 (MD—25) astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz surpassed the previous space endurance record held by the Soyuz 11 cosmonauts (launched June 6, 1971). Conrad asked that a message be relayed to Soviet cosmonauts giving “our respects at this point in our flight to them and their comrades. Wish them good luck from us in the future.” EVA-2 began at 6:53 am edt June 19. Conrad and Weitz moved through space to retrieve and replace the atm film cassettes while Kerwin photographed the eva for TV from inside the Workshop. Conrad also freed a stuck relay by striking it with a hammer. One of two dead batteries began charging immediately. From the ground Schweickart said, “It worked. Thank you very much, gentlemen. You’ve done it again.” The cameras for the white light coronagraph and x-ray spectroheliographic experiments were replaced by the astronauts to permit photography during the unmanned period between Skylab 2 and 3. eva operations ended at 8:29 am edt, after 1 hr 36 min. During a June 20 press conference from space Kerwin said the astronauts’ physical condition was “a pleasant big surprise. I’m tremendously encouraged about the future of long-duration flight.” June 22:	The astronauts undocked the csm from the Skylab Workshop at 4:55 am edt on Mission Day 29. As the csm pulled away and circled the Workshop, TV and photographic coverage were obtained by the crew, cm separation from the sm at 5:40 am edt was followed by initial service propulsion system firing at 6:05 am edt and a final deorbit maneuver at 9:11 am edt. The cm splashed down at 9:50 am edt 1340 km (830 mi) southwest of San Diego. A recovery helicopter dropped swimmers who installed a flotation collar and a sea anchor. The recovery ship Ticonderoga was maneuvered beside the CM and a crane lifted it aboard with the astronauts inside. Medical examinations on board the recovery ship found some dizziness and ill effects from weightlessness. The crew would travel by ship to San Diego and by air to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., June 24. The Skylab 1-2 mission achieved its primary objectives of establishing the Skylab Orbital Assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data on the crew for use in extending the duration of manned space flight, and performing inflight experiments. It contributed significantly toward program objectives of determining man’s ability to live and work in space for extended periods, extending the science of solar astronomy beyond the limits of earth-based observations, and developing improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space. Despite mission anomalies, 80% of the solar data planned was obtained; 12 of the 15 earth resources data runs were accomplished; all 16 medical experiments were conducted as required and a time history of man’s adaptations to zero-g environment was obtained for the first time; and data were taken on all 43 experiments scheduled for Skylab 2 except those precluded by the use of the solar parasol and weight and power limitations. The performance of the flight crew was good and the mission was judged officially on July 14 to be a success. Major records set to date included the longest-duration manned flight, 28 days 50 min; the longest total time in space for one man, 49 days for Conrad (veteran of Gemini 5 and 11 and Apollo 12 missions) ; the longest inflight EVA, 3 hrs 30 min by Conrad and Kerwin June 7; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned flight, 18 531 559 km (11514 967 mi). Skylab 1-2 was the first U.S. manned orbital workshop. Skylab 3 was scheduled to be launched in August and Skylab 4 in November. The Workshop would be operated unmanned between manned missions. The Skylab program was directed by NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, msfc developed and integrated the major program components including the ows, AM, MDA, atm, payload shroud, and most experiments and was responsible for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. KSc managed launch operations. JSC was responsible for flight operations, recovery, crew selection and training, and development of the modified CSM and the spacecraft launch adapter. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the overall direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA prog off; NASA pao press briefing transcripts, 5/14/73-6/20/73; NASA Mission Rpt MR-3; PD, 6/25/73, 787, 827; NYT, 5/17/73-6/22/73; W Post, 5/16/73-6/22/73; W Star & News, 5/23/73-6/22/73; B Sun, 5/15/73-6/12/73; M Her, 5/14/73, 19A; H Post, 6/7/73) May 14:	Unsolicited cash contributions to NASA from persons in the U.S. and foreign countries since 1959 would be used to finance the 19 student scientific experiments on Skylab [see Jan. 26], NASA announced. The $5548 fund included individual gifts ranging from $1500 to the $0.35 contribution of an eight-year-old boy sent in 1970 because he had heard that NASA “didn’t have enough money.” A retired Navy chief petty officer had sent one day’s pay after each manned flight in memory of his son who had been killed in the Korean war. A naturalized citizen from Eastern Europe had sent $100 in 1964 because he wished to be a part of the space program that would mean the survival of a free U.S. (nasa Release 73—98)
Federal Communications Commission Chairman Dean Burch wrote Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, that FCC hoped NASA would continue satellite communications programs to “discharge its statutory responsibilities in the Communications Satellite Act of 1962” and “be a potent factor in maintaining the position of the United States at the very forefront of this new and vital technology.” The letter was in response to a Feb. 2 notification to FCC that NASA planned to terminate its comsat programs because of FY 1974 budget restrictions [see Jan. 5]. Burch wrote that FCC had “over the years placed heavy reliance on the advice and technical expertise of your agency with respect to communications services via satellite.” NASA also had been “invaluable” to FCC in other fields, including “detailed evaluation of the orbital assignments and space engineering of the various proposals before this Commission in the domestic satellite field.” With the use of comsat technology spreading to aviation, maritime, and educational activities, “it would be particularly unfortunate if this Commission were not to be able to receive the same high level advice and assistance upon which it has relied over the past decade.” (Text)
NASA activities in solar heating and cooling were summarized by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Aeronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy in hearings on H.R. 10952, the Solar Heating and Demonstration Act. Thermal control of spacecraft had been a NASA challenge since the space program’s inception. NASA and its contractors had developed competency in materials, thermal control coatings, heating and cooling technology, and thermal analysis technology which bore directly on the collection and use of solar energy. In the Skylab program Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a thermal coating with unique properties that increased solar collection efficiencies, resulting in higher operating temperatures. The higher temperatures allowed more efficient operation of absorption refrigeration cycles. NASA’s work in solar heating and cooling included advanced research and technology, a residential systems engineering demonstration program, and the planned use of a large new office building as a test bed to obtain realistic engineering and operating experience. (Transcript)
A survey of knowledge about technology and research at the Univ. of Michigan by Chairman David Fradin of the Federation of Americans Suporting Science and Technology (fasst) was reported in Air Force Magazine. Of student respondents, 50% to 75% knew the Federal Government was the major source of research and development funds, that it took 6 to 10 yrs to research and develop a new product, that the U.S. had a positive balance of trade in high-technology and agriculture products, and that the trend in U.S. trade had been negative. More than 75% of respondents did not know the amount of Federal expenditure for defense or for human and physical resources, or that aerospace was the Nation’s largest manufacturing employer. Scientific effort was deemed unnecessary for national defense by 25% to 50%. From 50% to 75% felt the space program had helped U.S. technical growth, but that money spent in going to the moon had been wasted; they considered tangible space program benefits like new knowledge of the environment to be more important than aerospace leadership, national prestige, or keeping ahead of the U.S.S.R. (AF Mag, 7/73, 90-91)
It was “puzzling,” a Washington Star and Daily News editorial said, “that Soviet leaders remain so secretive about their space problems, when the general nature of a mishap cannot be hidden from modem tracking equipment and more openness could lead to a sharing of corrective knowledge. The Russian announcement that the last Salyut had merely completed its mission . . . fooled no one. Greater frankness, certainly, will be needed in the joint mission [U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project] requiring the confidence of each country’s experts in the other’s equipment and ability.” (W Star & News, 5/9/73, A23) May 10:	Skylab 1, scheduled for launch May 14, would carry 950 kg (2100 lbs) of food, including lobster newburg, prime ribs of beef, filet mignon, asparagus, strawberries, and after dinner mints, the Washington Post quoted Dr. Malcolm C. Smith, Chief of Food and Nutrition at Johnson Space Center, as saying. Each Skylab mission would carry more than 70 different foods prepared by an automatic meal-reconstitution module. Semisolid food could be eaten out of the can with a fork and spoon and prevented from flying around in the weightless environment by a polyethylene membrane. Beverages could be consumed one swallow at a time from a multichambered bellowslike canister. Previously, astronauts had to drink the entire beverage at one time once the valve was opened. Fruit juices were fortified with potassium gluconate to replace the potassium lost in weightlessness. The use of alcoholic beverages had been rejected because of medical drawbacks and public opinion. The astronauts arranged their own meals with the correct combinations of nutrients and calories. Frozen foods would be used the first time in the U.S. space program. The cost of the Skylab food was $26.35 per man per day. Twenty percent more food than required would be carried. There would also be a rescue food supply of 16 days for three men. (Ross, W Post, 5/10/73, El)
Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Harvard Univ. astronomer and former Director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, received the Smithsonian Institution’s Henry Medal during Cambridge, Mass., ceremonies honoring his July retirement from the Observatory. Dr. Whipple was cited for his leadership of the Observatory from the early days of the national space program to the present and for his contributions to man’s understanding of the solar system. (Smithsonian Torch, 11/73, 4)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, announced that future spacecraft technical requirements would permit a phasedown beginning in mid-1974 of a Deep Space Network (dsn) facility and a Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) facility—NASA’s two major tracking and data-acquisition facilities near Johannesburg, South Africa. The 64-m (210-ft) antenna facilities at Goldstone, Calif., and the new large-dish facilities in Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, with smaller 26-m (85-ft) antennas at these stations, would be used for the new planetary spacecraft probing further into the solar system and beyond after June 1974. (nasa Release 73-128)
A Detroit News editorial commented on Pioneer 10’s Dec. 3 rendezvous with Jupiter: “Jupiter is lucky. It appears to radiate three times as much energy as it receives from the sun. When all the knowledge Pioneer has transmitted has been absorbed and categorized by NASA scientists, it should provide clues to new energy sources for earth, particularly solar energy and the sun’s rays. All these possibilities are beyond the comprehension of an energy-conscious nation that in four years has grown blase about man walking on the moon. But they open the door for the scientists to apply on earth the potential resources of the solar system.” (D News, 12/5/73) December 9:	A partial lunar eclipse, one of three visible from North America during 1973, shaded 10% of the moon. Cape Canaveral residents could view the obscurity at its peak at 8:45 pm est. (Today, 12/10/73)	' December 10:	Establishment of a NASA Task Force on Energy Conservation and designation of Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), Special Assistant to the Administrator and Assistant Administrator for dod and Interagency Affairs, as Director of Energy Conservation were announced by Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator. In a memorandum to Center Directors and program and staff office heads Dr. Low said the Task Force would direct NASA activities to reduce energy use, determine where further energy reductions could be made in NASA and its programs, and apply technical and management ingenuity to finding new and imaginative ways in which NASA and other agencies could conserve energy. (Text)
Some members of Congress were urging a second series of Skylab missions beginning in 1976, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The purpose would be to avoid the hiatus in manned space exploration between the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission in 1975 and the first orbital flight of the space shuttle in 1978. Dr. James Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had estimated the cost of a second Skylab series at less than $1 billion if the same experiments were flown. Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), would try to add funds for a second Skylab to nasa’s FY 1974 authorization. (Av Wk, 3/12/73, 16)
m/g John B. Hudson (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems of Air Force Systems Command, became a lieutenant general and afsc Vice Commander. He succeeded l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who became Vice Commander, AF Logistics Command, (afsc Newsreview 10/73, 1) October 1—6:	National Space Week was observed by 32 states to honor Nasa’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1]. The governors of the states had responded to a request by members of the Federation of Americans Supporting Science and Technology (fasst). Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker said: “The declared policy of the United States, that ‘activities of space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind,’ has established our country as the scientific and technological leader in space. NASA has coordinated the efforts of scientists and engineers in every field, the aerospace industry and educational institutions.” (fasst Release, 10/30/73) October 1—18:	A 47-member NASA delegation led by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney met with Soviet counterparts in Moscow for two weeks of discussions of technical problems of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission scheduled for July 1975. Discussions culminated in an Oct. 18 midterm review of the project by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of the Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. Low had arrived in Moscow Oct. 14; his stay included visits to the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of Space Research, the Cosmonaut Training Center, and the Space Flight Control Center. In an Oct. 18 communique Dr. Low and Academician Petrov confirmed their satisfaction with the astp project status. All major milestones were being met on schedule and, Dr. Low said, progress made indicated that the scheduled launch date could be met. Soyuz orbital and Apollo docking module drawings had been exchanged and agreement had been reached that U.S. specialists would participate in preflight final checkout of flight equipment at the Soviet launch site. Specialists would be exchanged to fit-check compatible equipment at U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. Academician Petrov told the press that U.S. specialists would be permitted at the Soviet launch site “up to the very minute of launching.” During the visit U.S. officials learned the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 June 30, 1971, were caused by accidental triggering open of an exhaust valve rather than by a hatch leak. The valve tripped open just after the reentry capsule separated from the larger orbiting module in a maneuver including firing of 12 explosive bolts. At least two crew members tried to close the valve but were unable to move fast enough. Unconsciousness from rapid decompression came in less than 10 sec; ground tests showed it would take 27 sec to close the valve by hand. U.S. officials said they were satisfied that subsequent modifications to the valve and crank mechanisms—tested on two unmanned flights, Cosmos 496 and 573, and on the manned Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission —were sufficient to prevent reoccurrence of the accident. (NASA Releases 73-199, 73-224; Smith, NYT, 10/19/73; jsc, astp Briefing transcript, 11/19/73; O’Toole, W Post, 10/29/73, Al; Av Wk, 11/5/73, 20-21) October 2:	NASA held three Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center. At a postflight crew press briefing, Skylab 3 Astronaut Alan L. Bean —who had splashed down Sept. 25, after a 59-day mission working in the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) with crew members Dr. Owen K. Garriott and Jack R. Lousma—said that the crew’s health had been “good the whole time.” Sufficient exercise, meals on time, and plenty of sleep had accounted f or their happiness and well-being. Having a scientist-astronaut aboard had created a “greater variety of interchange around the dinner table,” making “a better mission for everybody.” The mission would have been “50% less productive if Owen had not been there. He added a great amount to it . . . because his point of view is, just different.” Garriott said that a longer mission would necessitate “a somewhat less strenuous program,” but he could have spent eight hours a day at the wardroom window with a camera in each hand and a good supply of film “and never have any tendency to become bored.” Lousma said he still felt “a little less energetic” than before the mission, but within two weeks “I’ll be back to the same condition.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the crew was “in very good shape” but still had dizziness with specific head movements. Strength of the flexor and extensor muscles had decreased 20%. The astronauts’ weights were steadily climbing toward their preflight weights. Early blood tests had shown the red cell mass was down an average of 12% for all three crew members. The blood plasma was also down 15% to 20%. In an overview of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that the spacecraft (Command and Service Module 118) and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue were being readied for Nov. 11 launch. Final decision on the launch date would be made after further evaluation of the mission. In preparation, 140 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment had been deleted from stowage. It had been replaced with another 150 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment, 60 kg (130 lbs) for Skylab experiments, and 70 kg (150 lbs) of special equipment for Comet Kohoutek observations. After Oct. 8—10 flight readiness tests, only servicing, stowage, pyrotechnic installations, countdown demonstrations, and launch would remain. CSM—119, the rescue vehicle, was being prepared and would be available for a Jan. 6 launch if needed. Alfred A. Bishop, Manager of the jsc Missions Office, said that, after the first two weeks of acclimation, the Skylab 4 crew would perform 28 man-hours of experiments each day, an increase from the 19 to 221/j man-hours on Skylab 3. The increase would provide an additional 200 experiment man-hours. The crew would observe Comet Kohoutek, perform 12 experiments using the Apollo Telescope Mount, observe Mercury crossing the sun Nov. 10, observe a solar eclipse, and perform 10 to 14 new earth resources experiment package passes. (Transcripts)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, dismissed Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity. In a Nov. 2 memorandum to NASA employees he said: “Mrs. Harris has made public a paper she wrote me criticizing NASA’s Employment Opportunity Program and recommending the reassignment of the Assistant Administrator.” Dr. Fletcher was “deeply and personally committed to the goal of equal employment opportunity for members of minority groups and women” and “was not satisfied with NASA’s performance in this field.” He said NASA would consider Mrs. Harris’ recommendations and suggestions and “will adopt those we feel will be helpful.” He appreciated her effort and respected her “for having expressed her opinions.” But, “because Mrs. Harris has not demonstrated the degree of administrative and management skill required of her position, because she has been unwilling to share the broader problems of management with her peers, and because she became a seriously disruptive force within her own office, I concluded that she should not continue to serve. ... In so concluding, I also concluded that Dr. [Dudley G.] McConnell [Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity] can successfully do the job he has been assigned provided he has the good will and working support of all nasa employees.” Dr. McConnell, a former civil rights activist, had said most of Mrs. Harris’ report had been on public record already “but the time they spent preparing it should have been devoted to more positive kinds of things,” the Baltimore Sun reported. (O’Brien, W Post, 10/29/73, A5; Text, B Sun, 10/29/73, A3)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate John R. Quarles, Jr., as Deputy Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency succeeding Robert W. Fri, whose resignation he accepted. The President also designated Quarles, Acting epa Deputy Administrator, as Acting Administrator pending the confirmation and appointment of Russell E. Train as Administrator. Quarles’ nomination was submitted to the Senate Sept. 5 and confirmed Sept. 14. (PD, 8/20/73, 982; 9/10/73, 1070; epa pio) August 16:	NASA announced tentative plans to observe the Comet Kohoutek during the Skylab 4 mission, planned for Nov. 9 launch to join the Sky-lab Orbital Workshop. The Apollo Telescope Mount instruments provided a broad capability for comet observations over a range of spectral .bands. Observations would begin in mid-November and continue until shortly before mission completion, scheduled for Jan. 4, 1974. The tentative plans would be reviewed after the completion of the Skylab 3 mission (launched July 28). If technical problems necessitated an earlier launch to minimize the length of unmanned operations, it would not be possible to observe the comet. A possible 10-day delay of the launch beyond Nov. 10 would also be considered, to permit observation of the comet until Jan. 14. NASA also deleted the requirement to maintain the capability to launch the backup Workshop, which originally was to have been maintained to Sept. 30. (nasa Release 73-162)
A New York Times editorial praised Federal Communications Commission policy in authorizing construction of communications satellites: “Fortunately, the F.c.c. has not approved one chosen entity or single system but has decided to throw open the airwaves to various competitive groups.” There should be no corporate dominance of systems that depended on Federal funds. As fcc developed its open skies policy for satellites, “it should also consider the use of educational and public service broadcasts on a free or reduced-rate basis. Here is where the main ‘profit’ should accrue from quasi-public satellite communications.” A second Times editorial praised the agreement announced Dec. 5, 1972, that permitted the U.S. firm rca Global Communications, Inc., to use channel of Canada’s Anik 2 satellite to provide domestic communications service in the U.S.: The agreement signaled “a beam of light in broadcasting and business communications across the international oceans of the world.” In the near future Americans might receive some programs originating in Canada; later, from Europe. “Operating procedures and telecommunications systems must be synchronized; problems of copyright and aerial piracy must be overcome. And then international agreements would have to be hammered out as difficult as those on human and other national rights that have been dormant for years in the United Nations. Intelsat, a temporary arrangement between nations interested in orbital systems, will soon have the machinery for regular coordination with a secretariat in Washington.” (NYT, 1/13/72, 28) January 14:	A building boom of nuclear power plants in 1972 was reported by the New York Times. The Atomic Industrial Forum, a group seeking to foster development of atomic energy for peaceful uses, had reported 33 plant commitments made, with a total capacity of 36.3 million kw. The Atomic Energy Commission had reported 29 nuclear power plants operable in the U.S. with a total capacity of 14.7 million kw, or 3.8% of total electric utility capacity. Fifty-five plants with a total capacity of 47.8 million kw were being built and 76 with 80-million-kw capacity were planned, aec had predicted that in 1980 nuclear power capacity would be 23% of total U.S. electric capacity. (Smith, NYT, 1/14/73, 5:3) January 14-17:	The American Chemical Society held a regional meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Cyril A. Ponnamperuma and Dr. Peter M. Molton, Univ. of Maryland chemists, presented results of studies in which a Jupiterlike atmosphere of methane and ammonia had been produced in a flask at the University’s Laboratory of Chemical Evolution. Results had shown the chemicals necessary for establishing life probably existed in Jupiter’s upper atmosphere. “Jupiter today may have the kind of atmosphere that the primitive earth had 4 billion or 4% billion years ago,” Dr. Ponnamperuma, former NASA specialist in life chemistry, said. Further studies had shown that bombarding primitive chemicals with electrical discharges triggered complex chemical reactions forming aminonitriles—precursors of purines and pyrimidines, main components of dna and RNA, chemicals dictating the genetic make-up of every living cell. Aminonitriles combined with water became amino acids, ingredients of all proteins. Ponnamperuma and Molton said they would ask NASA to explore Jupiter’s atmosphere during the planned 1977 flyby mission to that planet. If a scientific probe could find the same life building blocks as produced in the laboratory, life in Jupiter’s clouds would be almost a certainty. (Kirkman, W Star & News, 1/17/73, A9; Cohn, W Post, 1/18/73, A14) January 15:	President Nixon had sent Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, a letter praising nasa’s contribution to the Administration program to assist minorities in finding a profitable role in the U.S. economic system, NASA Activities reported. (NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 6)
Publication of Federal Plan for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research, Fiscal Year 1974 was announced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. FY 1974 programs would cost $504 659 000, an increase of $22 032 000 over FY 1973. The increase would be used to employ computers, satellites, ocean buoys, automatic weather stations, remote sensing, and automated data-handling techniques to improve weather services with reduced manpower. NOAA would increase its expenditures for weather radars, satellite operations, new computers, and expanded weather-dissemination systems. The Dept, of Defense would add more weather radars, expand its satellite data-processing programs, and install advanced instrumentation aboard storm reconnaissance aircraft. The dod surface and upper-air weather observing program would be decreased because of curtailed military activities. The Federal Aviation Administration planned 100 more unmanned Flight Service Stations to provide weather information for pilots. The faa’s En Route Flight Advisory Service would be expanded from 4 to 25 stations, nasa launch of two Synchronous Meteorological Satellites, prototypes for the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (goes) , would begin a new phase in the environmental satellite program. Subsequent goes spacecraft would be funded by noaa. Both noaa and DOD were readying ground facilities for the GOES system, noaa’s series of polar-orbiting operational satellites would be maintained with launches scheduled as needed, itos-e was to be launched by nasa in July to become Noaa 3. (noaa Release 73-150)
Establishment of a Spacelab Program Office at Marshall Space Flight Center to manage nasa’s activities in the international project was announced by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, MSFC Director. Thomas J. Lee had been appointed Spacelab Program Manager, (msfc Release 73-202)
The first of six student volunteers in a Univ. of California at Davis experiment to determine if astronauts could survive social isolation was released after 105 days’ isolation in two small rooms. Dr. Don A. Rockwell, project manager, said the experiment had shown that astronauts should he able to adjust psychologically to long periods in space. (upi, W Post, 5/30/73, A4)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced it had adopted fuel-saving regulations permitting airlines to use flight simulators more in pilot training and flight checking. The new rules could save 200 000 cu m (50 million gal) of fuel annually and reduce flights by 9300. (faa Release 73-215) December 23:	Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper, astronomer and space pioneer, died of a heart attack at the age of 68, while visiting Mexico City. During his early career, Dutch-born Kuiper had discovered groups of dwarf stars, satellites of Uranus and Neptune, and an atmosphere surrounding Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. In the 1950s he became the first astronomer to measure Pluto’s diameter accurately and charted the equator and position of the poles of Venus. In the 1960s Dr. Kuiper became one of the foremost authorities on the moon, working in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor projects and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. (McFadden, NYT, 12/25/73, 24) December 24:	Fifth anniversary of the Christmas Eve reading of Genesis by the moon-orbiting crew of Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968) to TV and radio audiences that included one of every four persons on earth. The crew of Skylab 4 (launched Nov. 16 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14), second crew to spend Christmas in space, devoted Christmas Eve to searching for and opening gifts hidden for them in the Apollo command module before launch by colleagues in Mission Control. The packages included a 91-cm (36-in) green cloth Christmas tree beneath the gear they would need for their scheduled Christmas Day space walk and a surprise package stored in the CM locker. Mission Control also planned to transmit over a teleprint circuit a Christmas card depicting the sun, Skylab, gifts, and Santa’s sled. (A&A 1968; UPi, W Star-News, 12/24/73, Al)
Space program objectives would be served by broadening NASA’s charter, Daniel J. Fink—Vice President of General Electric Co., General Manager of GE Space Div., and 1974 President of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics—said in an Astronautics & Aeronautics article. By 1973 the U.S. “had attained or surpassed all the objectives set forth” in the Space Act of 1958; now nasa’s emphasis should shift from space techniques to “mission management and the science and applications technologies, allowing industry to assume fuller responsibility for subsystem design and development.” Congress also should charter NASA “to design and manage a broad-based, goaZ-oriented science program” to maximize the return from the achieved capability in lunar, planetary, and astronomical exploration. NASA would best fill its role if given “clearly defined responsibilities in nurturing space applications until they reach the most efficient handover point; if it is directed toward system integration and management rather than subsystem engineering and design; if it becomes the executive agency for an integrated space-science program; if it maintains its role as the advanced space-systems application-technology house for all users; and if it remains the active working partner of the aerospace industry in all programs, domestic or international, cooperative or competitive.” (A&A, 12/73,16-19)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo/ASTP Program Manager, became Marshall Space Flight Center Director on the retirement of Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees. The appointment had been announced Dec. 22, 1972. (msfc Org Ann 0101)
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center experiment to a 49.4-km (30.7-mi) altitude. The objectives were to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The sounding rocket was launched in conjunction with a Nimbus 4 weather satellite (launched April 8, 1970) overpass. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt Srl) September 19—21:	The exhibition “Technology in the Service of Man” was opened at Lewis Research CenteT by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator. Some 1400 representatives of business, industry, labor, professions, and Government viewed exhibits that included a Skylab slide show, Saturn launch vehicle models, a Skylab Student Project exhibit, mockups of future space shuttle payloads, a lunar roving vehicle, and material on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao). (msfc Release 73-129; LeRC Release 73—42; Lewis News, 9/21/73, 1) September 19—28:	Five Soviet radiation specialists toured U.S. industrial process radiation facilities under the Memorandum on Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy between the Atomic Energy Commission and the U.S.S.R. State Committee on the Utilization of Atomic , Energy. The visit reciprocated a Soviet tour by a delegation of U.S. radiation specialists in July 1972. (aec Release R-389) September 20:	President Nixon presented Harmon International Aviation Trophies to chief test pilots Brian Trubshaw and Andre Turcat of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft during White House ceremonies that coincided with the Concorde’s first U.S. visit. Trubshaw of Great Britain and Turcat of France received the 1971 Aviator’s Trophy for their Concorde flights. The 1972 Aviatrix Trophy went to Geraldine Cobb for humanitarian flights in the Amazon River Basin area of South America in 1971. Air Force pilots l/c Thomas B. Estes and l/c Dewain Bick received the 1972 Aviator’s Trophy for their April 26, 1972, SR—71 reconnaissance jet aircraft flight that set a record for sustained speed after a 24 100-km (15 000-mi) flight from Beale Air Force Base, Calif., at mach 3-plus speeds. In the first visit of a supersonic transport aircraft to the U.S., the Concorde arrived at Dallas-Fort Worth Regional Airport at Grapevine, Tex., to participate in Sept. 21 dedication ceremonies for the world’s largest jet airport. The Concorde—carrying 32 aviation officials, press representatives, and a 10-man crew—was flown from Caracas, Venezuela, to Texas by Concorde test pilot Jean Franchi in two and one half hours. The passengers had flown from Texas to Caracas the previous day in a conventional jet aircraft in four and one half hours. {PD, 9/24/73, 1170; NYT, 9/21/73, 1, 43; A&A 1972)
An Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation in space shuttle development was signed in Paris by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. The agreement included European funding and development of the Spacelab for the space shuttle. A NASA-European Space Research Organization (esro) Memorandum of Understanding that supplemented the agreement was initialed by NASA and ESRO representatives in Europe. The memorandum would be signed in Washington, D.C., by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Alexander Hocker, esro Director General, Sept. 24. (nasa Release 73-191; nasa Int Aff)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced award of a $735 213 contract to Collins Radio Co. to develop new area aviation techniques to increase airport and airways capacity. The two-year study would emphasize two-dimensional (positional and altitude guidance) and three-dimensional (added time element) area navigation concepts. (faa Release 73-30) February 9—19:	The U.S.S.R. ground control commanded the lunar explorer Lunokhod 2 to unfold its solar battery panel and begin its second lunar day of exploration. The moon car explored its parking area—a small deep crater with outcroppings of bedrock at its edge, formed 3 million yrs ago by a large meteorite that hit the surface of congealed lava. Lunokhod 2 made measurements of the magnetic field inside the crater by approaching it four times from different directions and making 120 precision maneuvers. The vehicle moved southeasterly to the Taurus Mountains. En route it measured physicomechanical properties of the soil and tension of the local magnetic fields, took panoramic photos of surrounding terrain, and tested riding characteristics of the lunar vehicle in various modes of operation. A monolith one meter (three feet) long of unusual lunar material was discovered Feb. 13. The plate had a strong, smooth surface unlike surrounding pockmarked stones and appeared to be much younger. During exploration of the giant crater Lunokhod 2 skidded and swerved over 2.3 km (1.4 mi) of difficult terrain with slopes up to 25° and sank in dust to the hub of its wheels as it ascended the rim of the crater. At the top of the rim, TV cameras showed a complex surface with ejecta piled on the rims of lunar holes formed when three meteorites hit the area within millions of years. Lunokhod 2 descended the slope of a 100-m (330-ft) crater, leaving deep ruts in loose rock. The difficult ascent was interrupted for 20 hrs to replenish electrical energy Feb. 19. Lunokhod 2 had covered 9.6 km (6.0 mi) since landing on the moon Jan. 16. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 2/14/73, LI; 2/15/73, L2-L3; 2/21/73, L2-L3) February 10-March 10:	Water impact and towing tests of the space shuttle’s solid-propellant booster were conducted by the Navy at the Long Beach, Calif., Naval Shipyard. Tests, under Marshall Space Flight Center direction, gathered data on retrieval of reusable solid-fueled-motor casings jettisoned from the orbiter stage at 40-km (25-mi) altitude. Test hardware, a 77%-scale model of the shuttle booster, was dropped from heights of 0.3 to 12 m (1 to 40 ft) at angles of 10°, 20°, and 30° off vertical. The model was towed at speeds of 3.7 to 14.8 km per hour (2.3 to 9.2 mph). Kennedy Space Center was responsible for development of the retrieval techniques; MSFC, for design and fabrication of solid-propellant reusable boosters, (msfc Release 73-12; icsc Release 22-73; NASA prog off) February 11:	Rising costs of the Skylab missions were discussed by Thomas O’Toole in a Washington Post article: Nearly $400 million had been added to cost estimates since the Skylab program had originated seven years ago. Postponement of the first Skylab launch from April to May had added $5 million in overtime costs and NASA had conceded another two-week delay and $5 million in additional costs was possible. Another reason for skyrocketing costs was the post-Apollo switch of emphasis from the moon and planets to the earth. Skylab’s original purpose had been to study the sun and addition of the earth studies program on Skylab had added greatly to costs. Skylab was the flagship of the U.S. manned space program. It was the “most impressive machine ever built,” weighing 90 metric tons (100 U.S. tons) and providing living quarters equal to a three-bedroom house. Scientists saw Skylab as the link between the first decade of space exploration and the 1980s, when the reusable shuttle would become operational. It would provide much information about effects on the human body of long periods in space. The last of three Skylab crews might stay in space for 70 days. “If they make it that long without any serious side effects, they will have done as much for space exploration as any of the pioneers before them.” (O’Toole, W Post, Al) February 12:	A statement by Western Union International, Inc., Vice President Thomas S. Greenish that mainland China had no plans for establishment of a domestic satellite communications system was quoted by Aviation Week & Space Technology. Greenish had returned from two-month stay in People’s Republic of China in connection with an earth terminal being built by WUI near Peking. (Av Wk, 2/12/12),
The B-l development program director, m/g Douglas T. Nelson (usaf), told the press in Washington, D.C., that construction of the swing-wing strategic bomber had fallen behind schedule, forcing a nine-month postponement of a decision on whether to produce B-ls at an estimated $54 million each. The decision date had been rescheduled for May 1976. First flight of a B-l prototype had been rescheduled from April to June 1974. B—1 prime contractor Rockwell International Corp. had been “falling noticeably behind schedule” in installing subsystems because it had had to spend more time than anticipated on assembling the airframe. By slowing the development program the Air Force hoped to avoid a program cost increase during the current fiscal year, but development problems would result in a $78-million total increase, to bring the total development cost to $2.79 billion. (WSJ, 7/13/73) July 13:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by a Titan HID booster into orbit with a 273.6-km (170-mi) apogee, 154.5-km (96-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 96.2° inclination. Press reports termed the spacecraft a “Big Bird” photo-reconnaissance satellite. The satellite reentered Oct. 12. (Pres Rpt 74; Av Wk, 8/27/73, 30)
The role of commercial aircraft in monitoring meteorological parameters and atmospheric constituents was discussed in a Science article by Lewis Research Center scientist Robert Steinberg. Wide-body jet aircraft could supply global atmospheric and tropical meteorological data. “While scientists are not in total agreement on the magnitude of the effect of particulates and gases on the atmosphere, there is almost unanimous concurrence that we are severely limited in information, and that global baseline concentration must he established for particulates and gases in the troposphere and lower stratosphere as soon as possible.” Commercial aircraft were flying 10 hrs a day on long-range flights, equipped with inertial navigation systems and central-air-data computers coupled to advanced data-storage systems capable of satellite interrogation. “This means that there is now a large amount of synoptic weather information which can be obtained with a minimum of effort and cost. Likewise, a start at obtaining measurements of atmospheric constituents on a global basis can be made now.” (Science, 4/27/73, 375-80) April 27—May 2:	Goddard Space Flight Center sponsored three scientific meetings: the X-ray Astronomy Symposium and the Goddard Scientific Colloquium met April 27 and the International Symposium and Workshop on Gamma-ray Astrophysics met April 30-May 2. Dr. Floyd W. Stecker, GSFC scientist, and Jean-Loup Puget of the Paris Observatory presented their theory before the gamma ray symposium that the galaxies had been formed when equal amounts of matter and antimatter in the universe coalesced into separate regions after the universe expanded and cooled from an extremely hot, dense state about 15 billion yrs ago. The regions could have grown to the mass of galaxy clusters by the time the universe had cooled enough to go from a plasma to an atomic gaseous state. The theory would account for the sizes, mean densities, and rotational speeds of galaxies and was consistent with Dr. Stecker’s interpretation of recently observed cosmic gamma radiation as resulting from matter-antimatter annihilation. (gsfc Note to Editors; nasa Release 73-86) April 28:	Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., retiring Secretary of the Air Force, was named by the National Geographic Society to receive its Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy. The citation said: “Under his leadership great strides were made in Air Force space programs, and new early warning and communications space systems were placed in operation.” [See April 30.] (AP, W Star & News, 4/29/73, A6)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Support to Universities, Colleges, and Selected Nonprofit Institutions, Fiscal Year 1971 (nsf 73—300). Total Federal obligations (exclusive of loans) to institutions of higher learning increased in current and constant dollars. Current-dollar volume rose $253 million, or 8%, to a record $3480 million. Constant-dollar increase was 2%, the first increase since 1967. The first 100 universities and colleges in Federal support accounted for more than $2.4 billion during 1971, or 69% of Federal funds to all academic institutions. Private universities and colleges receiving Federal funds outnumbered public institutions receiving Federal funds 1242 to 1126, but public institutions accounted for 61% of total Federal obligations, 65% of degrees awarded, and 75% of students enrolled. In 1971 life sciences research and development funding was $741 million, or 48% of all Federal r&d obligations. Obligations for general support of NSF and National Institutes of Health science programs was $100 million, the same level as in 1970. The Atomic Energy Commission continued as the principal Federal agency funding academically associated r&d centers, with 64% of the $984 million Federal total. NASA and the Dept, of Defense awarded $312 million, or 32% of the total. (Text) During April:	Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt concluded the largest and most successful schedule of postflight public appearances undertaken by an astronaut crew. The tour, begun Jan. 12 in Los Angeles, included 57 stops in 25 states and the District of Columbia in 11 weeks. The astronauts met with 12 state governors and addressed state legislatures in Kansas, New Mexico, Georgia, Arkansas, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Colorado, and Washington. Activities Bureau Chief Eugene A. Marianetti of NASA’s Public Events Directorate said later that the astronauts had met no evidence of antispace sentiment, “only a lack of adequate information ... on the actual amount spent on the space program.” (NASA Activities, 5/15/73, 89)
NASA’s 15th anniversary year—memorable for advances in earth resources technology, aeronautics progress, expanded international cooperation in space, and increased promise for future manned and unmanned planetary exploration—boosted the U.S. space program from the spectacular orbit of Apollo lunar exploration to a steady program of extended service to science and mankind. Skylab’s triumph heralded the approach of the shuttle era that would weld with the earth the vast regions of near-earth space, extending man’s transportation system into regions beyond land, sea, and air. The newest Pioneer probes began penetration into the mysteries of outer planetary space. Budget restrictions in line with President Nixon’s January 1250-billion target for total Government spending slowed space shuttle manpower buildup, suspended work on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory, and required phase-out of communications satellite work and curtailment of work on nuclear propulsion. But Skylab, the space shuttle, the scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the Viking, the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, and many applications and aeronautics projects were retained in a balanced and productive program. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for the past seven years and member of the NASA staff since October 1958, retired at the end of the year. Dr. Newell had been Science Program Coordinator in the Nation’s first satellite program, the Naval Research Laboratory’s Project Vanguard, before establishment of NASA. Tight funding and the near completion of the Skylab missions brought a net reduction in NASA Civil Service employees of 1646, including retirements, during the calendar year, with a total 25 598 on board Jan. 5, 1974. Headquarters employees dropped by a net change of 80, Kennedy Space Center by 117, Johnson Space Center by 110, Marshall Space Flight Center by 374, Ames Research Center by 49, Flight Research Center by 13, Langley Research Center by 62, Lewis Research Center by 494 (with the phasing down of Plum Brook Station), Goddard Space Flight Center by 289, and Wallops Station by 14. aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office was closed with the end of the nerva program. Further reductions of 628—including 405 at msfc and 200 at LeRC—were scheduled in 1974, to bring the FY 1974 end-of-year total to the required 24 970 ceiling. Aerospace industry employment in the Nation increased to 946 000 in June but declined to 935 000 by the year’s end. Techniques developed for aerospace activities were applied to earthquake prediction, development of residential solar heating, and fuelsaving integrated systems for housing. NASA added 550 technical briefs to its more than 5000 technical innovations already available for U.S, industry use. More than 68 000 U.S. industrial and commercial firms requested additional data on these innovations. Some 3000 firms spent $625 000 for special assistance from nasa’s Regional Dissemination Centers; 1500 firms purchased 1891 computer programs and related documentation for $221 530. NASA liberalized its patent-licensing procedures to speed technology transfer and during 1973 five exclusive patent licenses, the largest number since the program’s inception, were granted. A nasa liaison office was opened in New York City to work directly with city agencies on public safety, drug detection, and fire prevention. A rechargeable heart pacemaker was developed under nasa auspices by the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Electronic components designed for space use were incorporated in the device, which could be recharged at home by the patient, eliminating the need for surgery every two years to replace conventional devices. A new radio transmitter temperature pill allowed doctors to check localized internal body temperature changes. A portable visual testing device permitted early detection of eye disorders. A test hospital room for paralyzed patients used space-developed devices for remote operation of communications systems and appliances. The nasa FY 1974 appropriation of $3,002 billion was $13.9 million below the budget request, $62.4 million below the $3.0645-billion FY 1973 authorization, and $406 million below the FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion. (A&A 1972; A&A 1973; Aerospace, 2/74, 6-11; nasa Off Comptroller; nasa Off of Admin; NASA SP-5119; nasa Release 73281)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, issued a memorandum stating that private communications with astronaut crew members of the Skylah Orbital Workshop (to be launched May 14) would be permitted for morale, operational, and medical reasons. Private calls to families would be permitted once a week, without monitoring or public announcement. Private operational calls could be requested for “extreme operational emergency” and would be announced; paraphrases would be released to the public as appropriate. Private medical conversations would be scheduled daily and not announced. A daily medical bulletin on crew health would be issued to the public. (NASA Release 73—110, attaching memo)
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)
Federal Aviation Administration award of a six-month $125 082 contract to Boeing Co. to develop data to identify aircraft noise patterns in airport vicinities was announced by Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar. Boeing would collect and analyze noise and performance data on its four in-service commercial aircraft—Boeing 707, 727, 737, and 747. (faa Release 73—55)
Rep. Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.), with cosponsors from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 8871 to authorize the NASA Administrator to conduct research and development programs to increase knowledge of tornadoes, hurricanes, large thunderstorms, and other short-lived weather phenomena and to develop methods for predicting, detecting, and monitoring such atmospheric behavior. {CR, 6/20/73, H5064)
Flight Research Center technologist Kenneth W. Iliff—a 32-year-old, wheelchair-bound victim of bulbar and paralytic polio in his youth—had been selected by NASA as the agency’s Outstanding Handicapped Federal Employee of the Year, frc announced. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had nominated Iliff, to receive the same award for the entire Federal Government. Iliff would receive his doctorate from the Univ. of Southern California at Los Angeles in June, had helped develop advanced analytical techniques for NASA, including an optimal parameter estimation, (frc Release 9—73)
NASA postponed the launches of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and the Skylab 2 crew from April 30 and May 1 to indefinite dates in May. The postponement was necessitated by an unexpected accumulation of problems in launch preparations for vehicle modules and experiments and first-time Skylab testing at Kennedy Space Center. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider set tentative launch dates of May 14-15 but would announce official dates in late March after continued testing and reviews of flight planning. (Schneider TWX to NASA Centers, 1/22/73)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—in the 39th day of their mission aboard the Orbital Workshop [see Nov. 16-Feb. 8, 1974]—were participating in new tests developed by nasa scientists and heart specialists at the National Heart and Lung Institute to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on the heart, the New York Times reported. Space program doctors wanted data to help explain the smaller heart size, sudden drops in blood pressure when shifting quickly from a prone to upright position, and the smaller output of blood during exercise experienced by astronauts immediately after space flight. The new technique, called echo-cardiography, used sonarlike sound waves of extremely high frequency to produce internal pictures of the heart. The Skylab 4 crew had been tested using echo-cardiography for a week preceding launch. Repeat studies would be made aboard the recovery ship within hours after splashdown. The astronauts would be studied over the course of weeks and possible months to record the complete readaptation of the heart to gravity. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/24/73, 1)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., was named Executive Director of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics staff, succeeding Charles F. Ducander, who was retiring effective June 30. Committee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), said Swigert’s “broadly based skill and enthusiasm” would “aid in expanding the effort being made by the Committee to assure that our national space program and federal research and development will receive adequate support in the mid-1970s.” (AP, Houston Post, 4/14/73; Com Off)
The Senate agreed by a vote of 82 to 10 to S. Res. 71 to seek agreement with other governments to prohibit the use of environmental or geophysical modification activity as a weapon of war. (CR, 7/11/73, S13101-02) July 12:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, outlined potential uses of space age technology before the Western Assn, of State Game and Fish Commissioners in Salt Lake City, Utah. He said earth surveying could find hidden resources, such as formations likely to have petroleum beneath them. (Evans, Desert News, 7/12/73)
Australian Prime Minister E. G. Whitlam and Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, officially opened the largest space-tracking antenna erected in Australia for NASA. The 64-m-dia (210-ft-dia) antenna at the Tidbinbilla Deep Space Communications Complex near Canberra would be part of NASA’s global Deep Space Network (dsn) of three stations. The first station was built at Goldstone, Calif., in 1966 and the third was nearing completion in Madrid, Spain, (nasa Release 73-69; NASA pao)
Ames Research Center scientists had developed a miniaturized radio transmitter in pill form to monitor temperatures of the human body, NASA announced. Used in the space program to monitor persons in a simulated spacecraft environment, the transmitter could detect minute variations in temperature which often indicated to doctors the presence of infection. Produced in volume, the transmitter pill could he sold for 50 cents, arc was working to decrease the pill’s size still farther and to increase its transmitting power without increasing its cost. (NASA Release 73—167)
A planned layoff of 2500 workers—including scientists, engineers, and blue collar personnel—had been announced by Lockheed-California Co., the Associated Press reported. The work force reduction of 9% of the 29 000 employees would follow earlier signing of an agreement with Eastern Airlines, Inc., in which the airline asked for delayed delivery of wide-bodied Lockheed aircraft. Eastern had lost $10 million during the first eight months of 1973. {W Post, 11/15/73, C13) November 15:	Final reviews of all launch preparations had been completed and Skylab 4 was “now GO for launch at 9:01 tomorrow morning,” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced at a Kennedy Space Center news briefing. Leland F. Belew, Skylab Program Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, said the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) had experienced no major problems during the unmanned period and was in “excellent shape to support a 60-day open-ended up to 84-day mission.” Col. Alan R. Vette, U.S. Air Force recovery forces, said that all Dept, of Defense recovery forces, were in position and ready for launch. The prime recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans was in port in San Diego and would sail in early January to Hawaii to support target points in the Pacific beginning Jan. 13. Any splashdown before that date would be covered by Air Force helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft out of Hickham Air Force Base in Hawaii. (Transcript)
Abandonment of technology, a “source of man’s strength,” would be a senseless alternative to its further development and use, Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology President, warned in a Technology Review article. Man’s exploitation of and dependency on the environment could not be changed through greater understanding of science and its application. Even a relevant technology alone would not suffice. Man needed “to develop the ability to estimate rationally and to choose among alternate courses of action, particularly when new technology is concerned. Above all, we need the humility to admit that we will not find any absolute answers or permanent solutions.” But the fallacy of the approaching doomsday argument was “that it ignores the considerable evidence we already have that man can in fact modify his behavior fast enough to avoid the catastrophic disasters predicted by the doomsday-sayers.” The evidence included the fact that scarcely a decade after Rachel Carson’s warning against pesticides (in her book Silent Spring) “those chemicals are severely controlled—possibly too much so—and biodegradable equivalents are on the verge of being introduced.” Lake Michigan’s marine life was nearing extinction 10 yrs ago; “by vigorous ecological controls it has been restored.” Development and control of the rapidly changing synthetic environment had become as important as contending with nature. Those who saw only evil in technology “fail to recognize that our situation would be much worse if the search for new technological solutions was stopped.” The challenge was “to move on from where we are to technologies and ways of employing them that will avoid uncontrollable effects in the future. Stopping science will shut off new knowledge and weaken our efforts to reverse the present situation. Technology alone is not the answer, but without technological developments few answers are likely to be found.” More than 30 yrs ago Dr. Vannevar Bush had called science the endless frontier; “it remains that today. The range of exciting research now exceeds that which was imaginable when Dr. Bush coined the title.” (Tech Rev, 5/73, 10-13) June 1:	Skylab 3’s target launch date had been changed to July 27, NASA announced at a Johnson Space Center press briefing. SL-3, to carry the second crew to the Orbital Workshop launched May 14, previously had been scheduled for Aug. 8. The new target date was set because unexpected use of Skylab hardware during the Skylab 1—2 mission had exposed electronics, batteries, and systems to unusual environments. Deputy Skylab Program Director John H. Disher said a July 27 launch would give greater solar power input, because the relation of the sun to orbit plane at that date would give the spacecraft a greater percentage of time in the sun. The precise date would be set after the end of the Skylab 2 mission. (Transcript; NASA Release 73—111)
The Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1972 was presented in Washington, D.C., by the National Aeronautic Assn, to the 7th and 8th Air Forces and Task Force 77 of the Navy for their “demonstrated expert and precisely integrated use of advance [d] aerospace technology” in the conduct of Operation Line Backer II, the 11-day air campaign in December 1972 that “led to the return of the United States prisoners of war” in Southeast Asia. Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, received the trophy on behalf of the servicemen at a luncheon hosted by the National Aviation Club and the National Aeronautic Assn. Guests included Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator. (Invitation; nac Off)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, nasa Director of Key Personnel and former Director of Manned Spacecraft Center, retired. With NASA since its beginning, Dr. Gilruth had been Director of msc (now Johnson Space Center) from its establishment in November 1961—and through five moon landings of the Apollo program—until he came to Headquarters in January 1972. Earlier he had been at the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory, predecessor of Langley Research Center, and was appointed Assistant Director in 1952. In 1958 he was assigned to manage the Nation’s first manned space program, NASA’s Project Mercury, as Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, (nasa Personnel Off; nasa Biog; NASA Release 72-11)
Skyiab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Jack R. Lousma, and Dr. Owen K. Garriott concluded training for the second manned mission to the Skyiab Orbital Workshop, launched May 14. They practiced key flight maneuvers in a spacecraft simulator at Johnson Space Center and the complex countdown procedures to be used during the final two and one half hours before launch July 28. In an interview with the New York Times, Skyiab Program Director William C. Schneider said, “Everything seems to be going great.” (Wilford, NYT, 7/26/73; AP, B Sun, 7/26/73, A10)
Assignment of l/c William E. Barry (usaf), a medical doctor, as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator was announced. Dr. Barry had been selected from the White House Fellows Program, which provided highly gifted young persons experience in U.S. government and leadership. Dr. Barry had been an aeronautical engineer, a test pilot, and a flight surgeon in the Air Force. He had been named Air Force Systems Command Flight Surgeon of the Year and had won the Aerospace Medical Assn.’s Julian E. Ward Award for outstanding contributions to the art and science of aerospace medicine in 1972. (nasa Ann)
NASA held two Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center, while the Skylab 3 crew (launched into orbit July 28) completed its 56th day of<< work in the Orbital Workshop. At an Apollo Telescope Mount briefing, Skylab principal investigator James E. Milligan said that the Skylab 3 crew had operated the ATM console photographing the sun for 300 hrs. It was “remarkable how few mistakes they have made.” The sun also had been cooperative. “During this mission we’ve had everything from one of the quietest Suns I have ever seen to a Sun that was as active as it ever is, at least during a moderately active day during Sunspot maximum.” The crew had taken “thousands and thousands and thousands” of photographs of “on the order of one hundred” flares, coronal transients, and prominences. Jack H. Waite, Marshall Space Flight Center’s manager of corollary experiments, said at a corollary briefing that all the planned objectives of the corollary experiments had been completed. MSFC’s Material Processing Program Manager Robert L. Adams said the materials experiments had indicated that both electron-beam welding and the exothermic-tracing techniques could be used successfully in space for the assembly and repair of large structures. Experiments in the formation of metallic spheres had generally indicated more spherical and less porous products than their one-g counterparts could he produced. (Transcript)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of William D. Ruckelshaus to be Deputy Attorney General and the nomination of Russell E. Train, Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, to succeed Ruckelshaus as Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. (PD, 7/30/73, 931, 936) July 27:	In a Skylab 3 prelaunch press briefing at Kennedy Space Center, NASA Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the launch vehicle was “in good shape” with no open anomalies during the countdown. The crew “is eager, waiting” for their 7:10 am July 28 liftoff. The condition of the Unmanned Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) was good. The temperatures were under control and the electrical system had improved since the Skylab 2 mission (May 25-June 22). Col. Alan R. Vette of the U.S. Air Force recovery forces said that the recovery teams were trained and deployed around the world “ready to support the mission.” (Transcript)
Dr. Alexander Hocker, European Space Research Organization (esro) Director General, sent a message to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, on NASA’s 15th anniversary: “The resourcefulness, courage and remarkable achievements of NASA personnel have been an inspiration to us in Europe and ESRO is proud to be associated with some of nasa’s most stimulating endeavours.” (ESRO Newsletter, 10/73, 3)
The Senate confirmed Alexander P. Butterfield as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration. (CR, 3/12/73, D214)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
An Atlanta Journal editorial commented on space program spinoff as the Skylab 2 astronauts began routine business after having freed the stuck solar array wing on Skylab 1 (launched May 14) : “The ambitious and expensive Skylab program is in trouble and daring measures are being taken to stabilize the planned programs it was to introduce. Before the screams of those who would dissolve the space program reach the astronauts aboard Skylab, it might be well to consider some spinoffs from the space program that preserve and lengthen the lives of those who cry for its cessation.” Spinoffs included noise abatement, smog detection, medical devices, and fabric fireproofing. “The value of the space program is not up in the air; an awful lot of it is down to earth.” (Atlanta JC, 6/8/73)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, met in Cleveland with Ohio newspaper editors and businessmen to discuss the space program’s future and applications of NASA technology. He denied rumors that Lewis Research Center would be delegated responsibility as the national center for energy research, but said LeRC would continue its important role in Government energy research. Dr. Fletcher predicted the next steps in space would be establishment of a permanently inhabited space station, probably by the U.S.S.R.; establishment of a permanent base on the moon; and a manned mission to Mars. “But I don’t see a manned Mars mission in this century, unless it is a cooperative venture with the Russians.” He said the U.S.S.R. had “let up on their secrecy enormously in recent months” in preparation for the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz docking mission. (Cl PD, 11/28/73)
nasa might delay the Skylab 4 launch from October to November so that its crew could observe Comet Kohoutek swing around the sun, Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post quoted NASA officials as indicating. No firm decision had been made, but most officials favored a delay. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said, “Comets this size come this close to us once in a century. It really looks like the kind of thing you can’t pass up.” (W Post, 1/2A/12>, A12)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified on the effects of the Apollo program before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: Apollo “did not just sweep across our landscape to successful achievement of its specific objectives. Its effects on Earth are permanent and pervasive. Not just the hundreds of thousands of jobs it provided, the schools and homes it caused to be built, and the economic impact of the program itself; not just the invaluable accretion of scientific knowledge; not just the restoration of faith in American technological leadership—but a radical and enduring upgrading of technological capability throughout American industry. It is such advances that have enabled the United States to retain its preeminence in high technology production. And it is the continuation of such preeminence that is at stake when we consider the future of our space program.” (Transcript) April 5-26:	NASA’s Pioneer 11 (Pioneer-G), second Jupiter probe, was successfully launched into an excellent trajectory from Eastern Test Range at 9:11 pm est by a three-stage Atlas-Centaur-TE.........M-364—4 launch vehjcle. Eighteen hundred persons watched the nighttime launch after touring the Kennedy Space Center Flight Training and Vehicle Assembly Buildings, where Skylab was being prepared for a mid-May launch. Pioneer 11 sped away from earth at a velocity of 51 800 km per hr (32 200 mph), equaling the speed of Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, and still heading toward Jupiter), which flew faster than any previous man-made object. The primary objective was to obtain precursory scientific information beyond the Mars orbit with emphasis on investigation of the interplanetary medium during the 609- to 825-day journey, the Asteroid Belt, and Jupiter and its environment. The secondary objective was to advance the technology for long-duration flights to the outer planets. The 259-kg (570-lb) spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 12 scientific experiments to measure magnetic fields, plasma, cosmic rays and charged particles; the electromagnetic radiation in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared ranges; and the asteroid-meteoroid population. During the encounter trajectory with Jupiter, the spacecraft would provide the best possible information on the radiation environment, provide good viewing conditions of Jupiter before periapses, and obtain a short occultation of the spacecraft by Jupiter. The spacecraft also carried a pictorial plaque identical to the one carried on Pioneer 10 for identification of its origin by any possible intelligent beings of another solar system. Six hours following launch the large number of thruster pulses used to precess the spacecraft and point the antenna toward the sun provided the impulse to deploy fully one of the two radioisotope thermoelectric generators that had failed to deploy completely at first. The magnetometer boom was deployed and the spin rate stabilized at 5.4 rpm. On April 6 four science instruments—the helium vector magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid, detector—were turned on. An April 11 midcourse correction moved the target point at Jupiter from slightly ahead of the planet as it moved on its orbit, and above the equatorial plane, to slightly behind the planet and below the equator. The adjusted course would allow several mission choices: to make an equatorial pass either close to or distant from the planet to inspect one or more of its moons; to pass over the flattened pole of the planet; to fly on to Saturn in 1980; or, like Pioneer 10, to leave the solar system and escape into interstellar space. The option chosen would depend on Pioneer 10 findings during its pass of Jupiter in December. Nine of the twelve experiments were turned on and were operating normally.	. The control center for Pioneer 11 was transferred April 16 from Jet Propulsion Laboratory to the Pioneer Missions Operations Center at Ames Research Center. On April 26 Pioneer 11, traveling at 9.34 km per sec (20 900 mph), was 14 350 000 km (8 920 000 mi) from the earth. A second midcourse correction was made. The operation of all spacecraft subsystems was normal and 11 of the 12 experiments were transmitting good data. Six to seven hits had been recorded by the meteoroid detector. The infrared radiometer remained to be turned on. The spacecraft was expected to enter the Asteroid Belt in August 1973 and reach Jupiter in December 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by Ames Research Center. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1968, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays. (NASA prog off; nasa Releases 73-41, 73-72; arc Release 73-43; icsc Release 61—73)
The Aviation Advisory Commission sent to the President a report of its twoyear study of long-range U.S. aviation needs. Acting under Public Law 91-258, the Commission had concluded that the “U.S. is facing the greatest combination of threats to its position of world preeminence in aviation since it established that position in the late forties.” Recommendations included establishment of Under Secretary for Civil Aviation in Dept, of Transportation to prepare and keep current a 10-yr plan for air services, airports, airways, air vehicles, and ground access. Civil-aviation research and development functions of NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration, and other Federal agencies should be placed under the usca. {CR, 1/12/73, S608)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed a joint symposium on space program planning of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and the Society of Automotive Engineers in Denver, Colo. Points paramount for the U.S. space program, in his mind, were: “First, despite a year with all the trappings of potential disaster, NASA is coming through in pretty good shape. Second, now is the time for space planners—inside and outside the NASA family—to get serious about how best to use the space shuttle. Third, the single most important need for a healthy future space program is a substantially higher NASA budget request for Fiscal Year 1975. Fourth, Congress is willing to leave overall planning for future space options to the Executive Branch, but cavalier disregard for specific congressional decisions—such as we witnessed last January— is not likely to be so lightly accepted in the future.” (CR, 7/14/73, S13479)
The Federal Aviation Administration sponsored an International Microwave Landing System Symposium in Washington, D.C., to exchange information between the International Civil Aviation Organization (icao) member nations sponsoring MLS programs and other icao states interested in mls efforts. Presentations by the U.S., United Kingdom, France, Australia, and West Germany showed progress in the use of MLS. Canada reported on its short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft program, mls provided pilots precise course and glide-slope guidance to runways during landing approach. Broad areas covered permitted operational procedures to increase airport acceptance rate and reduce noise over surrounding communities, (faa Release 73— 199; faa pao) December 1:	Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, Atomic Energy Commission Chairman, submitted the report The Nation’s Energy Future to President Nixon in response to the President’s June 29 request for recommended energy research and development programs for inclusion in the FY 1975 budget. Recommendations were to establish an operational Energy Research and Development Administration by July 1, 1974, to plan and coordinate the total program and direct the major share of the Federal program; conduct an annual program review to reallocate funds among programs as required; ensure full consideration of energy consequences of all Federal actions to achieve nonenergy goals; promote private-sector participation in the conduct, review, and evaluation of the Federal er&d program; initiate in FY 1975 a Synthetic Fuels Pioneer program of privately funded construction of commercial plants for producing synthetic fuels from coal, using existing technologies; and accelerate ongoing work in environmental effects research, basic research, and manpower development. The congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy held hearings on the report Dec. 11. (Transcript)
The appointment of Frederick A. Meister, Jr., as Deputy Associate Administrator of Plans for the Federal Aviation Administration was announced by faa Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield. Meister would succeed Ronald W. Pulling, who had retired, (faa Release 73—68)
Award of a $33 982 080 contract to Rockwell International Corp. for lease or purchase of 11 75A Sabreliner aircraft with electronic systems, to flight-test more than 7000 ground navigational aids, was announced by the Federal Aviation Administration. The contract was part of an faa program to replace 47 DC-3s and T-29s with 21 modern, light, twin-turbine-powered aircraft for flight inspection, (faa Release 73-78)
The Senate received the nomination of l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Director of the National Security Agency and former NASA Apollo Program Director, to be a general, usaf. (CR, 7/25/73, S14742)
The Skylab 1 Investigation Board appointed to determine the cause of the anomaly that lost the Orbital Workshop’s meteoroid shield and one solar array wing during launch May 14 reported its findings and recommendations to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. The Board, chaired by Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin, said the most probable cause was inadequate venting of the pressure in a tunnel beneath the shield. Differential pressure buildup in the tunnel had forced the shield away from the Workshop shell and into the supersonic air stream. The shield then broke the tiedowns holding the solar array wings onto the spacecraft. About 10 min into the flight one solar array wing was torn away completely when it was struck by the exhaust plume of the 2nd-stage retrorockets. The remaining solar array wing would not deploy until the astronauts cut the strap which had curled around the wing and penetrated the metal fairing housing the array. The Board had found that “the significance of the aerodynamic loads on the meteoroid shield during launch was not revealed by the extensive review process” and recommended that complex, multidisciplinary systems like the shield “should have a designated project engineer who is responsible for all aspects of analysis, design, fabrication, test and assembly.” There was no evidence that the shield’s design deficiencies had resulted from or been masked by the Skylab management system. “On the contrary, the rigor, detail, and thoroughness of the system are doubtless necessary for a program of this magnitude.” (nasa Release 73-135; Lundin testimony before Sen Com on Aero and Space Sci, 7/30/73) July 14:	Sweden had handed the 25-nation Geneva disarmament conference a list of 925 nuclear weapon tests carried out from World War II through April 25, 425 of them after the August 1963 signing of the treaty banning all experimental nuclear blasts above ground, Reuters reported. The majority of the 425 had been underground tests, but China and France, which did not sign the treaty, had continued atmospheric nuclear testing. (NYT, 7/15/73, 7) July 15:	The countdown for the July 28 launch of Skylab 3 began at Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn IB launch vehicle would boost the Apollo spacecraft and its three-man crew into earth orbit to rendezvous and dock with the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), where astronauts would live and work 56 days in space. The countdown was the first for a manned Saturn launch in which the flight crew would not participate with the ICSC launch team in a dress rehearsal. The rehearsal had been eliminated because of the performance record of the Saturn IB and V. The countdown would include a simulated T-zero, ignition, and liftoff with a fully fueled launch vehicle on Complex 39, Pad B. (ksc Release 163-73)
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled 5 to 4 that municipalities could not enact local curfews on jet flights at their airports to control noise. Justice William 0. Douglas said in the majority opinion: “We are not at liberty to diffuse the powers given by Congress to F.A.A. [the Federal Aviation Administration] and E.P.A. [the Environmental Protection Agency] by letting the states or municipalities in on the planning.” (NYT, 5/15/73, 11)
A Federal Aviation Administration rule protecting the public from sonic booms generated by civil supersonic aircraft was announced by Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar. The rule, prohibiting civil aircraft from exceeding mach 1 when flying over land mass or territorial waters of U.S., would become effective April 27, 1973. (faa Release 73-57)
President Nixon sent to Congress United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: Shaping a Durable Peace. The report recalled agreements made during the May 1972 Moscow Summit Meetings, including the agreement on a joint rendezvous and docking of Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. “Since the summit, all of the agreements have been carried out as expected. Our space agencies have conducted preliminary tests of models of the spacecraft docking system and crew training will begin this summer. The Joint Committee on Environmental Protection met in Moscow in September 1972 and planned 30 collaborative projects on a variety of subjects. . . . The Joint Commission on Science and Technology met in Washington in March 1973 and agreed to carry out some 25 projects in . . . energy, chemistry, biology, and agricultural research. American and Soviet naval officers will meet this year to review the agreement on reducing incidents between ships and aircraft. This process of cooperation has begun to engage an ever widening circle of people in various professions and government bureaus in both countries. Direct contact, exchanges of information and experience, and joint participation in specific projects will develop a fabric of relationships supplementing those at the higher levels of political leadership. Both sides have incentives to find additional areas for contact and cooperation, and I anticipate further agreements patterned on those already concluded.” (PD, 5/14/73, 455-653)
Sen. Pete V. Domenici (R—N. Mex.) introduced S. 2755, a bill to require the NASA Administrator to study the feasibility of entering into international cooperative programs using space technology and applications. The nasa Administrator would work with the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and the National Science Foundation Director to study the desirability of international cooperation and cost sharing to develop a solar energy collection and conversion system. (CR, 11/29/73, S21370) November 30:	The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 613 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 274-km (170.3-mi) apogee, 188-km (116.8-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Western observers identified the spacecraft as an unmanned Soyuz. It was brought down by parachute near Karaganda Jan. 30, 1974, after orbiting the earth 60 days, a record length of flight for any Soviet spacecraft recovered intact. Cosmos 613 flew the same orbital track as other manned Soviet spacecraft but at a higher altitude, leading to speculation that the purpose of the mission was to test the ability of Soyuz spacecraft to fly higher and the durability of its systems as a prerequisite to a possible two-month manned mission, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; 1/31/74; SBD, 12/3/13, 164; O’Toole, W Post, 12/16/73, A25; 2/10/74, A27; Av Wk, 2/11/74, 32)
NASA held two Skylab 1—2 postmission briefings at Johnson Space Center. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told a NASA press conferC ■ 3 ence that, “as near as we can tell, essentially all of the objectives that were anticipated for this mission have been completed. And needless to say none of us really dreamed that this could be done at the time that the meteoroid shield failed to deploy. So it exceeded our wildest expectations at that time.” Skylab 1-2 could be symbolized by a hammer, and the Skylab 2 astronauts could be characterized as “the master tinkerers of space.” The mission’s anomalies had made no major impact on NASA’s budget. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said at a crew medical status briefing that the astronauts had “looked rather wobbly and unsteady when they got out of the spacecraft.” The crew—aware of the increased pull of gravity—had said they felt as if they were “very heavy . . . like about a two-G load.” All three men had experienced dizziness, lightheadedness, and some nausea. Astronaut Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin felt more of these effects than Charles Conrad, Jr., and Paul J. Weitz. His blood pressure had dropped to a critical level 25 min after splashdown and he had to inflate his spacesuit to force the blood back up from his legs to his brain. During medical tests aboard the recovery ship Ticonderoga, Conrad had performed at his premission level. Weitz had experienced a sudden drop in blood pressure and pulse rate while on the bicycle ergometer but had recovered within a five-minute rest period. Kerwin had demonstrated more of the vestibular disturbance and was unable to complete any of the tests. (Transcripts)
The National Space Club held its Awards Luncheon in Washington, D.C. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award of $500—named for the U.S. rocket pioneer—was presented to Barton C. Hacker of Iowa State Univ. for his essay “From Space Station to Orbital Operations in Space Travel Thought, 1895-1951.”' The Dr. Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship award of $2000, presented annually to an “individual . . . pursuing the challenges of research, exploration, and administration in astronautics, so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space” for the U.S., was given to Dr. Palmer Dyal of NASA Ames Research Center Electrodynamics Branch. The award was named for the first NASA Deputy Administrator, who died in 1965. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Scholarship of $2000 was presented to David 0. Starr of Catholic Univ. (Program; nsc News Letter, 2/22/73)
Aircraft operations at the 364 Federal Aviation Administration control towers increased 1% in FY 1973, from 53 620 706 in FY 1972 to 53 992 674. Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport again recorded the largest number of takeoffs and landings—682 984. Santa Ana, Calif., followed with 608 361. The most air carrier operations were at O’Hare, Atlanta International, Los Angeles International, New York’s Kennedy International, and San Francisco International. Busiest air route traffic control centers were Cleveland with 1664 634 aircraft handled, Chicago with 1 603 157, and New York with 1 564 570. (faa Release 73-218)
Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management since Oct. 1, 1970, had resigned effective Dec. 12, NASA announced. In accepting the resignation, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said: “He brought much to NASA in managerial knowhow from his former capacity as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Shell Oil Company. ... He made NASA a better organization—in our dealing with industry and in our handling of internal affairs.” (NASA Ann)
A New York Times editorial commented on the successful Sept. 27—29 Soyuz 12 manned mission: “The purpose . . . was not primarily to set new records. Its main goal was to test the latest improved version of the Soyuz spacecraft. . . . Americans as well as Soviet citizens have reason to rejoice. ... In 1975 present plans call for the historic docking of a Soviet Soyuz craft with a United States Apollo vehicle. Thus Soviet and American astronauts must want each other’s space ships to be as safe as possible. And beyond the docking experiment in 1975 lies the prospect of a future fully integrated Soviet-American joint space program.” (.NYT, 9/30/73, 12) During September:	Soviet plans for a reusable space shuttle had been revealed by Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov and Soviet Academician Andrey Shikarin, according to a Vienna correspondent quoted by Interavia. The Soviet shuttle would consist of two vehicles coupled pick-a-back, each in delta configuration and designed for hypersonic operating speeds. One would be the booster, the other the orbiter. The spacecraft was designed for horizontal takeoff from a runway. The manned booster would carry the orbiter until it attained a 22-km-per-sec (4900 mph) speed corresponding to a 2- to 3-g acceleration. The stages would separate at about a 30-km (19-mi) altitude and the booster would descend in a controlled glide to land on the runway. The orbiter would accelerate to a more than 100-km (60-mi) altitude, complete its mission, and glide back to the earth. Construction was expected to begin during the 1970s. {Interavia, 9/1973, 945)
NASA, on its 15th birthday, found itself “in the throes of an identity crisis,” John N. Wilford said in a New York Times article. After a “fast and glorious youth, full of promise and widely heralded achievement,” could NASA, “knowing that it could be flying to the moon and beyond, adjust to a more mundane existence?” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had said in a recent interview: “Our charter is clear: We have to make the country strong in space. But NASA has to move back from the spectacular. We will become more like one of the service agencies of government.” (NYT, 10/1/73, 62)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented an award of $10 000 to Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren in a JPL ceremony. The award was for a 1968 discovery of mascons (mass concentrations of dense material beneath the lunar surface) and for imaginative interpretation of the discovery’s results and implications significant to the success of the Apollo program and future studies of the earth and other planets. The mascon discovery had received international recognition. Muller and Sjogren had been awarded the 1971 Magellanic Gold Medal of American Philosophical Society and had been elected members of the Society of Sigma Xi and Fellows of Britain’s Royal Astronomical Society, (nasa Release 73-6; NASA PAO)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held a hearing on the Skylab 1 Investigation Report [see July 13]. A Senate hearing had been held July 30. Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin, Skylab 1 Investigation Board Chairman, testified that the failure to recognize design deficiencies in the Orbital Workshop’s meteoroid shield that led to its loss during the May 14^-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission and the failure to communicate the importance of proper venting of the shield must be attributed to “an absence of sound engineering judgment and alert engineering leadership . . . over a considerable period of time.” There had been no evidence to indicate that “the design, development and testing of the meteoroid shield were compromised by limitations of funds or time. The quality of workmanship applied to the shield was adequate for its intended purpose.” Testing emphasis on ordnance performance and shield deployment had been appropriate. “Engineering and management personnel on Skylab, on the part of both contractor and Government, were available from the prior Saturn development and were thus highly experienced and adequate in number.” The Investigation Board had suggested corrective action: omit the meteoroid shield on any future Workshops, coat the Workshop for thermal control, and rely on meteoroid protection from the Workshop tank walls. If further protection was required, the Board had favored a fixed, nondeployable shield. To reduce the probability of separation failures as had occurred at Saturn S-II interstage second separation plane, linear-shaped charges should be detonated simultaneously from both ends, and all ordnance applications should be reviewed for a similar failure mode. Structural systems that had to move or deploy, or that required other mechanisms or components for operation, should not be considered solely as structure; and complex, multidisciplinary systems should have a designated project engineer. N0I FILMED NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley described nasa’s actions to prevent recurrence of the Skylab Orbital Workshop anomalies: “We established an independent Investigation Board, have accepted the Board’s report, and have directed all our program and project people to examine their projects in light of the findings of the Board. We will follow up to see that changes in formal management systems are made when required.” (Transcript)
Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, received the National Civil Service League’s 1973 Career Service Award for Sustained Excellence at the League’s 19th annual awards banquet in Washington, D.C. Dr. Low was cited as the individual most responsible for the success of the Apollo program because of his significant contributions toward solving reentry problems. Also honored was Paul G. Dembling, General Counsel for the General Accounting Office, who as NASA General Counsel had been a principal drafter of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and a major participant in developing the legal framework governing peaceful uses of outer space, (nasa Hq WB, 4/16/73; W Post, 5/5/73, B4)
Creation and detection of antitritium—the counterpart of heavy, radioactive, hydrogen isotope tritium—was reported in the Soviet press by a Soviet scientific team using the U.S.S.R.’s largest nuclear particle accelerator at Serpukhov. The New York Times later said the discovery further strengthened the hypothesis that the universe was made up symmetrically of ordinary matter and antimatter. In a joint project of the Soviet Institute of High Energy Physics and the Institute of Nuclear Research, nuclear physicists Valentin I. Petrukhin and Vladimir I. Rykalin and team had examined 400 billion particles over several months before identifying four antitritium nuclei. It was the second identification of an antinucleus at the Soviet accelerator. In February 1970, Soviet scientists had reported the creation of antihelium. The search for antimatter was being spurred by the theory that the mutual annihilation of matter and antimatter might ultimately yield a new form of useful energy. (Shabad, NYT, 5/20/73, 41) May 21:	French satellites Castor and Pollux, jointly launched from Kourou Space Center, failed to enter orbit and fell into the sea when the Diamant-B launch vehicle failed to produce sufficient thrust for the separation of the 2nd and 3rd stages. It was the second straight failure for the French space program. On Dec. 5, 1971, the Polaire satellite had failed to achieve orbit when the 2nd stage of the Diamant-B booster malfunctioned. (AP, M Her, 5/22/73; Tass, fbis-W Europe, 5/21/73, F3)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1973. The plan abolished the National Aeronautics and Space Council, including the position of Executive Secretary, and the Office of Science and Technology, including the posts of Director and Deputy Director, nasc had been created under the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, enacted July 29, 1958. Provisions of the plan would take effect July 1 unless Congress acted against the plan. In his transmission message the President said NASC had “met a major need during the evolution of our nation’s space program. Vice President Agnew has served with distinction as its chairman for the past four years. At my request, beginning in 1969, the Vice President also chaired a special Space Task Group charged with developing strategy alternatives for a balanced U.S. space program in the coming years. As a result of this work, basic policy coordination can now be achieved through the resources of the executive departments and agencies, such as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, augmented by some of the former Council staff.” In streamlining the Federal science establishment, the Administration was “firmly committed to a sustained, broad-based national effort in science and technology.” The research and development capability of executive departments and agencies had been upgraded. The National Science Foundation had “broadened from its earlier concentration on basic research support to take on a significant role in applied research as well” and had “matured in its ability to play a coordinating and evaluative role within the Government and between the public and private sectors. I have therefore concluded that it is timely and appropriate to transfer to the Director of the National Science Foundation all functions presently vested in the Office of Science and Technology, and to abolish that office.” The President also announced his intention to ask Dr. H. Guyford Stever, nsf Director, to take on the additional post of Science Adviser to advise and assist the Administration “on matters where scientific and technological expertise is called for” and to act as the President’s representative in selective cooperative programs in international science, “including chairing such joint bodies as the U.S.—U.S.S.R Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation.” (PD, 1/29/73, 75-8; nasa Leg Off)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D—Wash.), introduced S. 2782 to establish a National Energy Information System, to authorize the Dept, of the Interior to undertake an inventory of U.S. energy resources on public lands and elsewhere, and for other purposes. (CR, 12/6/7.3, S22002) December 7:	A major reorganization plan that included two key directorates at Johnson Space Center had been announced by Dr. Christopher C.	Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, the jsc Roundup reported. Effective immediately, the reorganization would not be implemented fully until February 1974. Flight Crew Operations and Flight Operations would be combined into a new Flight Operations Directorate devoted entirely to space flight and aircraft activities. A new Data Systems and Analysis Directorate would provide institutional and programmatic data systems and analysis and the onboard software for the space shuttle. Pilot astronauts in the former Flight Crew Operations Directorate would be assigned to the Astronaut Office in the new Flight Operations Directorate. Scientist-astronauts would be assigned to Astronaut Offices in the Science and Applications and Life Sciences Directorates. Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht and Flight Control Div. Chief Eugene K. Kranz would be Director and Deputy Director of the new Flight Operations Directorate. They also would continue in their present assignments through completion of the Skylab program. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would be Chief of the Flight Control Astronaut Office. Howard W. Tindall, Jr., and Lynwood C. Dunseith had been named Director and Deputy Director of the Data Systems and Analysis Directorate. Astronaut Owen K. Garriott was Deputy to Director Anthony J. Calio of the Science and Applications Directorate; Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt would be Chief of the Science and Applications Astronaut Office. Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin would be Chief of the Life Sciences Astronaut Office, which also would include astronaut physicians F. Story Musgrave and William E. Thornton. In addition to their duties as space shuttle crew candidates, Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Eugene A. Ceman had been assigned duties in project management. Haise would be Technical Assistant to the Space Shuttle Orbiter Project Manager, Duke would be Technical Assistant to the Acting Manager for Space Shuttle Systems Integration, and Cernan would be Special Assistant to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Manager. Of 37 astronauts on active flight status, 26 were pilots. Of these, 16 would participate in space shuttle activities; 10 had been assigned to the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Eight scientist-astronauts would work in the Science and Applications Office, and three in Life Sciences. (Roundup, 12/7/Ti, 1)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, issued a management instruction continuing in existence, and setting forth the charter for the NASA Space Program Advisory Council and its related standing committees under the Federal Advisory Committee Act of Oct. 6, 1972 (P.L. 92-463). The nasa Administrator had determined Jan. 4, 1973, that the Council and committees were in the public interest in the performance of duties imposed upon NASA by law, “and they are therefore continued for the period ending June 30, 1974.” Council functions were to consult with and advise NASA, through the Deputy Administrator, on plans for, work in progress on, and accomplishments of NASA’s programs. (NASA nmi 1156.20C)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. An Areas from Antigua, West Indies, carried a Goddard Space Flight Center meteorological experiment to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The launch was in conjunction with an overpass of the Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970), hut the mission was unsuccessful because of the rapid fall rate, caused by abnormal parachute performance, and because of the lack of radar track. (NASA Rpt SRL) An Aerobee 200A from White Sands Missile Range carried a Univ. of Hawaii solar physics experiment to a 228.4-km (141,9-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily but, because of failure of the solarpointing-attitude reaction control system, the experiment was unsuccessful. (gsfc proj off) November 24:	A Washington Post editorial criticized NASA’s dismissal of Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris [see Oct. 26]: “nasa has compiled a dismal record with respect to female and minority employment. Dr. Fletcher himself admits as much. The question is, what to do about it? Dr. Fletcher says that every effort is being made to correct the problem. By now NASA should have learned that institutionalized sexism and racism give way to neither simple pieties nor eloquent declarations of principle. Achieving equitable employment opportunities for women and minorities in large American institutions requires skill, determination and sustained effort, just as a successful space program does. That is a lesson for the 1970s that all major American institutions must learn if the tragedies of the 1960s are to be avoided in this country’s future.” (W Post, 11/24/73, A14)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin astronomy experiment to a 171.9-km (106.8-mi) altitude. The second, launched 50 min later, carried a Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment to a 154.5km (96.mi) altitude. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 13:	The decision to launch Skylab 4, the third and final mission to man the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), at 9:01 am EST Nov. 16 was announced at a Kennedy Space Center press briefing by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider. The replacement of eight damaged fins discovered on the Saturn IB launch vehicle Nov. 6 was complete and additional precaution had been taken by retrofitting an aluminum block over two lower brackets on each of the tail fins. Cracks found on the aft interstage structural beams Nov. 12 were left untouched after stress tests showed that the cracks would not worsen even under the most extreme aerodynamic stress. “We know of nothing today that would keep us from going,” Schneider said. Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue arrived at Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., from Houston to participate in the countdown, which was ordered resumed. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Past, 11/14/73, A24)
“The public has grown increasingly sanguine about NASA’s manned missions, almost considering them routine, because of the agency’s perfect safety record on manned missions.” The Aug. 2 oxidizer leak had shown “that the missions are anything but free of hazard, and the mental stress imposed upon the three astronauts must be intense. We hope, of course, that the mission will continue for the full 59 days and that the astronauts will then make it home safely. But if there is any serious question about the condition of the Apollo ship, then NASA certainly should exercise its option of sending a rescue ship up to Skylab and ending the mission in advance of schedule.” (B Sun, 8/5/73) August 6:	A Chicago Sun-Times editorial commented on space rescue capability as the Skylab 3 astronauts, manning the Orbital Workshop since July 28, conducted their first extravehicular activity: “There is a certain amount of calculated risk involved at this period of space experimentation. In a real emergency Russia might be able to help out with one of its spacecraft. When the shuttle program becomes effective, a reusable winged spaceship could be made ready for launching in two hours.” Meantime, “all we can do is trust that the good luck, astronauts’ skill and inventiveness of the space program people that have provided magnificent results to date continue during the current series of missions.” (C Sun-Times, 8/6/73)
The award of a $7 125 497 firm-fixed-price contract to Litton Systems, Inc., for avionics for the F-4 jet fighter aircraft was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 360-73) July 20:	Skylab 3, scheduled for launch July 28 as the second manned mission to crew the Skylab Workshop, would be extended from 56 days to 59 days to provide a better recovery posture, NASA announced. Splashdown would be 6:26 pm edt Sept. 25, in the Pacific Ocean 547 km (340 mi) southwest of San Diego. A comprehensive review of the medical findings of Skylab 2 (launched May 25) had indicated that a 59-day mission was medically feasible. The medical data obtained on Skylab 3 would be reviewed at midmission point and weekly reviews would be scheduled for the remainder of the flight. Following each review, approval for continuation of the flight would be made for the next seven days by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider. Simulated T-zero ignition and liftoff with the fully fueled Saturn IB and Apollo spacecraft on its launch pad was successfully completed in the Skylab 3 countdown, begun July 15. (nasa Release 73-136; ksc Release 163-73)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, would retire from NASA to become President of the Univ. of Texas Health Science Center April 1, 1974, nasa announced. The new position had been created to bring all the health-oriented schools and services of the University under one administrator. Dr. Berry, an Air Force flight surgeon since 1951, had been Chief of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the School of Aerospace Medicine and Chief of Flight Medicine in the Surgeon General’s Office before coming to NASA on loan in July 1962. He accepted appointment as Chief of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Medical Operations Office in August 1963. Dr. Berry had participated in the early medical evaluations leading to selection of the original seven Mercury astronauts in 1958 and had continued to work with NASA throughout the project. He was appointed Director for Life Sciences at nasa Hq. in September 1971. His honors included the NASA Exceptional Service Medal and the nasa Distinguished Service Medal. Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said Dr. Berry’s “work in determining the ability of man to function and work in space for long periods ... is an important contribution to the future of the space program. The University of Texas is to be congratulated in obtaining the services of an outstanding medical researcher and administrator.” (nasa Release 73-284; nasa pao)
The Federal Aviation Administration put into effect Phase II of the tightened airport security measures announced Dec. 5, 1972. An armed guard would be stationed at every departure gate of every U.S. air carrier airport; every passenger would be screened before boarding aircraft; and all baggage would be inspected before being carried aboard, (dot Release)
Skylab 4 crewmen Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue began a 21-day prelaunch isolation period geared to a possible Nov. 10 launch. The astronauts would crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) in the third and final manned Skylab mission. The isolation would minimize the exposure of the crew to infectious disease, (nasa Release 73—220) October 21:	Not since the 1947 first report of what came to be known as “flying saucers” had there been “such widespread reports of unidentified flying objects, or ufo’s, as in recent days,” the New York Times said. They had ranged from a report of a flying V formation of lights in Rochester. N.Y., to press accounts of “strange creatures with weirdly shaped heads” stopping cars on Route 90 in Gulfport, Miss. Two men in Pascagoula, Miss., had said they had been taken aboard a UFO by creatures with crab-claw hands [see Oct. 12]. The Federal Aviation Administration had said that no reports of special significance had been submitted by airline pilots, and an Air Defense Command spokesman had denied that any UFO had been detected in the last three weeks. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/21/73, 65) October 23:	Two fuel tanks on the Saturn IB launch vehicle scheduled to launch the Skylab 4 astronauts toward a Nov. 10 rendezvous with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) buckled slightly after fueling at Kennedy Space Center. The dome-shaped top sections of the tanks sank after ground crews pumped 163 cu m (43 000 gal) of kerosene fuel into the Saturn IB’s four giant tanks and then drained some off to prevent expansion or overpressurization. A plastic cover protecting the tanks from a rainstorm prevented air from rushing into the aluminum tanks as the fuel was drained. The resulting vacuum buckled the tanks inward. Metallurgy experts were flown to KSC from Marshall Space Flight Center to assess the problem. (W Star-News, 10/24/73, A23; AP, B Sun, 10/24/73)	.
nasa’s 15th Annual Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, to Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; Robert H. Gray, Kennedy Space Center Director of Launch Operations; S. Neil Hosenball, Deputy General Counsel; Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; and William E. Lilly, Comptroller. The NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, the agency’s highest award to non-Government personnel, was presented to Dr. Leo Goldberg, Director of Kitt Peak National Observatory, and Dr. Frank Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology lunar geophysicist. The Group Achievement Award went to the Apollo Lunar Sounder Investigator Team, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; the Communications Cost Reduction Team, NASA Hq.; the Mariner Venus/Mercury 1973 Program Team, jpl; the Scout Project Team, Langley Research Center; and the YF-12 Thermal Loads Calibration Team, Flight Research Center. Other awards included the Exceptional Service Medal to 35 persons and the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 32. (Program; NASA Release 73-219) October 26:	Skylab 4, the third manned Skylab mission—crewed by Gerald P. Carr, commander; Dr. Edward G. Gibson,, science pilot; and William R. Pogue, pilot—was scheduled for launch Nov. 10 at 11:40 am EST, Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced. Plans called for a 60-day or more, open-ended mission carrying enough consumables for 85 days. Mission extensions would be considered on the 56th, 63rd, 70th, and 77th days of the flight. Up to five extravehicular activities would be scheduled, to install and retrieve Apollo Telescope Mount film and experiment samples, repair an antenna on an earth resources experiment, and photograph the Comet Kohoutek on Dec. 25, just before it swung around the sun. An extended 85-day mission would splash down Feb. 3, 1974, at 12:15 pm est off the Pacific Coast near San Diego, (nasa Release 73—233)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin galactic astronomy experiment. The second, launched two hours later, carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 3—13:	NASA’s Mariner 10 (Mariner-J) Venus-Mercury probe was launched into a parking orbit from Eastern Test Range at 12:45 am est by an Atlas-Centaur Dl-A launch vehicle. After a 25-min coast, a 130-sec burn of the Centaur engines injected the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit that would allow Mariner 10 to pass within 5300 km (3300 mi) of Venus Feb. 5, 1974. Using the gravitational field of Venus to change the speed and flight path of the spacecraft, Mariner 10 would travel toward a March 29 encounter with Mercury, approaching the sun more closely than any other planetary mission. Mariner 10 would be the first spacecraft to use gravity assist in a dual-planet mission and the first to explore Mercury. The primary objective was to measure Mercury’s environment, atmosphere, surface, and body characteristics and to make similar investigations of Venus. Secondary objectives were to perform experiments in the interplanetary medium and to obtain experience with a dual-planet gravity-assist mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED! The seven experiments aboard the octagonal 503-kg (1108-lb) spacecraft included a TV camera and an infrared radiometer to investigate the planet’s surface; plasma science experiment, charged particle telescope, and magnetometer to investigate the environment around the planet and the interplanetary medium; dual-frequency-radio science experiment and ultraviolet spectrometer to measure characteristics of the Mercury neutral atmosphere and ionosphere if they existed; and celestial mechanics experiments to measure planetary mass characteristics and test the theory of relativity. All experiments had been designed and selected for their Mercury scientific objectives but also would obtain important data at Venus and during the cruise phases. The Tidbinbilla, Australia, tracking station was unable to maintain command lock with the spacecraft following spacecraft injection. Acquisition of the star Vega by the spacecraft Canopus tracker also was delayed, but two-way communications were established within an hour and, after repeated commands, Vega was acquired. Solar panels, high-gain and low-gain antennas, and plasma science and magnetometer booms were deployed. On Nov. 4-5 four moon and three earth TV picture mosaics were completed. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft was 1 394 000 km (866 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at a speed of 4.32 km (2.68 mi) per sec. All science experiments except the infrared radiometer and electrostatic analyzer had been turned on. The scanning electron spectrometer portion of the plasma science experiment was not operating properly and the problem was being analyzed. Four trajectory correction maneuvers were scheduled during the mission. The first, Nov. 13, successfully adjusted the flight path for closest approach to Venus on Feb. 5, 1974, as planned. A second would be made Jan. 18, 1974. On Feb. 9 and March 1, 1974, after the Venus encounter, maneuvers would target the Mariner 10 to pass Mercury at 1000-km (620-mi) altitude. The Mariner program, including mission operations and tracking and data systems, was managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., was responsible for the launch vehicle. Previous missions had been made to Mars, including Mariner 4, 6, 7, and 9 (launched Nov. 28, 1964; Feb. 24, 1969; March 27, 1969; and May 30, 1971). Mariner 9 had been the first spacecraft to orbit a planet other than the earth. All others had been flyby missions. (nasa prog off; jpl Release 673) November 3—January 9, 1974:	NASA’s Pioneer 10 interplanetary probe (launched March 2, 1972) became the first spacecraft to reach Jupiter during a two-month encounter, returning new findings about the giant planet and continuing toward Uranus and eventual exit from the solar system. November 3—December 3:	Encounter operations were begun Nov. 3 by Ames Research Center controllers and scientists and on Nov. 4 Pioneer 10 began sending photopolarimeter images of Jupiter to the earth three to eight hours a day. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft, 25 000 000 km (15 500 000 mi) from Jupiter, had begun measuring the placet’s atmosphere above Jupiter’s orange-and-blue-striped cloud tops and the characteristics of particles making up the dense clouds. On Nov. 8 the spacecraft crossed the orbits of Hades and Poseidon, the first two of Jupiter’s outer moons, and on Nov. 9 and 11 it crossed the orbits of Pan and Andrastea. At a Nov. 19 press briefing at arc Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, said that low temperature in that area of the solar system slowed evolution and scientists hoped to find objects not very different from what they were at their formation. “The passage of Pioneer 10 past Jupiter also marks the gateway to the exploration of the outer solar system. This is an exploration which is critical if we truly want to understand the formation and evolution of our solar system.” Dr. William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center scientist, said that Pioneer 10 had encountered 100 times more space dust than expected during the journey between the Asteroid Belt and Jupiter. He expected that 30 times more particles would be detected as the spacecraft neared Jupiter. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s moons Demeter, Hera, and Hestia Nov. 22 and was 11400 600 km (7 084 000 mi) from Jupiter. By Nov. 25 a charged particle detector aboard the spacecraft had begun to show traces of particle radiation. Preliminary indications were that the probe was beginning to cross into Jupiter’s magnetosphere, estimated to be 20 times stronger than the earth’s. The planet’s radiation belts contained particle concentrations up to 1 million times higher than the earth’s Van Allen Belt and were considered by some scientists to be extremely dangerous to the spacecraft’s electronics. At a distance of 8 336 400 km (5180 000 mi) from Jupiter, spacecraft instruments began returning pictures of Jupiter’s great red spot. The final spacecraft-attitude change before encounter was made Nov. 26 and a 24-hour day of imaging and polarimetry began. At 3:30 pm EST Nov. 26 Pioneer 10 successfully crossed Jupiter’s bow shock wave at a distance of 7 709 000 km (4 790 000 mi)—with great turbulence when the solar wind hit Jupiter’s magnetic field. The spacecraft was unaffected by the turbulence hut data from 6 of its 11 instruments changed dramatically. Solar wind speed abruptly decreased to half the normal velocity and solar wind temperatures rose sharply. On Nov. 27, at a distance of 6 760 000 km (4 200 000 mi) from Jupiter, the spacecraft crossed into the planet’s true magnetic envelope, the region of interplanetary space into which the solar wind could not penetrate. Pioneer 10 crossed the magnetopause, entering the magnetic field for the first time at 3:30 pm est. At a Nov. 29 press briefing arc scientists said new data had shown the reach of Jupiter’s magnetic field to be greater than predicted. It stretched more than 13 000 000 km (8 000 000 mi) in diameter and its strength was 40 times that of the earth’s ma'gnetic field. Its direction was south, rather than north as predicted. The strength of the magnetism at 6 400 000 km (4 000 000 mi) from the planet seemed to rise and fall in a regular 10-hour phase, possibly because of the planet’s rotation. Jupiter’s mass was also found to be greater than estimated and the spacecraft was being drawn toward Jupiter faster than planned; it would arrive at its closest approach two minutes earlier than predicted. On Nov. 30 Pioneer 10 recorded a sharp drop in magnetic and radiation measurements, indicating disappearance of the magnetic field. Eleven hours later the spacecraft again crossed the magnetopause, which had apparently been driven toward the planet by a disturbance in the solar wind. At 1 427 500 km (887 000 mi) from the planet, the spacecraft entered Jupiter’s dipole magnetic field. Preliminary data indicated that the outer portions of Jupiter’s magnetic field did not rotate with the planet and were more flattened than the earth’s field. Also, the magnetic dipole center was appreciably offset, both radially and toward the north from the center of the planet. The magnetic axis was tilted from the spin axis. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s innermost moons—Callisto, Ganymede, Europa, and Io—Dec. 2-3. As it came within 446 000 km (277 000 mi) of Ganymede, the infrared radiometer indicated the moon’s surface temperature was 125 K (—235°F). Six hours before its closest approach to Jupiter the probe entered the dangerous region of intense radiation and, soon after, the imaging system ceased returning picture data. Radio commands switched the system back to normal operation within 30 minutes, however. The press later reported that NASA attributed the mishap to an unidentified flight control room guest who had inadvertently pressed against a cathode ray display, pushing a button that cut out eight instruments. December 3—11:	As the gold and silver spacecraft approached Jupiter and radiation intensity increased 10-fold every two hours, reaching 65 million ev 90 min before periapsis, tense scientists paced the floor of arc’s Mission Control with fingers crossed. At 9:25 pm est Dec. 3, after a flight of 641 days and 826 000 000 km (513 000 000 mi), Pioneer 10 sped past Jupiter at an altitude of 130 000 km (81 000 mi), traveling 155 140 km per hour (96 400 mph), the fastest speed ever achieved by a man-made object. The spacecraft’s 11 instruments sent back readings and pictures that came in loud and clear, taking 46 minutes to reach a jubilant team on earth. “Needless to say, we’re elated,” Dr. John Wolfe, Pioneer Project Scientist, told cheering newsmen. The Washington Post later described the scene at arc: “So deluged were Pioneer scientists with transmissions of the spacecraft’s instruments, they were literally changing their minds about Jupiter’s physics and chemistry every hour.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “Some of us have been looking through telescopes at Jupiter since our early teens. This is more than we ever dreamed of.” The spacecraft suffered no apparent failures and continued to function as planned. However, preliminary estimates of radiation belt parameters and observed effects on the spacecraft and instrumentation indicated that the margin of survival had been small. As Pioneer 10 flew by Jupiter, the spacecraft was accelerated and slung by the planet’s gravity into a new trajectory that would take it past the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and, traveling at a constant 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph), out of the solar system toward the constellation Taurus. Pioneer 10 would be the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. By 7:00 pm EST Dec. 4, it had traveled nearly 1600 000 km (1000 000 mi) beyond Jupiter. December 11—January 9:	arc Mission Control ended Jupiter picturetaking Dec. 11 and returned to routine interplanetary operations. The spacecraft recrossed the bow shock wave Dec. 12 and continued into interplanetary space. By Dec. 14 the spacecraft was 10 881000 km (6 761 000 mi) from Jupiter, traveling at 83 525 km per hr (51 900 mph) toward the edge of the solar system. Preliminary findings from the encounter included the discovery of an ionosphere (implying a tenuous atmosphere) surrounding Jupiter’s moon Io, detection of helium in Jupiter’s atmosphere, new density measurements of the entire Jovian system that would affect current theories on the formation of the universe, and new temperature measurements of Jupiter that indicated little difference between average daytime and nighttime temperatures. Pioneer 10 was expected to continue collecting and returning data until it reached the orbit of Uranus in 1980, almost 3 200 000 000 km (2 000 000 000 mi) from the earth. Data returned would determine whether the second Jupiter probe, Pioneer 11 (launched April 5 and crossing the Asteroid Belt since August), could safely be retargeted closer to the planet. The Pioneer 10 mission was officially adjudged a success Jan. 9, 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by arc. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1969, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays, (nasa prog off; arc Release, 11/6/73; nasa Releases 73-243K, 73-256, 73-279; Wilford, NYT, 11/25/73; 11/30/73, 1; 12/4/73, 1; 12/5/73, 13; O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/73, Al; AP, W Star-News, 11/28-29/73; AP, B Sun, 12/3-4/73; Miles, LA Times, 12/4/73; 12/6/73) November 3:	The Skylab 4 launch crew successfully completed a simulated launch of the Saturn IB booster at Kennedy Space Center. The booster was scheduled to lift the Apollo command and service module and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue into orbit Nov. 10 to dock with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) and begin NASA’s third manned Skylab mission. Following the perfectly timed simulation, the fuel was drained from the launch vehicle and preparations for the final countdown were begun. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/73, A7)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), who became Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Jan. 4, commented on his new post in a statement released to the press in Washington, D.C.: “Many people may have the impression that the space program is over now that the last Apollo moon landing has taken place. This is not the case. One important phase of our space exploration program has ended, but a new phase—a more productive phase in terms of benefits to man on earth—has already begun.” Sen. Moss would “work diligently with my colleagues on the Committee and with NASA to develop a clear understanding of the program” and its relation to other national needs and priorities. Sen. Moss has been concerned with the “apparent high cost of the space program in relation to other important demands on the Nation’s resources.” He would “approach the question of current, present and future level of the nation’s space program with an open mind.” (Text)
The Federal Aviation Administration released Census of U.S. Civil Aircraft for 1970 and 1971. Civil aircraft at the end of 1971 totaled 166 785, of which 131 870 were listed as “active.” End-of-1969 figures had shown 190 749 aircraft, of which 133 814 were listed as “eligible to fly.” (faa Release 73—197)
Appointment of Roald Sagdeyev as Director of the Soviet Space Research Institute was announced in Vestnik, monthly publication of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Sagdeyev replaced Georgy I. Petrov, who went into voluntary retirement. Sagdeyev, a nuclear physicist, had been made a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences in 1964 and had become a full member in 1968. Before his appointment as Director, Sagdeyev had specialized in plasma physics at the Nuclear Physics Institute in Novosibirsk. (AP, W Post, 9/23/7$, Al; 9/24/73, A21) September 2—7:	The 66th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) was held in Dublin, Ireland. U.S. participants included Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan and Apollo 16 commander John W. Young. The 1972 fai Gold Space Medal was presented to Cernan in recognition of the Dec. 7-19, 1972, final Apollo mission which had “accomplished all of its goals and magnificently concluded the extraordinary and highly successful Apollo program.” Cernan also received t'he 1972 De la Vaulx Medal for his absolute world record of 21 hrs 32 min 44 sec for “Duration of Stay Outside his Lunar Module ‘Challenger’ Spacecraft,” set during Apollo 17. Young received the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for “remarkable leadership, skill, daring and dedication” as commander of the April 16-27, 1972, Apollo 16 mission and the V. M. Komarov Diploma, on behalf of himself and Apollo 16 Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II and Charles M. Duke, Jr., for successful completion of all but one of the mission’s 33 major experiments. The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Aeronautics was awarded to the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration “in recognition of its outstanding contribution to air traffic efficiency and safety by the development of the now fully operational Automated Radar Terminal System” (arts). The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Astronautics went to Boeing Co. Aerospace Group for design and production of the lunar roving vehicle (lrv) used during the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions. The Paul Tis-sandier Diploma was presented to Kay A. Brick for “her outstanding contributions to women’s aviation over the past 23 years” as a member and Chairman of the Board of the All-Women’s Transcontinental Air Race “Powder Puff Derby.” (naa News, 9/73, 1—2; faa Release 73— 155; A&A 1972) September 3:	The U.S. had “discreetly blocked” Soviet attempts to purchase 10 ilc Industries’ Apollo lunar-configured spacesuits, Aviation Week & Space Technology'said. The U.S.S.R. had been told that U.S. export of such technology could not be approved. (Av Wk, 9/3/73, 11) September 4:	World atlases were inaccurate in delineating outer boundaries of polar icecaps according to imagery returned by Nimbus 5 (weather satellite launched by NASA Dec. 10, 1972), NASA announced. A Goddard Space Flight Center study had shown that synoptic photos from Nimbus 5 clearly indicated polar regions underwent large-scale changes in a short time. Boundaries between the multiyear icepack around the North Pole and the large areas of first-year ice varied significantly within one freezing season. Even greater changes occurred around Antarctica. Nimbus 5 also was measuring daily rainfall distribution over the earth’s oceans to indicate to meteorologists how much energy was being released into the global atmosphere. An electrically scanning microwave radiometer aboard the spacecraft was measuring rainfall rate and heat thus released to enable forecasters to understand a tropical storm or hurricane and predict its 24- to 48-hr intensity, (nasa Releases 73-176, 73-175)
The last Apollo splashdown party given by National Space Club in Washington, D.C., had the theme “Salute to Apollo: Man’s Promise for the Future.” The program included remarks and messages from President Nixon; Vice President Spiro T. Agnew; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President and President-Aerospace Group William B. Bergen; and Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr. Former President Lyndon B. Johnson who had died during day, had sent a message commending space pioneers who had “made the Apollo miracle a living reality. It has been more . . . than an amazing adventure into the unexplored and the unknown. The Apollo program has been and will endure as a monument to many things—to the personal courage of some of the finest men our nation has produced—to the technological and managerial capability, which is the genius of our system—and to a successful cooperation among nations which has proved to all of us what can be done when we work together with our eyes on a glorious goal.” Master of Ceremonies Peter S. Hackes of National Broadcasting Co. eulogized President Johnson as “the policy father of the space program.” A message from Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), former Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Apollo program had been an “outstanding example of government, industry, and university cooperation and has really shown brilliance of management and technological competence.” An Apollo film was narrated by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director. Dr. Petrone said the Apollo program had taken 12 yrs “and I don’t look upon this as curtains at the end of a play. It’s like the curtain at the end of the first act. It’s just beginning.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said President Johnson had been instrumental in achieving congressional support for the space program. Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders recalled President Johnson as “a very large man, very down to earth” who had the spirit of an astronaut, but was “a little too big” to be one. (Program; Texts; Smyth, W Post, 1/23/73, B2; ri pio)
