A recommendation by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to transfer Skylab backup hardware to the Smithsonian Institution was agreed to by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.), Chairman of the House Science and Astronautics Committee. In a letter to Dr. Fletcher, Teague said he understood the transfer would “in no way affect the status of the Saturn launch vehicles and Apollo spacecraft being retained for possible use.” Teague said he shared a “belief that to display the Skylab hardware to the public will foster a better appreciation and increasing support for our national space program.” Other equipment was being stored to permit restoration if additional space missions should become desirable [see 9 Apr.]. (Letter, Teague to Fletcher, 21 July 75)
Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was “one of the few tangible survivors of that champagne-bubble atmosphere of detente along with the badly tarnished SALT [Strategic Arms Limitations Talks] agreements,” Aviation Week and Space Technology said in an editorial. From the Soviet viewpoint the goals were obvious: to tap into the mainstream of U.S. technology, to blur the international image of U.S. superiority with the appearance of parity by flying a joint manned mission, and to develop the technical base for international space rescue capability. U.S. goals remained obscure. The mission would provide the answers to some experimented questions: Could the U.S. and U.S.S.R. work together in a joint space program? Could an international rescue capability be developed? Could the ASTP experience be expanded to future joint space ventures? That ASTP had survived to the final countdown was a tribute to the flexibility, stamina, and ingenuity of the technical working groups of both countries. A formidable series of technical, philosophical, linguistic, and operational problems had been solved and the investment by both countries had been substantial. ASTP had been “partially worth the effort.. . to have a sizable group of NASA and industry technicians get some practical hard-headed experience in working with their Soviet counterparts and acquiring a realistic view of their technical capabilities and philosophy. We think the rest of the value of the mission will come from determining just how serious the Soviets are about future joint ventures in space and how much they really want to give and how much they want to take.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 5 May 75, 7) U.S. communications equipment checkout and docking target alignment tests were completed at the Baykonur cosmodrome by midMay, in time for Dr. Low and a group of NASA officials to take an inspection and orientation tour of the cosmodrome. The group visited the launch pad from which the ASTP Soyuz spacecraft would be launched and the Soviet equivalent of Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) where the group inspected the prime launch vehicle and prime backup Soyuz spacecraft. At the 22 May flight readiness review (FRR) chaired by Dr. Low and Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, acting president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences replacing the ailing Mstislav V. Keldysh, Soviet and U.S. space officials signed the report indicating that the “Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was proceeding in accordance with the agreed schedule and ready to proceed toward the launching planned for July 15,1975.” Before the signing, U.S. ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney and his Soviet counterpart Konstantin D. Bushuyev gave a 5-hr review of the technical histories of their respective spacecraft. Reporting that no major problems remained, Lunney and Bushuyev said that 133 documents had been negotiated and signed and only the postflight review, remained to be prepared. Working Group chairmen made their final presentations indicating that all major tasks had been completed. (NASA Release 75—156; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285—301; Reuters, NYT, 23 May 75, 33)
Intelsat IV F-6 communications satellite was destroyed by a NASA range safety officer 415 sec after launch from Eastern Test Range when the Atlas-Centaur test vehicle tumbled out of control. Lifting off at 6:35 pm EST, the mission had been normal to Atlas booster-engine cutoff at 138 sec. Then telemetry data indicated several malfunctions, including electrical problems and loss of altitude. After destruction, the vehicle impacted in the Atlantic Ocean 800 km downrange from the launch site. An investigation of the failure was begun under the direction of Lewis Research Center and the mission was officially judged unsuccessful 6 March. The failure was the first for an Atlas-Centaur since May 1971, when a circuit problem in the Centaur ended the launch of the Mariner 8 Mars probe. The 1400-kg Intelsat IV F-6, launched by NASA on a cost-reimbursable basis for the Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the 89-member-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, was intended to be the primary spacecraft over the Indian Ocean region, with Intelsat IV F-5, launched 13 June 1972, becoming the backup. The failure of Intelsat IV F—6 would have no immediate effect on Intelsat global communications; Intelsat IV F-5 could provide the primary function and Intelsat III F-3, launched 6 Feb. 1969, was still capable of providing limited backup. The Intelsat IV F-6 mission had been scheduled originally for launch in February 1973 but experienced a series of delays from problems in both the satellite and the launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 26 Feb 75, 13 March 74; PAO, interview, 21 Feb 75; NASA Releases 73—83, 75—7, 75—47; NASA “Note to Editors,” 3 May 73, 27 June 75; SBD, 24 Jan 75, 127)
Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov* one of the Soviet Union’s leading space scientists, died in Moscow at the age of 80. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Commission for Space Research and head of the State Research Institute of Engineering Studies, was one of the key scientists responsible for launching the world’s first satellite, Sputnik 1, 4 Oct. 1957. Blagonravov had begun his career in the military and much of his early work was on the development of automatic infantry weapons. He later turned to the development of spacecraft, making major design contributions to the Soviet Union’s Lunik I, launched 2 June 1959, as the first man-made object to fly by the moon. Blagonravov also represented the U.S.S.R. in many international organizations: He had been vicepresident of the International Space Research Committee, permanent U.S.S.R. representative on the United Nations Scientific and Technical Subcommittee for the Peaceful Use of Space, and permanent deputy Soviet representative on the U.N. Space Committee. In 1962 Blagonravov held discussions with Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, during which details for exchange of satellite data were worked out. (Moscow Domestic News Service, FBIS—Sov, 7 Feb 75, Ul; WPost, 7 Feb 75, C8; McElheny, NYT, 6 Feb 75, 34)
NASA’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Chester M. Lee said at a NASA Headquarters press briefing that a number of modifications had been made on the Apollo command and service modules to accommodate the special requirements of the July U.S.—U.S.S.R. ASTP mission. Changes to the command module included a modified umbilical to accommodate docking-module functions, an additional TV camera and recorder for coverage of joint activities, modified controls and displays for new equipment and experiments, additional equipment for communications and TV coverage via Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974), modified stowage, added intervehicular intercom, and additional VHF-FM communications capability at the U.S.S.R. frequency. Changes in the service module included added heaters and insulation of propellant systems for solar inertial attitude, added propellant storage module for increased attitude-control and backup deorbit capability, and deletion of the unused main propellant tank. The docking module would be carried in the same position in which the lunar module had been during lunar landing missions. It would be extracted in the same manner, by separating the CSM from the booster once in orbit, turning around, and pulling out the docking module with the nose of the CSM. In response to questioning, Lee said that the U.S. cost of the ASTP mission would fall within the $245-mi]lion congressional authorization. Although the Soviets had not quoted a specific amount, Lee believed that the launch of the two unmanned Soyuz spacecraft to check out modifications made for ASTP, the launch of a manned mission, and the preparations for two complete spacecraft and crews would indicate that the Soviets were investing “at least the equivalent” in resources. (Transcript)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had said that NASA’s Space Shuttle program “might be on the verge of a financial breakdown,” the Washington Post reported. Citing a General Accounting Office report, Sen. Proxmire warned that the risk of cost overruns had increased and that Congress should look for “cheaper alternatives.” (AP, W Post, 6 March 75)
Mariner 10 made its last and closest flyby of Mercury at a distance of327 km at 6:39 pm EDT. To prepare for the flyby, the trajectory had been corrected on 30 Oct. 1974 and 13 Feb. 1975. An additional correction 7 March was to reduce the probability of Mariner 10’s impacting the surface of Mercury from 30% to 1%, targeting Mariner 10 to approach the planet from the sunlit side, then loop around behind it. One last-minute problem was navigational difficulty in locking onto the star Canopus so that the spacecraft would point in the proper direction for data collection. Because a commanded roll search for Canopus would expend all remaining attitude-control gas, Mariner 10 had to be maneuvered using solar-radiation pressure on the solar panels and high-gain antenna. The problem was intensified because of the tandem demands of Helios 1 and Mariner 10 on the antennas of NASA’s deep-space tracking network. However, the primary users— West German scientists tracking Helios 1—gave receiving time to the Mariner 10 flight controllers, who obtained Canopus lock in time for the encounter. Major objective of the third encounter was to determine whether Mercury had an intrinsic or induced magnetic field. In a press briefing 17 March, Dr. Norman F. Ness, principal investigator of the magnetic fields experiment, said that Mercury did have an intrinsic magnetic field, encountered on the incoming trajectory at precisely the time predicted from the first Mercury pass. Mariner 10 had measured the field to be a maximum of400 gamma. Plasma science experiment data supported the presence of the field; Dr. Ness observed that the interface between the solar wind and Mercury’s magnetic field appeared to be a scaled-down version of the interaction between the solar wind and the magnetic field of earth. The spacecraft returned about 300 TV pictures of the planet’s surface between 12 and 17 March, with best resolution at 100 m obtained from quarter-frame near-encounter pictures. All photos were transmitted in real time and at 22 kilobits per sec, instead of the planned 117, because of overheating of the spacecraft. (NASAMORs, 10 March 75, 7 April 75; NASA Releases 75—58, 75—59; NASA Activities, April 75, 12—13; Av Wk, 24 March 75, 24- 25)
NASA’s new Low Cost Modular Spacecraft (LCMS), a recoverable compartmented spacecraft being considered for use aboard the Space Shuttle, was. demonstrated at a news conference at Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Division. The LCMS consisted of an instrument and spacecraft assembly joined by a transition ring. Scientific instruments or earth-resources sensors could be attached to the LCMS for specific missions. Designed by Goddard Space Flight Center engineers, the LCMS would fit into the 5- by 18-m payload bay of the Orbiter and also could serve as a platform for as many as 14 satellites. The system could be placed in orbit by the Shuttle and later serviced or recovered and returned to earth for needed repairs. Dr. Robert G. Wilson, Director of Advanced Payload Analysis at NASA Headquarters', said that a recoverable modular satellite system such as LCMS could save as much as $100 million annually over the cost of nonrecoverable satellites. (JSCRoundup, 14Feb 75, 3;GoddardNews, Feb 75, 8)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 1 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA budget called for the authorization of $3,539 billion and net outlays of $3,498 billion for the 12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional NASA Budget Plan, FY 76 (in millions of dollars) FY 1974- FY 1975 FY 1976 Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 amounts of $958.9 million in authorizations and $905.6 in net outlays for the 3-mo transition period beginning 1 July 1976. Dr. Fletcher said the new budget was “lean but manageable.” For the first time since 1961 the budget provided no new program starts. In accordance with President Ford’s request "to hold FY J975 and FY 1976 expenditures to a minimum, NASA, in FY 1975, had deferred obligations of $72 million and outlays of $70 million, reduced civil service employment by 300, and made program adjustments to stay within the total FY 1975 and 1976 hudgets. Further adjustments might be necessary if the inflation rate continued to grow. Although NASA’s FY 1976 budget was up $300 million from the previous year, $200 million of this increase was specifically anticipated in last year’s budget to carry forward commitments built into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA had received an effective increase of only $100 million, or about 3%. This, along with the nation’s current 9% inflation rate, was a “good indicator of the leanness of NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” The budget would permit NASA to proceed with current major programs as planned: The Space Shuttle, scheduled for a first manned orbital flight in mid-1979, and Landsat—C, scheduled for a fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in aircraft remained a principal focus in NASA’s aeronautics research and technology. NASA was also continuing stratospheric studies, including the effects of pollutants on the environment, with significant contributions coming from NASA meteorological and atmospheric satellites, sounding rockets, and balloons and high-flying aircraft. Although there would be no new starts, NASA would continue its study and advanced technical development for science, applications, and aeronautics projects to be started in future years, including preliminary work for payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. The 1975 calendar year launch schedule was one of the most ambitious in U.S. history with 28 launches scheduled, including the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July and the two Viking missions to Mars scheduled for August. Although NASA’s legal responsibilities for energy research and development—designated under the Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 1974—had been transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration, NASA would work closely with ERDA in various aspects of solar research and development. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said at the press briefing that the largest budget increase was for manned spaceflight, where the increase for the Shuttle was partially offset by reduced spending for the rest of manned spaceflight. The small increase for space science did not tell the whole story: If funds for the Viking program were subtracted, the budget for the rest of science had increased $170 million from FY 1974 to FY 1976. Although applications, aeronautics, and space technology programs each showed small increases, funds for tracking and data acquisition decreased slightly despite increased maintenance costs for tracking stations, because NASA was beginning to close down tracking stations, preparing for the time when tracking and data relay satellites would be available. . NASA Budget Plan (in millions of dollars) FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1976 Manned space flight 999.9 1110.3 1414.6 Space science 664.5 542.8 582.6 Applications 159.0 174.5 175.0 Aeronautics and space technology 234.3 237.8 250.3 Tracking and data acquisition 244.0 248.0 243.0 Energy programs 4.7 4.4 5.9 Technology utilization 4.5 5.5 7.0 Total Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 Total budget plan 3156.0 3231.2 3539.0 William E. Lilly, NASA Comptroller, said that, of the $84.6 million budgeted for construction of facilities, $47.2 million was to continue the buildup of Space Shuttle facilities, mostly for launch and landing facilities at Kennedy Space Center. The remaining funds were for normal rehabilitation and modification of existing facilities, with smaller amounts for minor construction and for facilities planning and design. Civil service manpower was expected to continue at the same level for FY 1976 with 24 316 employees. However, the number of support service contractors—excluding mission or stage contractors—would decrease from 18 637 in FY 1975 to 17 811 in FY 1976. The estimated 125 000 persons working on NASA programs during FY 1975 was expected to increase by 6000 to 7000 by the end of FY 1976. Distribution of funds to the Centers would change: An increase of $224.3 million would go to Johnson Space Center for the Shuttle program. A decrease of $37.3 million for KSC reflected a decrease in funding for the construction program. Goddard Space Flight Center Estimated Distribution of Total NASA Budget (in millions of dollars) FY 1975 FY 1976 Decrease Johnson Space Center 922.6 1146.9 224.3 John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA 275.9 238.6 -37.3 Marshall Space Flight Center 428.7 541.2 112.5 National Space Technology Laboratories 10.0 10.9 0.9 Goddard Space Flight Center 493.7 461.1 -32.6 Wallops Flight Center 31.9 31.3 -0.6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory 180.9 188.1 7.2 Ames Research Center 168.2 193.0 32.0 Flight Research Center 34.6 40.3 5.7 Langley Research Center 285.5 249.4 -36.1 Lewis Research Center 218.1 253.3 35.2 NASA Headquarters 159.1 166.4 7.3 Undetermined 22.0 18.5 -3.5 Total 3231.2 3539.0 307.8 was down $32.6 million, largely because of a decrease in funding for Delta vehicles. (OMB, Budget of U.S. Govt., FY 76 and Appendix; NASA FY 76 budget briefing, 1 Feb 76, transcript; NASA Release, FY 76 budget briefing background material; Fletcher budget statement, 3 Feb 76, text)
NASA announced that lunar samples would be available to colleges and universities for teaching purposes. Under a new NASA program, a “thin-section educational package,” consisting of several 0.03-mm slices of representative lunar material plus brief descriptions, could be borrowed for several months by institutions offering undergraduate or graduate work in the geosciences. The purpose of the program was to broaden the use of NASA’s lunar sample collection. (NASA Release 75— 76) Addressing a conference dinner 19 March, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “In an age when space research and technology was measured by its immediate value in the marketplace, studies of the planets often are considered little more than an exercise in curiosity. Nothing could be farther from the truth.” When spacecraft were developed to meet the specialized needs of space travel and planetary exploration, technology was advanced. “NASA cannot lay claim to the development of the electronic computer, but it can take a large credit for spurring a revolution in the electronics industry.” The need for lightweight components in spacecraft led to electronic microminiaturization. The Uliac 4 computer, developed at the Univ. of Illinois for DOD and now operated jointly by DOD and NASA, could perform 300 million calculations a second and store 1 trillion bits of information at a time, more than the entire surviving output of the Greek and Roman civilizations. Operational since 1973, Illiac’s speed and refinement allowed scientists to simulate and study global climate changes, study long-range effects of pollution on the atmosphere, distinguish between earth tremors from natural sources and underground nuclear blasts, develop seismic pictures of the earth’s outer shell, and enhance medical x-rays so that tumors could be discovered in earliest stage of development. Illiac 4 has helped solve problems that had eluded scientists for decades. Other space technology was being used effectively to preserve and manage the earth’s resources and enhance the quality of life for all its inhabitants. Communications satellites were making global communications a reality. Meteorological satellites had advanced the science of weather forecasting on land and sea. Sensors, surgical instruments, biological isolation garments, lenses, portable cardiac care systems, and eye switches were just a few examples of space technology used in the medical field. New alloys and materials developed to withstand the rigors of space were being used for longer-lasting automobile and aircraft engines; temperature-resistant lubricants and fireproof materials added to the safety of homes and buildings. “The fast-growing list of things that are and will be as a result of our venture into the cosmos is almost beyond imagination. Everyone who lives will be affected by them. And because of them, the world a decade or so hence will be quite different from the world we now know.” (LeRC Release 75—11; Fletcher speech, text)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Joseph H. McConnell told a stockholders’ meeting that ComSatCorp was finalizing a contract with Exxon Corp. for five shipboard terminals for use with ComSatCorp’s Marisat maritime communications satellite scheduled for launch in summer 1975. McConnell also said that ComSatCorp had agreed to lease one shipboard terminal to Seagap, an oil exploration consortium led by Phillips Petroleum Co. Marisat would make available, for the first time, reliable voice, data, teletype, and facsimile communications to ships at sea and to offshore drilling rigs. McConnell said that the success of the Marisat program would depend on the Navy’s use of the system and on ComSatCorp’s ability to develop a substantial market in the commercial shipping industry. (Snider, W Star, 14 May 75, FI) 13 —14 May: More than 500 representatives from government, industry, and universities attended a 2-day conference at Lewis Research Center to review progress in aerospace propulsion. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that high-speed performance was no longer the top priority among the propulsion researchers, emphasis having switched to quiet, clean, and fuel-conserving engines. Presentations and panel discussions included aircraft noise-reduction technology, fuel-conservative engine technology, upper-atmosphere pollution-measurement programs, and engine systems and component technology. LeRC’s John B. Whitlow reported that new technology generated by NASA’s supersonic cruise airplane research (SCAR) would develop an engine far different from the afterburning supersonic turbojet that was to have powered the first U.S. supersonic transport. A potential new engine might be a duct-burning turbofan with features such as a variable-geometry fan that allowed the engine to move as much as possible between straight turbojet and straight turbofan operational cycles. Other objectives for future NASA-developed SST propulsion systems included a 7400-km range with outstanding economy at speeds from mach 2.2 to mach 2.7, good subsonic cruise characteristics, good hold endurance and economy, and low takeoff noise. Whitlow stressed that, because of noise limitations, future SSTs would not be straight turbojets, and SCAR researchers were concentrating on low-bypass-ratio turbofans. As bypass ratio also affects engine weight, fuel consumption, drag, and cost-effective performance, no single bypass ratio of a conventional engine could meet all desired goals simultaneously. Thus SCAR researchers were developing variable-cycle engine technology that could tailor the bypass ratio and perhaps the fan/pressure ratio for optimum performance. Candidate engines included a mini-bypass turbojet, a variable-bypass supersonic turbofan, a duct-burning turbofan, and a rear-valve variable-cycle engine. (LeRC Release 75—19; Yaffee, Av Wk, 14 July 75, 46- 49) 25.5 hr into the simulated mission. With both Soviet and U.S. crewmen participating in simulators in their respective countries and control centers fully manned, the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft were “launched” and put through various maneuvers. Communications between the two control centers included voice, teletype, datafax, and TV. During the simulation, a technical problem prevented observers in Houston from hearing the two Soviet cosmonauts; NASA officials said later that that problem should not happen during a real flight. No other major problems were reported. A second simulation begun at 6:30 am CDT 15 May and continuing for 56 hr rehearsed Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, docking, crew transfers, and undocking and final separation. A third simulation, begun at 6:30 am CDT 19 May, was cancelled when the command module simulator in Houston did not work properly. The simulation, a 9-hr rehearsal of rendezvous and docking, was successfully completed 20 May. Final simulations by Houston and Moscow control centers and crewmen were scheduled for 30 June and 1 July. (NASA Release 75 — 141; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 16 May 75, Ul; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285; UPI, NYT, 14 May 75, 69)
President Ford announced the recipients of the 1974 Presidential Management Improvement Awards, given annually as the highest recognition for outstanding contributions in improving the effectiveness and economy of government operations. Among the recipients was NASA’s Mariner—Venus 1973 management team at NASA Headquarters and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (PD, 12 May 75, 504)
NASA management had permitted inflight use of “undesirable components” in the electrical system of the Thor-Delta launch vehicle to preserve the program’s schedule, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. At least two Thor-Deltas had been launched with the same electrical-system contamination failure potential that “probably caused the loss” of the U.K.’s Skynet IIA military communications satellite 18 Jan. 1974. Av Wk reported that, although NASA officials considered the policy undesirable, they had used the components until they could be recycled or replaced, in the belief that the risk had been acceptable. On 18 Dec. 1974 the French—West German Symphonie 1 was almost lost when an apparent electrical contamination problem occurred in the Thor-Delta*s second stage. Av Wk said that Symphonie program management had not been aware of the vehicle’s electrical-system failure potential. (Av Wk, 3 Feb 75, 44)
A group of 28 scientists, engineers, sociologists, and economists concluded a 10-wk (16 June— 22 Aug.) NASA— Stanford University study at Ames Research Center by recommending that the U.S. adopt a space colonization program using available technology. The “city in space” envisioned by the study group could be a 1.5-km-wide wheel-shaped habitat for 10 000 persons positioned on the moon’s orbit at a point 385 000 km from both earth and moon. Costing an estimated $100 billion, the 454-million-kg wheel, or torus, would rotate around its hub at 1 rpm to simulate earth’s gravity. The rim would house inhabitants as well as shops, schools, light industry, and closed-loop agriculture; heavy industry could be located outside to take advantage of weightlessness and high vacuum in space. A major commercial activity of the first colony would be to construct solar-power satellites. Placed in geosynchronous orbit above the earth, the satellites would collect and convert sunlight into energy and beam it to earth as low-density microwaves. The space colony would have several advantages that might make it self-supporting: weightlessness for manufacturing and transportation, massive use of lunar minerals, and continuous natural sunlight for increased agricultural productivity. The study group had considered social, cultural, safety, and ecological difficulties of a space colony, but had found “no unsurmountable problems that would prevent humans from living in space.” (NASA Releases 75—229, 75—249; ARC Release 75—41; Dunstan, W Post, 23 Aug 75)
President Ford’s announcement that he intended to restore the White House Office of Science and Technology was discussed in a Washington Post editorial: most scientists were heartened by President Ford’s announcement. They had unanimously deplored President Nixon’s decision to abolish the office, believing that it was vital to the nation’s well-being for the President to get the most objective possible scientific assessment of new weaponry, as well as of medical, economic, and environmental policies. However, scientists also felt that the establishment of the office and the possible appointment of National Science Foundation Director Dr. H. Guyford Stever as its head would not solve the problem. A report drafted by a committee of 13 leading scientists had spelled out what was needed: establishment of a Council for Science and Technology that would carry the same weight as the Domestic and Economic Councils and could hold its own with the Office of Management and Budget and DOD. Any serious candidate for the top science job would want to consider whether the President “really intends to make constructive use of a science adviser. Past experience tells us that the best mechanism for advice from the scientific community is of no avail if the President isn’t listening.” (IF Post, 31 May 75, A12) During May: Preparations continued for late summer launches of the two Viking spacecraft to Mars. A Lander 1 plugs-out test was completed 8 May, 2 days later than planned, because of a grounding problem. By 26 May all flight equipment, except for the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, had been installed on Lander 1. Lander 2 was mated with its protective aeroshell on 28 May. Orbiter 1 was undergoing final mechanical assembly as the flight subsystems became available after individual reworking. By 31 May all temperature-control louvers, protective covers, and thermal blankets had been installed. Initial Orbiter 2 system testing was completed 5 May, and Orbiter block validation tests were begun. All solar panels for both Orbiters had been assembled and swing-tested, and were awaiting buildup of the low-pressure gas system. On 13 May a major hardware review of both landers was held at Kennedy Space Center with 100 NASA and industry participants. The review was the final chance to discuss modifications in the spacecraft before closure of the bottom plates and sterilization. Following the review, Langley Research Center’s Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said, “Everything is going just great and right on schedule.” (Viking launch and mission operations status bulletins 4, 5, 6; NASA Activities, June 75)
The Air Force was again studying the feasibility of a nuclear-powered aircraft twice the size of the C—5, the Washington Star reported. In an interview with the Star, Dr. Lawrence W. Noggle, program manager for nuclear aircraft-propulsion technology at Wright — Patterson Air Force Base, said that nuclear power could be used as an alternative power source for large subsonic aircraft. Other potential fuels under study were liquid methane, liquid hydrogen, and coal. A nuclear-powered aircraft, which would require larger engines to carry a larger cargo, could use conventional fuel for takeoff and landing and then switch to nuclear power at cruise speed. The Star quoted Dr. Noggle as saying, “We could use modified jet engines. . . with the reactor totally isolated from the engine through containment.” He predicted that nuclear-powered aircraft could fly for days without refueling. (W Star, 1 April 75, A4)
Sen. John Tunney (D—Calif.) defended the nation’s space program during a tour of Space Shuttle facilities at Rockwell International Corp. in Downey, Calif. According to Sen. Tunney, the most important justification for the space program was to provide new technology in weather mapping and control, to help increase the amount of land available for food production, and to locate additional stocks of natural resources in this country. Sen. Tunney stated, “I quite frankly think without a space program. . .mankind is going to have a rendezvous with destiny which would be catastrophic. . . .” But with this kind of program, a world food supply and adequate resources can “keep this country going indefinitely.” {Pasadena Star News, 6 Aug 75)
NASA signed a contract with Italy’s Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (National Research Council) to launch the SIRIO experimental communications satellite. The contract—signed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Prof. Alessandro Faedo, CNR President—provided for the launch of the microwave propagation satellite aboard a Thor-Delta launch vehicle in the fall of 1976. (NASA Release 75— 67)
Walter Cronkite, U.S. broadcaster who had covered the space program from its beginnings to date, reminisced about the space program during an interview with Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News. Cronkite recalled that news coverage in the early 1950s was done from the beach with very little official information. “All we had were tips from engineers and others we met in bars.” By Alan B. Shepard’s 5 May 1961 launch, things had improved only slightly; coverage took place from the back of a station wagon with a microphone, monitor, and very little incoming information. Later launches had seen drastic changes. “We’ve got so much information today that it’s the traffic cops’ job to take care of the flow, whereas before it was more imagination and fill-in-the-blanks.” Asked if he would be interested in riding aboard the Space Shuttle, Cronkite said, “I think newsmen will go on the Shuttle. . . . Just as soon as we prove out the equipment. ... I would guess that somehow or other we’re going to see that a pool man gets aboard, and I hope it’s Regarding the apparent apathy of the American public toward the space program, Cronkite stated that it would be difficult in this age to sustain the “high intensity of feeling about the space program, the race to the moon, [and] landing on the moon. ... We don’t have an attention span in the modern world, with so much going on, that permits us to remain at that high level of excitement.” (Spaceport News, 24 July 75, 6)
NASA announced the development of an improved inorganic paint, a potassium silicate zinc-rich coating with a silicon additive that could provide long-term protection from salt spray, fog, heat, and rapid temperature changes. Produced at Goddard Space Flight Center as an anticorrosion coating for use in the space program, the paint had shown no deterioration after 5300 hr of continuous exposure to a 3% brine spray. The paint had also been applied to a 2-m panel mounted under the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco for further testing. (NASA Release 75-213; Newsweek (int’l ed), 18 Aug 75)
NASA’s permanent employment level decreased by 521, or 2.1% during FY1975, NASA’s Office of Personnel reported in “The In-House Work Force.” Average age of NASA employees had risen 0.3 yr to age 43 and the average executive age fell 1.3 yr to age 49.6. Average grade of permanent employees remained at GS —11, constant since FY 1973. New hires and separations were down by 4.4 and 6.5%, respectively. Marshall Space Flight Center had had the only NASA reduction-in-force, resulting in 76 separations. The 62 intercenter professional transfers were down from 72 in FY 1974, and the 789 retirements were 30% below the FY 1974 level, although disability retirements continued to rise, totaling 220 in FY 1975—a 147% increase over FY 1970. (Off of Personnel Rpt, “The In-House Work Force,” 30 June 75)
The U.S.S.R.’s Baykonur cosmodrome, located in the city of Leninsk near Tyuratam, was three to four times as big as Kennedy Space Center, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander Thomas P. Stafford said at an ASTP press briefing at Johnson Space Center. ASTP astronaut Vance D. Brand said that 50 000 persons inhabited the launch complex. The briefing followed the crew’s return from the Soviet Union where they had participated in the final training session before the scheduled July launch [see 14—30 April]. The astronauts said that at the Soviet spaceport they had been shown “everything we had a requirement to see,” the launch pad, spacecraft, test and checkout facilities, automatic checkout equipment (ACE) rooms, and crew quarters. The one “drastic difference” between the tour received by the Soviet cosmonauts in the U.S. and that of the American astronauts in the U.S.S.R., said Stafford, was “we didn’t go to Disneyland over there.” Astronaut Donald K. Slayton described the launch pad as “relatively simple.” The spacecraft, assembled on top of a railroad car, was hauled to the pad about 4 days before launch. The stacked vehicle was jacked up and set on the pad; after checkout, the vehicle was rotated to the proper launch azimuth. The booster was held to the pad by four support arms which were popped out of the way by counterweights once the vehicle started to move. Stafford said that Leninsk was a new city built in a desert. The continued construction activity indicated that the Soviets “are not slowing down one bit in their space program.” The Soviets had told their U.S. counterparts that they would continue to have several manned flights a year operating in low earth orbit. (Transcript)
Dr. Walter C. Williams’ appointment as NASA Chief Engineer became effective. In his new position, Dr. Williams, who had been vice president and general manager of the Aerospace Corp. Vehicle Systems Div., would be responsible for reviewing the technical excellence of all NASA programs and for assuring their development on a sound engineering basis with proper programmatic controls. From 1940 to 1958 Dr. Williams had been employed by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and, after 1958, by NASA. His previous positions included chief of the High-Speed Flight Station, Associate Director of Manned Space Center, Associate Director of Mercury’s Space Task Group at Langley Research Center, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Flight Operations at NASA Headquarters. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)
The current fleet of supersonic transports—including the 16 Anglo-French Concordes and 14 Soviet Tu—144s flying or scheduled for service—would cause minimal damage to the ozone layer, Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, Director of the Dept, of Transportation’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program, announced at a press briefing. Citing a 3-yr DOT study, “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft,” Dr. Grobecker said it would require 125 Concordes flying 4.5 hr daily to cause a minimally detectable change in the ozone layer. However, the study concluded that future expansion of stratospheric jet fleets should be carefully monitored. Recommendations made by the study included development of engines to meet specific nitrogen oxide-emission standards, development of low-sulfur aviation fuels, and establishment of stratospheric air-quality standards and engine-emission regulations. (AP, NYT, 22 Jan 75, 33; Robinson, Av Wk, 27 Jan 75, 16—17) 22 —25 January: NASA launched Landsat 2 (Landsat—B), formerly called Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS-B), from Western Test Range at 9:56 am PST on a two-stage Thor-Delta booster supplemented by nine strap-on rockets. The satellite entered a near-polar orbit with a 918.23-km apogee, 912.89-km perigee, 103.32-min period, and 99.09° inclination. Primary objective of the mission was to acquire multispectral imagery over the U.S. and foreign countries in quantity sufficient to improve remote-sensing interpretative techniques and to further demonstrate the practiced application of Landsat data. Secondary objectives were to acquire sufficient multispectral coverage over the U.S. to supply data requirements for the Applications System Verification Tests for at least 1 yr, to acquire multispectral coverage for at least 2 yr over the major agricultural areas of the world to illustrate further applications of Landsat imagery for crop inventory, and to demonstrate successful operation of the Data Collection System. A 3-day delay in the launch changed the initial orbital phasing of Landsat 2 relative to Landsat 1 (launched as Erts 1 on 23 July 1972) into a 12- to 6-day repeat cycle instead of the planned 9-day cycle. However, an orbital correction maneuver beginning 27 Jan. and ending 6 Feb. altered phasing to a 9-day repeat cycle. The payload separated from the launch vehicle 50 min 3 sec after launch, followed by solar-panel deployment and earth acquisition using the attitude-control system. The command system was turned on automatically, permitting activation of the payload by ground stations. During the night of 22—23 Jan. the mechanical integrity of the wideband video tape recorder was verified, Data-Collection System (DCS) activated, and data-collection platform experiment data transmitted. By 12:00 pm EST 23 Jan. all spacecraft systems were operating and by 25 Jan. the wideband transmitter, wideband video tape recorder, multispectral scanner (MSS), and return-beam vidicon (RBV) were turned on, and operating normally. Teaming up with Landsat 1, the 953-kg Landsat 2 would provide repetitive coverage of almost the entire earth to demonstrate the practical benefits of resources management from space for NASA in cooperation with the Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Dept, of the Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and various state, local, and foreign organizations. Experiments included the cooperative NASA—DOA—NOAA Large Area Crop Inventory (LACIE), which combined crop-acreage measurements derived from Landsat data with meteorological information from ground stations and NOAA satellites to assess crop yields and make production forecasts. During the first yr of operation, LACIE would concentrate on U.S.-grown wheat, but the experiment would later be expanded to other crops and other regions. Other experiments included land-use survey and mapping; mineral resources, geological, structural, and land-form surveys; water resources studies; marine and ocean surveys; meteorological and environmental studies; and interpretative techniques development. Data were being transmitted to three NASA tracking and data-acquisition facilities at Fairbanks, Al.; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md. In addition, Canada and Brazil operated Landsat ground data-acquisition stations and Italy and Iran were constructing similar facilities. Data received from the satellite were sent to the NASA Data Processing Facility at Goddard Space Flight Center where 1300 images, covering 45 million sq km, could be processed each week. The data would then be forwarded to the Federal Data Center and made available to the public. The Landsat mission was part of a U.S. program to develop remotesensing methods for improved management of earth’s resources. In addition to Landsat 1 and 2, the program included remote-sensor instrument development; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; low-, intermediate-, and high-altitude aircraft flights; and Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP) experiments completed during the 1973 manned Skylab missions. (NASA MORs, 9, 23 Jan 75; NASA Releases 74—329, 75-31)
An Italian launch crew launched Explorer 53 (SAS—C) Small Astronomy Satellite for NASA from San Marco launch platform, located in the Indian Ocean off the coast of Kenya, at 6:45 pm EDT (1:45 am local time 8 May) on a Scout launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered near-equatorial orbit with a 523.35-km apogee, 502.18-km perigee, 94.88-min period, and 2.995° inclination. Primary objectives of the Explorer 53 mission were to measure the x-ray emission of discrete extragalactic sources, to monitor the intensity and spectra of galactic x-ray sources from 1.0 kev to 50 kev, and to monitor the x-ray intensity of the star Sco X— 1. During a preliminary in-orbit checkout, controllers noticed that a stuck nutation damper was causing the spacecraft nutation, or coning, angle to be 4° rather than the planned 0.2°. Energizing the z-axis coil reduced the coning angle to 0.5°. Although the damper could not be freed despite repeated attempts, the nutation could be kept within reasonable limits so that scientific objectives could be achieved. A committee would evaluate the problem. Other spacecraft anomalies included intermittent operation of the spinning digital solar-aspect detector, and irregular and noisy operation of the spacecraft star sensor. Neither problem was expected to seriously degrade the mission. The 195-kg satellite was designed to extend and complement the capabilities of Explorer 42 (Uhuru, launched 12 Dec. 1970 as the first satellite dedicated entirely to the study of x-ray sources in space) and Explorer 48 (launched 16 Nov. 1970 to study galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation). Explorer 53, with its broad spectral range, provided higher energy resolution than previous satellites and permitted a study of physical conditions near an x-ray source. The spacecraft’s quasi-three-axis stabilization system allowed much longer continuous observation of sources. Data from Explorer 53 would provide the basis for the more detailed x-ray studies to be made by High Energy Astronomy Observatories A and B scheduled for launch in 1977 and 1978. The experiment aboard Explorer 53 was designed and built by the Center for Space Research of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The spacecraft control section was designed by the Applied Physics Laboratory of the Johns Hopkins Univ. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program for the Office of Space Science. Langley Research Center was responsible for the Scout launch vehicle. Italy was responsible for the assembly, checkout, and launch of the Scout on a cost-reimbursable basis. (NASAMORs 6 May 75, 15 May 75; NASA Releases 75—101, 75—121)
Despite the immediate need for aircraft noise-abatement regulations, little or nothing had been done, Sen. John V. Tunney (D—Calif.) said in a speech on the floor of the Senate. The Federal Aviation Administration was considering proposals to curb jet-fleet noise by retrofitting engine nacelles of JT—3D and JT—8D aircraft with sound-absorbing material. Delay had come in part from industry, which favored an alternate NASA refan program costing five times that of retrofit and not technologically feasible for severed years. In addition, the NASA program could not quiet the JT—3D aircraft—the Boeing 707s and McDonnell Douglas DC—8s—which made up the noisiest fourth of the nation’s jet fleet. Sen. Tunney said that the potential benefits of the NASA program did not justify waiting until the technology was ready at a cost five times greater than retrofitting. If FAA was to prove responsible in the area of aircraft noise abatement, it could not “succumb to industry pressure against retrofit.” A retrofit regulation should be put into final form at the first available opportunity. (CR, 19 Feb 75, S2160)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Commercial Airplane Co. of Seattle for negotiations leading to award of a $9.8-million contract to develop a computer software system that could substantially reduce design time and costs of aircraft and space vehicle design and ensure improved vehicle performance. The system, called IPAD (integrated programs for aerospace-vehicle design), would process installation of engineering information on computers at major U.S. aerospace companies, acting as the key communications and calculations integrator for many designers and increasing their effectiveness by speeding up computations and data management required in design. It would serve large engineering staffs from the design concept through detailed design, and would help to organize and assemble design data in support of manufacturing processes. (NASA Release 75—312)
NASA announced signing of an agreement with the Federal Aviation Administration to act as a third party for the purpose of receiving, processing, and analyzing safety reports filed under FAA’s Aviation Safety Reporting Program. The third-party arrangement would stimulate the free and unrestricted flow of information, by assuring users that FAA’s objective in the program was to provide the safest possible aviation system by identifying and correcting unsafe conditions before accidents occur. The agreement provided for specific procedures to protect the identity of persons involved in the reports submitted to NASA, except in criminal cases or accidents. NASA would set up an aviation safety reporting working group under its Research and Technology Advisory Council to advise NASA on the reporting system, to evaluate and review the program once it is under way, and to ensure the anonymity of those submitting reports. The group would include aviation and consumer groups and others involved in operational aspects of the national aviation system. (NASA Release 75—273)
The U.S. space program was an adventure whose potential benefits were undefinable and incalculable, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher told the National Academy of Engineering. Speaking on the “Outlook for the Space Program,” Dr. Fletcher noted that the public and the Congress were “now” oriented, and that concentration on immediate benefits might jeopardize “the vast potential” of the national space program. Admitting that “NASA’s present actions seem to speak louder than its words,” in that its money had been spent on current needs rather than on tomorrow’s goals, Dr. Fletcher said this did not result from lack of vision but from “accommodation with current constraints.” Projects to be considered for NASA’s future should include satellite systems to beam solar energy to earth; a permanent manned space station in orbit, as a forerunner of the space colony that had been proposed; exploration of the planets expanded to interstellar missions; and making contact with another intelligent race—“the most significant achievement of this millennium.” (Text; NASA Release 75—294)
People’s Republic of China launched its third satellite into an earth orbit with a 455-km apogee, 182-km perigee, 90.9-min period, and 69.0° inclination. PRC’s Hsinhua news agency reported 27 July that the satellite had been launched “under the guidance of Chairman Mao’s [Tse-tung] proletarian revolutionary line . . . promoting production and other work and preparedness against war.” Hsinhua also reported that the instruments on board the satellite were operating normally. The satellite was PRC’s first in 4 yr. Baltimore Sun correspondent Edward K. Wu attributed the apparent slowdown in the PRC space program to an estimated 25% cutback in military spending. PRC’s first two satellites had been successfully launched 24 April 1970 and 2 March 1971. (Wkly SSR, 25-30 July 1975; FBIS-PRC, 28 July 75, El; Wu, B Sun, 28 July 75, A4; W Post, 28 July 75, A14; A&A 70; A&A 71)
NASA announced that Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Associate Administrator, would leave NASA in May to join the National Center for Resource Recovery as president and chief executive officer. Dr. Petrone, who in 1960 was assigned on loan from the Army to Kennedy Space Center as Saturn project officer, later became Apollo program manager responsible for planning, developing, and activating all launch facilities for the Apollo program. Upon retirement from the Army he served at KSC as director of launch operations from 1966 to 1969, when he was appointed Apollo program director. In 1972 he was assigned additional responsibilities as program director of the NASA portion of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. In Dec. 1972 he was appointed Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, a position he held until his appointment in 1974 as Associate Administrator. (NASA Releases 69-124, 75-98)
NASA expected to add 3800 contractor personnel in FY 1976, mostly for the Space Shuttle, NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly told a joint session of the House Subcommittees on Space Science and Applications and on Aviation and Transportation R&D. However, overall employment on the space program had been forecast down 68%, or 278 000 workers, from its peak of 409 000 in 1965. NASA would lose 17 more Federal positions in FY 1976 after losing 521 Federal employees in FY 1975. NASA is paying more for fewer employees, Lilly pointed out, because agency manpower expenses go up about $6 million a year, offset by only $1 million in replacing retired workers with new workers in lower grades. Total Federal employment at NASA had hit a high of 33 924 in 1966; NASA Federal employees now numbered 24 316. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 995, 1024, 1031)
The Federal Council for Science and Technology, a committee of officials representing major research and development agencies, released “Report on the Federal R&D Program—FY 1976,” a summary of 17 R&D agencies’ efforts in applying science and technology to national issues. The report stated that the FY 1976 budget included $21 billion for R&D programs, a 15% increase over the FY 1975 R&D budget of $18.8 billion. Of this, approximately $7.4 billion was planned for civilian programs including energy, health, education, agriculture, environment, urban problems, and transportation. Approximately one-fourth the civilian R&D budget was planned for energy, with the largest share of that—$1.55 million—going to the Energy Research and Development Administration. Nine other government agencies would receive increases in R&D budgets, with NASA’s FY 1976 budget estimate increasing to $3,539 billion, up from $3,231 billion in FY 1975, an increase of more than $300 million. Space R&D would continue with projects to explore Mars, Venus, and outer planets, as well as the sun. Satellites would continue to be used for earth resources assessment, weather prediction, and surveys of potential geothermal energy sources. The Federal Aviation Administration would receive increases for air traffic safety, and Dept, of Defense increases would support development of the B—1 manned strategic aircraft, Trident missile systems, and Navy and Air Force air combat fighters. (Text; OMB, Budget of the U.S. Govt., FY 1976)
The Soviet Union may establish a ground station to receive data directly from the U.S. Landsat earth resources satellites, under a cooperative program in which the U.S. would establish facilities to receive data from Soviet weather satellites, NASA Administrator James Fletcher announced in Moscow. Landsat could be of enormous value to the Soviet Union, which is judged to have vast untapped oil and mineral deposits, which depends heavily for power on its water resources, and which needs help in improving crop yields and forecasting. (SBD, 20 Oct 75, 255) Astronomers had considered the compact stars in these binary systems the most exciting objects of current research: the stars have masses close to that of earth’s Sun, but diameters of only about 10 km. Neutron stars, for example, had been found so dense that a teaspoonful would weigh a billion metric tons, and “black holes” would be even more dense. Five satellites currently in earth orbit had been observing celestial x-rays: Copernicus, Oso 8, and Sas 3, managed by GSFC, and the U.K.’s Ariel 5 and the Netherlands’ Ans 1, for which GSFC had coordination responsibility. In the past year spacecraft had discovered six new and extremely powerful x-ray sources, brightness in the sky, known as x-ray novas from their sudden brightening and subsequent fading after several months. One of these x-ray novas is as bright as earth’s sun and more than 10 times brighter than the easily visible Crab Nebula, most famous of the supernovas (exploding stars). (NASA Release 75—279; JSC Roundup, 24 Oct 75, 1)
France would begin deactivating its space center at Kourou, French Guiana, in September, the New York Times reported. A space center spokesman was quoted as saying, “We’ll have to put the space center to sleep for a while because of lack of funds.” The deactivation did not mean that the French were abandoning their ambition to achieve independence from the U.S. in space operations but that it would take longer than originally thought. The European space program at Kourou would resume with launches of several experimental rockets scheduled in 1979 and a satellite launch planned for the 1980s. Since its establishment in April 1968, the Kourou center had launched more than 225 balloons, satellites, and sounding rockets. Its location 5° north of the equator made Kourou especially suitable for equatorial launches. The largest of its disappointments had been the failure of the Europa 2 launch vehicle in 1971, a program finally abandoned in 1973 in favor of the Ariane booster. (Howe, ATT, 14 June 75)
“Clear and immediate benefits to society” that NASA could produce would justify a 25% increase in its budget, said Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), chairman of the House subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, urging the space agency to come up with plans for such a program. Noting that the Administration had been considering across-the-board cuts in the Federal budget, Rep. Fuqua said the President and the Office of Management and Budget should reconsider the NASA cuts, as returns from the space program should give it higher priority than nonproducing areas of the budget. The subcommittee’s three-volume report, “Future Space Programs,” called for new space systems for educational and medical services, and for new earth-survey satellites to provide maritime, agricultural, geological, and demographic data. The report stressed that the agency should offer both short-term and long-term plans. The latter should include plans for lunar bases, orbital colonies, extraterrestrial communications, planetary and stellar exploration, satellite solar power, and disposal of nuclear waste. Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) of the House Committee on Science and Technology endorsed the subcommittee report, which he said contained “sensible recommendations,” noting particularly the concept of space-based generation of electrical power. Growth of the nation, said Teague, “is fundamentally dependent upon our continuing its number one ranking in science and technology.” (IFPost, 6 Nov 75, A10; NYT, 6 Nov 75, 51; SBD, 6 Nov 75, 28-30)
European spending for space programs would rise significantly during 1975 as major projects begun in the past reached a maximum pitch, Aviation Week and, Space Technology reported. Most space spending was reflected in the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) budget which had jumped 50%, from $220 million in 1974 to $350 million in 1975. Two programs—the Ariane launch vehicle and the Spacelab for use on the Space Shuttle—accounted for half the ESRO budget for 1975. Av Wk reported that officials of France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), prime contractor for the Ariane, had estimated that the booster would be used to orbit between 20 and 39 geostationary satellites during the 10-yr period from 1980 to 1990. Other European space programs under way included the Orbital Test Satellite (OTS), a test bed to evaluate equipment and concepts planned for a European comsat to be launched around 1980; Aerosat, a Canadian— ESRO— U.S. comsat program, with the first of two satellites scheduled for launch in 1978; Marots, a maritime comsat planned for launch in 1977; and Exosat, an x-ray astronomy satellite to be launched in 1979. All ESRO programs would be reviewed in the spring to resolve any pending disagreements, and to obtain approval of a 3-yr financial plan that called for a budget of $410 million in 1976 and $415 million in 1977. (Av Wk, 17 March 75, 65- 68)
NASA announced appointment of William H. Rock as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center, effective 9 Nov. Rock joined NASA in 1964 and had served at NASA Headquarters, at Goddard Space Flight Center, and since 1968 at Kennedy Space Center, where he was associated with various applications and manned flight programs. (NASA anno, 30 Oct 75)
A significant influence on NASA’s ability to maintain viable programs in the face of possibly unstable funding will be the extent to which commercial and foreign government users participate in the development and financial support of future payloads,” Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Av Wk interviewed the Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, Philip E. Culbertson, who said that it would be better, in the long term, to move into a position where more organizations outside NASA were sponsoring and paying for missions and payloads. The agency was encouraged by the interest of industries in flying and funding Space Shuttle missions involving a wide range of basic scientific and technical operations. Foreign reimbursable payloads, already an important part of NASA launch operations, were seen as an even iarger factor in Shuttle payloads development. Japan, already holding discussions with NASA to lay the groundwork for a viable national space program, was considered a serious Shuttle customer; Japan would like to develop both scientific and earth applications programs in the communications, navigation, and weather satellite fields.. Canada’s interest in positioning domestic communications satellites over its territory would continue into the Shuttle era. Even individual Soviet scientists had made inquiries into the possibilities of flying payloads on the U.S. Shuttle. Culbertson pointed out that, unlike earlier NASA manned space programs that included scientific funding in overall program budgets, NASA in-house Shuttle payload development was the sole responsibility of the specific NASA disciplines themselves. NASA’s FY 1976 budget request contained from $50 to $100 million for various efforts that could evolve into Shuttle payloads, and the budget for FY 1977 would markedly increase payload funding. However, with the budget crunch, funding for Shuttle payloads would compete directly with other programs and the payload proposals “will have to stand on their own merit.” Culbertson also said that major decisions would have to be made on how long to keep which expendable launch vehicles in the program. In another interview, NASA Spacelab Program Director Douglas R. Lord said that upcoming major decisions concerning Spacelab included a follow-on procurement plan for Spacelab hardware and priorities on how often ESRO (European Space Research Organization) and other crews and experimental hardware would fly on Shuttle— Spacelab missions. Lord said that operations of overall Spacelab functions would probably be maintained separately from payload operations: Johnson Space Center was the logical place to handle overall operations, and Marshall Space Flight Center was the leading candidate for the Spacelab payload operations center. Goddard Space Flight Center had expressed interest in handling operational needs of the high-energy experiments on Spacelab pallets. (Covault, Av Wk, 17 March 75, 59- 60) 18March: “The expertise and facilities of LeRC [Lewis Research Center], as well as other NASA centers, are being considered by ERDA [Energy Research and Development Administration] as part of its overall definition of a total institutional structure required to carry out the nation’s energy R&D program,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., ERDA Administrator said in a letter to Representative Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio). The letter was a reply to correspondence from members of the Ohio congressional delegation and Cleveland businessmen and industrialists to President Ford calling for increased use of LeRC talent to meet the nation’s energy crisis. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Seamans noted that the newly established ERDA was the lead Federal agency for managing national energy R&D. ERDA intended to use the expertise and facilities of other Federal agencies where it was feasible and in the national interest with respect to cost, timeliness, and program management. LeRC, NASA’s lead center for aerospace propulsion and power, was already involved in ERDA-sponsored projects in solar heating and cooling, wind energy, and topping cycles to increase the efficiency of coal-fueled steam plants. But LeRC would continue its main task to work on propulsion technology, conducting energy research in support of ERDA “when it was consistent with the requirements of its principal mission within NASA.” (Text, letter to Mosher from Fletcher and Seamans, 18 March 75)
The U.S.S.R. had turned down a U.S. invitation to participate in another joint manned space mission in 1976, Thomas O’Toole of the Washington Post reported a U.S. space official as saying. O’Toole reported that in 1974 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low had suggested to Soviet Academy of Sciences President Vladimir Kotelnikov that two Soviet cosmonauts and three American astronauts dock with a Soviet Salyut space station and work together in earth orbit for up to 2 wk. However, the Soviets had replied that they would undertake a repeat of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for 15 July launch) but could not prepare to fly an Apollo-Salyut in any reasonable length of time. The Post quoted Dr. Low as saying, “Any second American—Russian space flight will have to wait until the 1980s.” The Post also quoted Dr. Low as saying that NASA had suggested an Apollo-Salyut mission as early as 1971, but the Soviets had requested a change back to an Apollo-Soyuz mission during a presummit meeting in April 1972 just before President Nixon’s Moscow visit. Dr. Low said that the Soviets had said that it was too expensive to modify Salyut to accept both a Soyuz and an Apollo spacecraft at the same time. (O’Toole, W Post, 14 July 75, Al)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that the combined efforts of government and industry could reduce fuel consumption of civil air transport by 40 to 50% without degrading the environment or reducing aircraft safety. The conclusion was based on a study by NASA, Federal Aviation Administration, DOD, and industry at the request of the committee. Need for a vigorous fuel-conservation program had been underscored by estimates from the Federal Energy Administration and Air Transport Association of America that U.S. outlays for imported oil had increased from $3 billion in 1970 to $24 billion in 1974, and could reach $32 billion by 1977. Jet fuel costs had risen from 12 cents a gallon (4.4 cents per liter) in 1973 to 29 cents (10.5 cents) in 1975. NASA studies had shown that, by the year 2005, the U.S. could save one million barrels of refined aircraft fuel per day by use of new technology in civil air transport. NASA’s proposed fuel-efficiency plan would include six major programs of research on engine components, engine efficiency, aircraft design, turboprop performance, laminar flow control and drag reduction, and increased use of composite materials for aircraft parts. (Transcript, NASA Release 75—252)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Secretary of the Interior Thomas S. Kleppe announced the selection of Dr. William Nordberg, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Dr. Carlos Brockmann, director of the Landsat project in Bolivia, to receive the 1975 William T. Pecora Award. Dr. Nordberg was selected for his meteorological contributions to the Landsat program and for his management of day-to-day research operations using data from Landsat 1 and 2, launched (as Erts 1) on 23 July 1972 and on 22 Jan. 1975. Dr. Brockmann was selected for his leadership of a multidisciplinary team of Bolivian scientists responsible for the evaluation and application of Landsat images. Within 1 year, the team had produced evaluation reports covering geology, volcanology, forestry, hydrology, and land use of Bolivia; the group also published an improved national atlas of Bolivia. Given annually by NASA and the Dept, of Interior in recognition of “outstanding contributions of individuals or groups toward the understanding of the Earth by means of remote sensing,” the award would be presented at the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. 4-day symposium on earth resources at Sioux Falls, S. Dak., 28—31 Oct. (NASA Releases 75-283,-285)
Rockwell International Corp. announced that its Electronics Research Div., under a contract awarded by NASA on 18 Feb. 1974, had developed a single-chip bubble-domain memory element with a capacity of 102 400 bits, believed to be the largest capacity memory device ever built. The new data recorder—a major milestone in NASA’s continuing program to develop an all-solid-state data recorder for future U. S. spacecraft—was one-third the size and one-half the weight of current equipment. It was expected to use half the power and have 10 times the life expectancy of present recorders. Objective of the effort was to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating high-capacity memory elements with reasonable yield and operating margins. (Rockwell Int’l Release ERD-1; LaRC proj off, interview, 18 Jan 77) 22 May—7 June: The U.S. and Peru launched more than 40 sounding rockets and balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for the Inca god of flight, to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere from Chilca Launch Range in Peru, a location on the magnetic equator where the earth’s magnetic field is horizontal. Instruments aboard the rockets and balloons measured the composition of the neutral and ionized atmosphere, density and temperature, wind shear, and turbulence. The measurements would be compared with data from Explorer 51 (Atmosphere Explorer—C, launched 15 Dec. 1973) and the ground-based Jicamarca and Huancayo Observatories. Tbe overall mission included the launch of 4 Nike-Tomahawks, 8 Nike-Apaches, 7 Super Areas, and 10 Super Lokis, as well as two balloons measuring 36 m in diameter and 12 ozonesonde balloons. Project Antarqui was a continuation of a NASA sounding-rocket program conducted during the 1964— 65 International Quiet Sun Year when 77 sounding rockets had been launched during the first 4 mo of 1965 from a sea-going launch platform, the USNS Croatan. Wallops Flight Center managed the program for NASA; the Instituto Geofisico del Peru arranged for the use of the range, supplied range operation and logistics support in Peru, correlated ground-based measurements from Jicamarca and Huancayo, assisted in recovery operations, and performed some preliminary work at the range. In addition to WFC, Goddard Space Flight Center, Dudley Observatory, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Univ. of 111., Penn. State Univ., Univ. of Denver, and GCA Corp. supplied scientific payloads for the sounding rockets and balloons. (WFC Release 75—6; NASA Activities, June 75, 14; WFC proj mgr, interviews, 11—12 Jan 75) 24 May—26 July: Tne U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 18, carrying cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 7:58 pm local time (10:58 amEDT). According to the Tassnews agency, the spacecraft entered orbit with a 247-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the purpose of the mission was “to conduct further experiments with the orbital research station ‘Salyut—4,’ started on January 12, during the joint flight of the delivery spaceship ‘Soyuz—17’ and the station ‘Salyut—4’ as well as to test individual elements and systems of the spaceship in various modes of flight.” During the first day in orbit Klimuk and Sevastyanov checked out essential spacecraft and life-support systems and prepared for orbital maneuvering. The crew switched on the main engines twice on 25 May to raise the spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and docking with Salyut 4. On 26 May Soyuz 18 approached the station by an automatic control system. At a distance of 100 km the crew took over control and manually docked the spacecraft with the Salyut 4 station in pitch darkness. After docking, the crew switched on the station’s lights and began activation and checkout of the onboard systems. The crew transferred equipment and boarded the station where they found a “Welcome to our common home” sign left by the station’s previous tenants, Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and Georgy Grechko. The cosmonauts reported that all systems were operating normally and that they themselves were in good health. By 28 May the station and spacecraft were in an orbit with a 349-km apogee, 338-km perigee, 91.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. During their 63 days in orbit, the cosmonauts studied the sun, planets, and stars in various bands of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation using several x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; investigated geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, photographing the U.S.S.R. in the medium and southern latitudes; studied physical processes in the earth’s atmosphere and in space; performed medical and biological research with particular emphasis on the impact of weightlessness on the human organism; and tested the station’s design and onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised a garden of onions and peas as a forerunner of providing self-sufficient food supplies in space. Tass reported that, for the first time during a space flight, the polar fights were investigated using integral photography and spectrography methods. Twice during the mission Klimuk and Sevastyanov spoke with cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov who were also in orbit participating in the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project begun 15 July. By 23 July the cosmonauts were preparing the space station for automatic operation. On 26 July at 3:56 pm Baykonur time (6:56 am EDT), Soyuz 18 and its crew undocked from Salyut 4. They softlanded 56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan at 7:18 pm Baykonur time (10:18 am EDT). ' Tass reported that by 27 July the cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood pressure fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned to normal. Decreases in erythrocytes and increases in leucocytes disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and resistance to functional tests had almost reached preflight baselines. Both Klimuk and Sevastyanov had lost some weight—3.8 kilograms and 1.9 kilograms respectively—during the mission. The Soyuz 18 crew’s 62-day 23-hr 40-min mission broke the previous 29-day 13-hr 20-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 17. The current world’s record for time in space was held by the Skylab 4 astronauts for their 84-day 1-hr 16-min mission, 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974. Salyut 4, which had been visited by the two crews of Soyuz 17 and 18, was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station on 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted experiments for 24 days but were killed during a reentry accident. Salyut 2 was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion of wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 and a two-man crew, carried by Soyuz 14, lived and worked aboard the station from 3—19 July 1974. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. 1974, returned to earth in 48 hr after an unsuccessful attempt to dock with the station, which itself reentered the earth’s atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 24 May— 28 July 75; GSFC WklySSR, 22—28 May 75; AP, B Sun, 27 July 75, A3; Lib of Congress, “S&T News Alert,” No 2600, 19 Sept 75) 27 May—14 June: A one-third-scale model of the Space Shuttle Orbiter was tested in Ames Research Center’s 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel, to gather low-speed flight data in support of approach and landing tests of the first full-scale Orbiter at Flight Research Center in 1977. In addition, data were gathered to calibrate the vehicle’s air data probes. The model, built by Shuttle prime contractor Rockwell International Corp., was 13.1 m long and weighed 20 400 kg. Additional wind-tunnel tests were scheduled for November 1975 and February 1976. (4-Strogram, 5 June 75, 1; Young, JSC aerodynamic subsystems mgr, interview, 21 April 77) In a speech, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Union M. Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s intention to play an important role in the peaceful uses of outer space; the programs of ESRO—ESA offered a particularly well chosen range of satellites for research and applications. Y. Demerliac, Secretary General of Eurospace—Groupement In-dustriel Europeen D’Etudes Spatiales—reminded the audience that since 1962 Europe had developed 43 satellites, including four communications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of the 104 ground stations or antennas in the network of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). More than two-thirds of these had been sold to non-European countries. Director General of ESRO Roy Gibson (United Kingdom) said the creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: the convention of the new agency gave it a specific mandate to work toward a rationalization of Europe’s space program which its predecessors ESRO and ELDO (European Launcher Development Organization) did not have. He hoped that the 3-day presentation of ESRO— ESA and other European programs would give the visitors an impression of the total competence and capability of Europe’s up-to-date, rather dispersed space effort. (ESRO Release 28 May 75)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Donald P. Hearth, Deputy Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, gave in their testimony before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology a preview of the new NASA report “Outlook for Space.” The report had been submitted to NASA by a 21-member study group established by Dr. Fletcher in June 1974 to develop an unconstrained listing of desirable and practical civilian space activities; to group these around goals, objectives, and themes; to define R&D tasks required by potential commercial and operational uses of space; to identify social and economic challenges that could benefit from space-reported data; and to relate space goals and objectives to national ones. All space objectives defined by the study group were evaluated in terms of their contribution to national interests, which included expansion of human knowledge, physical benefits to the U.S. and humanity, contribution to the vitality of the nation, exploration of the unknown, national prestige and self-esteem, and international cooperation. The report suggested categorizing space missions as either earth-oriented or extraterrestrial. Earth-oriented programs for the rest of the century should help increase food production by improved weather and water-availability forecasting, improved crop forecasting, improved detection and monitoring of diseases and infestations in vegetation. The consequent economic benefits and stabilization of the commodity market could gain hundreds of millions of dollars per year. Other earth-oriented space programs should emphasize improved forecasting of seasonal and climatic trends, to aid in the managing of food and energy resources and associated transportation requirements. Benefits from improved climate forecasting could reach hundreds of millions of dollars annually. The space program should also address itself to the challenge of the unknown by adding to man’s knowledge of cosmic and human evolution and destiny. Spacecraft could take instruments above the “dark and dirty glass” of earth’s opaque atmosphere, and should continue to carry instruments to other planets, setting up laboratories there as well as bringing samples back to earth for analysis. Extraterrestrial missions should include textural, chemical, and isotopic planetary studies and comparisons of atmospheric trends for all planets and their satellites. Plans should also continue for human activities in space, using both the space shuttle and free-flying laboratories to repair and maintain orbiting spacecraft systems and perform research in space. Although the study panel had found it difficult to assert that manned orbiting or planetary bases should be undertaken in the next 25 yrs, it found that man was an integral and necessary part of the more creative space-exploration programs. If the U.S. was to avail itself of the potential benefits of space, the next logical step for NASA’s manned program could be development of a permanent space facility in which crews could work for extended periods. (H.R. transcript)
The appointment of Lt. Gen. Duward L. Crow (USAF, Ret.) as Associate Deputy Administrator became effective. Gen. Crow succeeded Willis H. Shapley, who retired. Before joining NASA in September 1974 as Assistant Administrator for Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs, Gen. Crow had been Assistant Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force since October 1973. He had previously been Comptroller of the Air Force. Replacing Gen. Crow as Assistant Administrator for DOD and Interagency Affairs was Lt. Gen. William W. Snavely (USAF Ret.) who had been Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems and Logistics since January 1973. (NASA Release 75— 260)
A massive new power source for earth—transmission of solar energy by microwave frequency—had been under study by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the Goldstone station near Barstow, Calif. The dish antenna equipped with a 450-kw klystron tube for microwave transmission, represented a space station; the tower a mile away with an array of solar receivers to which the experimental power converted to microwave energy had been beamed represented a ground station. This research had been designed to lead to a network of space stations that would collect solar energy 24 hr a day and beam it to ground stations; the Goldstone tests had been the first high-power field trials of the system. Tiny rectifying dipole antennas—called rectennas— collect and convert the radio-frequency beam; the 17 panels in the tower receiver contain 4590 of the rectennas. The system had demonstrated a maximum output of 30.4 kw converting the microwave beam to usable electricity, an efficiency of 82.5%. A space-to-earth system would be 6 times more effective than a surface system, the Los Angeles Times commented, and could probably supply 15% to 20% of the earth’s energy needs in the next century. Development of a utility operating system delivering 10 000 mw of power would cost about $60 billion, as much as NASA has spent to date on space programs. A single equatorial space station carrying a 1-km-diameter antenna transmitting to a U.S. earth station 15 km long and 10 km wide could supply all the electrical needs of New York City or a third of the needs of the Los Angeles basin. (LA Times, 6 Oct 75, 1; NYT, 10 Oct 75, 2)
NASA’s basic goal in the U.S. stratospheric research program was to determine the normal makeup of the upper atmosphere with emphasis on understanding the dynamic processes occurring and the perturbations caused by natural and man-made events, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s current high-altitude program was being carried out by conventional and special purpose aircraft such as the U—2, instrumented packages placed on commercial aircraft, instrumented balloons, sounding rockets, and computer modeling techniques. Satellites still provided the best potential for continuing repetitive global observations of the upper atmosphere. The Nimbus satellites had measured properties affecting the ozone and had made vertical profiles of the upper atmosphere. Atmospheric Explorer (AE) satellites had made coordinated investigations of photochemical processes in the upper atmosphere caused by solar ultraviolet radiation. Dr. Fletcher said that NASA would continue these efforts and had plans for new atmospheric studies. In addition to payloads planned for launch on the Space Shuttle, NASA would use instrumented aircraft, balloons, and sounding rockets to study the effects of chlorofluorometh-anes, or Freon, on atmospheric ozone. (Transcript)
NASA commemorated the 15th anniversary of the 12 Aug. 1960 launch of Echo 1, world’s first communications satellite. Visible to millions around the world, the 30-m gas-inflated mylar (0.0013-cm thick aluminum-coated plastic) balloon served as a passive radio reflector in space, bouncing signals from one point on earth to another. Its first transmission sent the recorded voice of President Eisenhower from Goldstone, Calif., to Holmdel, N.J.; during its first year in orbit, it served in approximately 150 experiments, including voice, teletype and facsimile communications. Echo Vs large size, small mass, and extreme sensitivity to solar radiation pressures and aerodynamic drag helped scientists confirm orbital behavior theory. Despite its original 1-yr life expectancy, Echo 1 remained in orbit for nearly 8 yr until, leaking gas through its skin bombarded by meteorites, it reentered the atmosphere and burned up 23 May 1968. (NASA Releases 61—177, 75—217; A&A 68, 23 May)
Contrary to the impression of peaceful cooperation created by the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission [see 15—26 July], both countries had increasingly emphasized the military potential of manned space flight, the Philadelphia Inquirer reported the Center for Defense Information as saying. The Center, a private organization critical of defense spending, charged that the 1967 United Nations treaty which reserved outer space for peaceful uses had not prevented either country from exploiting space for military purposes. Although the Pentagon had listed its space spending at $2.25 billion, it had acknowledged the existence of another $667 million in Air Force “miscellaneous” requests for secret space programs. The Center said that, although the Soviet Union’s space program was 15 yrs behind the U.S., frequent launches indicated that they were attempting to catch up. The Center concluded that, contrary to the spirit of the outer space treaty, space technology and systems were being developed that had the potential for new confrontations between the superpowers. (UPI, P Inq, 10 Aug 75)
At a Moscow exhibition of space art to commemorate the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, Soviet art glorified man’s role in space, whereas U.S. art emphasized technology, the Baltimore Sun reported. U.S. artists, commissioned by NASA and the National Gallery of Art to record the space program, showed basically factual treatments of blastoffs, launch towers, and mazes of steel gridwork. Artist Alden Wicks depicted Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building as “The New Olympus.’’ Men played subordinate roles in U.S. art; they swarmed through control centers or, as in Jamie Wyeth’s “Firing Room,” sat by the dozens in front of individual TV monitors. Engineers ministered to launch vehicles like priests before an idol. Even in the pen-and-ink drawings of individual astronauts, faces were diminished by the detailed minutiae of spacesuit and life-support paraphernalia. By contrast, man dominated the Soviet art. Artist Anatoly Yakushin depicted pioneer rocket theoretician Konstantin Tsiolkovsky against a geometric maze, but man controlled the idea. A painting by Boris Okorokov showed a young flight controller commanding abstract equipment, in contrast to Wyeth’s passive TV-monitor watchers. The irony of the two artistic visions was that they “reverse the technological visions of the nations’ manned space programs,” the Sun said. In reality, U.S. flights left much of the flying up to the astronauts, while the Soviets had kept their cosmonauts as passive as possible. Also included in the exhibition were paintings by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, the only one of the artists who had seen outer space. He painted cosmic scenes in brilliant colors: His deep space was not a flat black, but a composite of black and indigo, streaked with magenta and stars with violet coronas. The Leonov earth as seen from space was deep marbled blue with atmospheric sheaths surrounding it in hard-edged layers, pale hues close to the planet, darkening in stages to the night of Space. (B Sun, 16 July 75, A4)
NASA had begun a demonstration of hydrogen-injection technology, a technique that could help reduce fuel consumption in large aircraft engines by 20 to 25% and lower emissions of pollutants from general-aviation engines. Working with the Federal Aviation Administration and industry, NASA was studying minor engine modifications that would reduce characteristic engine emissions. A separate NASA-industry program was investigating emission reduction and fuel efficiency by means of more extensive changes in the basic design of aircraft engines. In a third program, NASA was investigating both the noise and the emission characteristics of small general-aviation engines. (NASA Release 75-198)
An Apollo-Soyuz Test Project flight readiness review at Kennedy Space Center was attended by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; ASTP Program Director Chester M. Lee; and top management from NASA Headquarters and Marshall, Johnson, and Kennedy Space Centers. During the meeting Lee said that “ASTP is on schedule and ‘go’ for launch on July 15.” Top management had reviewed and closed out all aspects of flight preparations. ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lun-ney reported that no hardware problems remained that might interfere with an. on-time launch. MSFC Saturn Program Manager Ellery B. May reported that the 8-yr-old Saturn IB launch vehicle had been carefully checked out and all components were being monitored by periodic inspections; during one of these inspections corrosion cracks had been discovered in the fins, requiring them to be replaced [see 19 Feb.—19 March], May reported that the vehicle was ready to fly. William H. Rock, manager of the Sciences and Applications Project Office at JSC, said that modifications, including a larger, more effective lightning rod on the launch tower, had been made to the launch pad to minimize the hazards from lightning strikes. Jesse R. Gulick, KSC meteorologist, said that thunderstorm probability for launch day was 23% and that the probability of a tropical storm or hurricane winds was less than 3%. Based on previous years’ data, chances were good that, even if bad weather postponed the primary launch date, the Apollo spacecraft could be launched within 4 days. (MSFC Release 75 — 119; KSC Release 104 —75; Marshall Star, 18 June 75, 1; Ezell et al.. The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 310 — 12)
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)
Space programs that create new commercial activity, new wealth, and new jobs were essential to the growth of both the U.S. and Europe, Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah) told the Assembly of Western European Union. Reviewing policies that had governed agreements on space with Western Europe, Moss warned that continued cooperation in space would hinge on Europe’s paying its full share of the expenses. Concentration on programs with immediate application to earth problems should not mean abandonment of space science, or loss of “the vision and imagination that have been so important to our achievements to date,” the senator said. (CR, 10 Dec 75, S 21650; SBD, 5 Dec 75, 185)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and New York City mayor Abraham D. Beame met in New York to review NASA-developed safety standards for handling liquefied natural gas. Following a 1973 gas storage tank fire that killed 40 persons, New York officials had asked NASA to use its experience in handling highly volatile rocket fuels to help the city establish a comprehensive risk-management plan to design, construct, and operate natural gas facilities. The plan, developed at Kennedy Space Center and incorporated into New York City Fire Department operating procedures, identified liquid gas risks, controlled the risks through redundant fail-safe techniques, and set up criteria for discussions to eliminate or accept certain risks. Also discussed was the new fiberglass and aluminum breathing system developed at Johnson Space Center and being tested by firefighters in New York, Houston, and Los Angeles. Results to date indicated that the new unit—which was 30% lighter than conventional systems and featured a high-pressure, longer duration air tank and a face mask allowing better vision—was superior to old-style units. The new system was expected to be introduced commercially later in the year. (NASA Release 75—25)
Communications Satellite Corp., U.S. representative in the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, transmitted its twelfth annual report to the President, covering the activities of ComSat from 1 July 1974—30 June 1975. Two more Intelsat IV satellites had been orbited, Intelsat IV F—8 21 Nov. 1974 over the Pacific Ocean and Intelsat IV F— 1 22 May 1975 over the Indian Ocean. A third satellite, Intelsat IV F—6, failed to achieve orbit when the launch vehicle malfunctioned. By 30 June 1975 a network of 112 antennas—27 more than last year—at 88 earth stations was providing 379 ComSat pathways, with 107 countries leasing satellite services, an increase of 7 over the previous year. Comsat General Corp., a subsidiary, had entered into a joint venture with the European Space Agency and the Government of Canada on 3 Dec. 1974 to provide satellite capacity for an Aerosat (aeronautical satellite) communications test and evaluation program. Comsat General and International Business Machines Corp. had notified the Federal Communications Commission that they would seek to enter the domestic satellite business with one or more partners. ComSat’s earth stations in Connecticut and California neared readiness for Marisat (maritime satellite) communications services in the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean areas. ComSat reported a net income of $44 918 000, or $4.49 per share, up from $36 299 000 or $3.63 per share in 1973. (Text) During August: “The importance of space to our defensive military effort can only increase in the future,” Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, retiring commander of the Air Force Systems Command and NASA’s Apollo Program Director from 1964— 69, said in an interview. Gen. Phillips speculated that aircraft, including the B— 1 bomber under development by the U.S., would be an important part of the military force “for as many decades ahead as anyone cares to project.” However, he saw energy scarcities increasing the need for training simulators and alternative aircraft fuels. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 75, 1) September 1975
NASA had awarded Bendix Field Engineering Corp. a $104-million contract to operate and maintain portions of the worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network that serves the needs of NASA’s earth-orbital space programs, manned and unmanned. The 2-yr cost-plus-award-fee contract would permit negotiation of up to three additional 1-yr extensions, and would be supervised by Goddard Space Flight Center. The contractor would provide technical support for STDN stations and facilities as well as for the Laser Tracking Subnet and for the Magnetic Tape Certification Facility and the NASCOM facilities located at GSFC. (NASA Release 75—315)
Development of the Spacelab by the European Space Agency for NASA’s Space Shuttle continued. An annual Spacelab status review 4—5 June attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Roy Gibson, ESA Director General, established schedule milestones, determined readiness for the preliminary design review, and discussed arrangements for the first Spacelab flight. They also discussed plans for the instrumentpointing system and the first Spacelab payload, follow-on Spacelab procurement by NASA, and terms and conditions for use of the Space Shuttle—Spacelab system. On 6 June, the recommendations of 10 teams—which had met at Marshall Space Flight Center in May to discuss Spacelab systems, avionics, structures, environmental control and life support, software, test and integration, and payload operations and accommodations—were presented to the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight for concurrence. At the same time ESA was preparing similar recommendations at the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC). Beginning on 9 June, combined NASA—ESA teams met in Noordwijk to consider the 1772 review-item discrepancies prepared by both agencies and, after 2.5 days, had processed all of them. (Spacelab Newsletter 75—2, 3 July 75)
NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration dedicated a 100-kw wind turbine designed and built by Lewis Research Center at Plum Brook Station for ERDA. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and ERDA Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., attended the ceremony conducted by LeRC Director Dr. Bruce T. Lundin. Objective of the wind turbine project was to test the performance and define the operating and economic characteristics of wind-energy systems for generating commercial electric power in the future. The installation will provide data for use in developing larger and more advanced systems that could be produced commercially by private industry. The Plum Brook installation was the largest wind-energy system in operation and the second largest ever built; the largest, a 1250-kw system operated between 1941 and 1945 in Vermont, had been abandoned because of economic difficulties and availability of less expensive fossil energy. The new generator, with its 38-m-wide propeller blades, was built on top of a 30-m-high open-truss steel tower and could supply the power needs of about 25 homes. NASA was participating in the ERDA program because of its capability in energy-related technology. (NASA Release 75—277)
NASA announced the appointment of David R. Scott as Director of Flight Research Center to replace Lee R. Scherer, who had become Director of Kennedy Space Center. Scott had been an astronaut on Gemini 8 (16 March 1966), on Apollo 9 (3 — 13 March 1969), and on lunar landing mission Apollo 15 (26 July—7 Aug. 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, Scott served as technical assistant to the Apollo Program Manager at Johnson Space Center, and as special assistant for mission operations and government-furnished equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA anno, 18 April 75)
NASA was inviting scientists to propose experiments for a 1979 mission that would fly by Jupiter in 1981 and then travel to a mid-1985 encounter with Uranus. Although the mission was not yet approved, NASA officials wanted to select flight investigations early to initiate necessary science planning and development. (NASA Release 75 —127)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented 23 awards to Marshall Space Flight Center employees and contractor personnel for contributions to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—26 July). Ellery B. May, former manager of the Saturn Program Office at MSFC, received NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal. Exceptional Service Medals were awarded to 14 MSFC employees; Public Service Awards went to six contractor employees active in the ASTP mission. The Group Achievement Award went to the ASTP Experiments Team and the Stress Corrosion Review Team. ASTP astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton, as well as NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low, Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight John F. Yard-ley, and ASTP Program Director Chester M. Lee, attended the ceremony honoring MSFC workers who had provided the Saturn launch vehicle as well as 10 of the 27 onboard experiments for the mission. (MSFC Release 75 — 196; Marshall Star, 17 Sept 75, 1—2)
The Central Intelligence Agency reported to the Senate Appropriations Committee on its secret monitoring of the Soviet space program and on the safety risks that might exist during the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the Washington Post reported. Details of the report, which was requested by Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.), would be made public by the committee within a few weeks. (AP, W Post, 5 June 75, A3)
Transfer of the Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program from the Office of Space Science to the Office of Manned Space flight, and transfer of the NASA Directorate for Life Sciences from the Office of Manned Space Flight to the Office of Space Science became effective. Also, the name of the Office of Manned Space Flight had been changed to Office of Space Flight, and the name of the Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program had been changed to Expendable Launch Vehicle Programs. In announcing the changes, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had said that the exchange of these functions would “provide a more logical alignment of responsibilities as we move into Space Shuttle operations. The new Office of Space Flight will be concerned primarily with launching. . . and conducting Shuttle operations, while Space Science will have responsibility for the science to be performed on these flights.” (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 1)
NASA’s Earth Resources Technology Satellite, ERTS, had been renamed Landsat, NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews announced at a Landsat—B prelaunch press briefing in Washington, D.C. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, would be called Landsat 1; ERTS-B, scheduled for launch 19 Jan., would be designated Landsat 2 once in orbit. Mathews said that, since NASA planned a SEASAT to study the oceans (see 9 Jan.), Landsat seemed a more appropriate name for a satellite that studied the land. Landsat Program Manager Harry Mannheimer said that Landsat— B would be launched into the same orbital plane as Landsat 1 but 180° out of phase. Between them the two satellites would retrace the identical ground track every 9 days rather than the 18-day interval of one satellite. The additional coverage would enable scientists to study dynamic phenomena more effectively. Mannheimer said that a significant improvement over Landsat 1 was Landsat—B’s increase in command storage, adding flexibility in commanding the various instruments while the spacecraft was out of view of a ground station. James R. Morrison, Landsat Resources Survey Program Manager, said that, whereas the emphasis of the Landsat 1 mission was on experimentation, the emphasis for Landsat—B would be on fewer but larger scale applications of remote-sensing information to real resource problems. Of the 120 investigators—compared with 320 investigators during the Landsat 1 mission—57 were U.S.-sponsored and 52 were from foreign countries. During the rigorous selection, preference had been given to investigations that included direct participation and cost-sharing by bona fide users in both the public and private sectors. New with Landsat— B were the Applications Systems Verification Tests (ASVT), based on results of Landsat 1, to further develop, demonstrate, and document Landsat results. The ASVTs were larger in design and scope than earlier investigations, essentially beyond the capability of any one investigator to manage. ASVTs for Landsat—B included a large-area crop inventory experiment (LACIE), ice-warn program, snow-cover and snow-melt prediction program, natural resources information system, and environmental information system. (Text)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking system functioned well even though “conditions were not too favorable in the second docking,” spacecraft designer Vladimir Syromyatnikov said at a Moscow press conference. Although he said he was not yet familiar with all the details, Syromyatnikov said there had been a great deal of pitch between the two craft. “We know that the Soyuz system, after capture, is turned off, while the manual operation of the Apollo ship. . . should have been turned into a different mode.” At point of capture Soyuz began to turn on its axis at approximately 3° per sec, and the shock absorbers on the Soyuz “were very strained in order to absorb this strain.” All the pitch was “quelled” after about 40 sec, Syromyatnikov added. When a reporter asked why this happened, flight engineer Sergei Tsibin said, “We know that at one moment on the Apollo there was a folding of the gyroscopic system. We also know that at the moment of locking and latching the Apollo and Soyuz were rolling at approximately 1 degree a second. This should not have taken place.” The Los Angeles Times reported on 21 July that the Russians were worried about a pressure drop in Soyuz and had voiced concern over possible damage to the Soyuz by the hard docking. However, the Times quoted NASA officials in Moscow as saying that the docking had been within prescribed limits though conceding that “it may have been a little harder” than the first one. (USSR press briefing transcript, 20 July 75; Toth, LA Times, 21 July 75)
Jackson M. Balch, director of NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL)—formerly the Mississippi Test Facility—announced plans tO'retire. As bead of the test facility for 10 yrs, Balch managed testing of Saturn V rockets for both the Apollo and Skylab programs. (NASA anno, 22 July 75) 22 —23 July: Nearly 200 NASA managers, engineers, and scientists— headed by Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Research Center Director, and Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.—met at Kennedy Space Center for the Viking launch-readiness review. Those attending—including Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science—heard status reports on the launch vehicle, spacecraft, and launch and tracking preparations. Everything was “in excellent shape” for the 11 Aug. launch of the nation’s first mission to land unmanned spacecraft on Mars, said Martin. “We still have three weeks of work ahead, but time to do it in an orderly fashion, and no significant open items.” Viking—A would be mated with the Titan— Centaur launch vehicle on 28 July, followed by specialized tests, including an operational readiness test 6 Aug. during which the entire NASA and contractor Viking team would go through the countdown and several hours of simulated flight. Problems discussed during the review included the x-band radio on the Viking—B Orb iter in which a defective coaxial cable had been replaced. A leak discovered in the Viking—A gas chromatograph mass spectrometer after sterilization was found to be so small— 0.000864 cubic centimeters per day—that it would not affect the mission. (NASA Releases 75—210, 75—216; KSC Release 156—75)
If NASA had unlimited funding, “I would mpve fairly quickly on a manned station because that will become an important outpost foy anything that we do in space,” Dr. Geprge M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an interview with the San Diego Union. Dr. Low added that he would move quicker in launching a space telescope and bringing back soil samples from Mars, “both enormously important from a scientific point of view.” Dr. Low expressed concern that “we really aren’t being inventive enough. We haven’t discovered a new propulsion system.” All NASA’s rockets so far, including the Space Shuttle, had Used conventional means of propulsion, and with it man was limited. Dr. Low said that the moon landing “was enormously difficult because we are tied to chemical propulsion systems.” NASA was experimenting with solar electric propulsion but to date no one had invented a fission or antigravity system. (San Diego Union, 8 June 75) On 14 June at 9:30 am local time (12:30 am EDT) Venera 10 was successfully launched toward Venus from Baykonur Cosmodroipe. Tass reported that “in design and purpose it is analogous to the ‘Venera-9’ station launched on June 8” and that all spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Venera 10 was also expected to reach Venus in October. In an interview 17 June with the Christian Science Monitor, Boris N. Petrov, chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of International Cooperation in the Study and Exploration of Outer Space, revealed that the Venera mission called for a landing rather than just a flyby. (GSFC SSR, 30 June 75;FBIS—Sov, 8—17 June 75; Pond, CSM, 17 June 75,1; W Post, 8—17 June 75; NYT, 8—17 June 75)
NASA would store $900 million worth of surplus Apollo-Satum hardware instead of scrapping it as planned earlier, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague, Chairman of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology. The flight hardware would be stored in a manner to minimize costs and to permit restoration, if required, to flight condition. Dr. Fletcher also wrote that, as Space Shuttle launch-readiness schedule and program costs required, NASA would convert Launch Complex 39 and its supporting facilities to handle the Space Shuttle. As requested by the Committee during a 25 March meeting with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, NASA would supply the Committee with a summary of options for missions that could be flown using the remaining Apollo-Satum flight hardware. Dr. Fletcher also stated that, because of the “considerable cost” to the government of storing the equipment, NASA would like to discuss the matter with the committee once again during the FY 1977 authorization hearings. (Text, letter Fletcher to Teague, 9 April 1975; UPI, NYT, 17 April 75, 7)
Estimated cost of the Spacelab being built for the first Space Shuttle flight had risen from $400 million to $500 million during the last year, and the program had fallen 3 to 6 mo behind schedule, NASA’s Space-lab program director Douglas Lord told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. The European Space Agency, which was developing Spacelab, was confident of delivering it in time to fly on the Shuttle. Lord and NASA Associate Administrator John F. Yard-ley said the increased development cost would not affect NASA’s cost in purchasing the modules, because NASA’s agreement with ESA precluded the Europeans from recouping development costs. NASA had been committed to buying one set of Spacelab hardware at a cost “reasonable to NASA,” although pricing proposals would not be received for 6 to 8 mo. The two officials said European cooperation on the program had been “exceptional.” (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 889)
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
In a letter to Rep. Don Fuqua, chairman of the House of Representatives’ Committee on Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher summarized options for missions that could use the remaining Apollo-Saturn flight hardware. Options included an earth-orbital mission as an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project backup; a Skylab revisit; an Apollo geosynchronous mission; a lunar orbital mission; an earth-orbital mission to visit a Soviet space station; and a manned-satellite inspector. The hardware could also be used to launch a U.S. unmanned space station carrying a large U.S.S.R. payload, a large orbiting reflector, a space solar-power demonstration, a planetary probe, or multiple payloads. Another possibility might be to carry an Apollo spacecraft into space aboard the Space Shuttle to provide a crew-rescue capability or to serve as a habitable module, to demonstrate a Shuttle-serviced free-flying module, or to inspect and service orbiting satellites. Dr. Fletcher’s letter added that he did not foresee that funds would be available to support additional Apollo-Saturn missions in the period preceding the Space Shuttle operation. The subcommittee at a 25 March meeting had asked NASA to summarize the options when the agency had sought permission to dispose of surplus Apollo-Saturn equipment [see 9 April]. (Text, letter from Fletcher to Fuqua and attachment “Conceptual Flight Possibilities for Satum-Apollo Hardware,” 15 Sept 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
Canada’s Anik 3 (Telesat—3) domestic communications satellite was launched by NASA at 7:35 pmEDTfrom Eastern Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. Originally scheduled for March, the launch had been postponed because of a strike by McDonnell Douglas Corp. workers [see 10 Feb.]. The satellite was placed in the planned highly elliptical transfer orbit with a 35 945-km apogee, 231.4-km perigee, 634.3-min period, and 24.75° inclination. Ground control fired the spacecraft’s apogee kick motor at 1:30 pm EDT on 10 May, circularizing the geosynchronous orbit at 38 000 km; the spacecraft was drifting toward its final operational location at approximately 104° west longitude. Anik (Eskimo word for brother) 3 was third in a series of Canadian domestic comsats; Anik 1 (launched 9 Nov. 1972) and Anik 2 (launched 20 April 1973) were operating at 114° and 109p west longitude, providing TV and telephone service to the most remote areas of Canada. Built by Hughes Aircraft Co., Anik 3 was 1.8 m in diameter and 3.3 m high, weighing 544 kg at launch and 272 kg in orbit. With power from 23 000 solar cells and enough battery capacity to maintain full service during a solar eclipse. Anik had 13 channels that could transmit up to 10 color TV transmissions or 9600 telephone circuits or analog or digital data. The NASA—Telesat Canada contract defined the NASA mission objective as the placement of the satellite in a synchronous transfer orhit of sufficient accuracy to allow onboard propulsion systems to place the spacecraft into a stationary orbit with enough residual stationkeeping propulsion to meet mission-lifetime requirements. This objective was met and the mission was adjudged successful on 20 May. NASA would be reimbursed for launch hardware, services, and DOD range support. The project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA MORs, 25 April 75, 20 May 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 1—7 May 75; NASA Releases 75—113, 75—131)
NASA launched Sms 2 (SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite) into transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 5:04 pm EST. Launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the three-stage inertially guided Thor-Delta booster placed the satellite in an orbit with a 36 810-km apogee, 197-km perigee, 651.0-min period, and 23.9P inclination. Originally scheduled for 30 Jan., the launch had been delayed to replace the Inertial Measurement Unit of the launch vehicle’s flight-control system with a newer more reliable unit. The spacecraft performed normally during the transfer orbit, and attitude and reorientation maneuvers were performed as planned. The apogee boost motor was fired on second apogee at 9:43 am EST 7 Feb. placing Sms 2 in a synchronous orbit; orbital parameters were 36 685-km apogee,. 35 680-km perigee, 1456.4-min period, and 1.1° inclination. By 10 Feb. the spacecraft was drifting westward at 6° per day toward the final operational station of 115° west longitude. Over several days beginning 10 Feb., the onboard auxiliary propulsion system was fired to place the spacecraft into proper attitude for operational use. First photos were transmitted 11 Feb. NASA objectives—to launch the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to enable the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, conduct an in-orbit evaluation and checkout of the spacecraft, and turn operational control over to NOAA—were met, and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. NASA turned over control of Sms 2 to NOAA 10 March. The 628-kg cylindrical spacecraft carried five instruments to provide high-quality day and night cloudcover data; take radiance temperatures of the earth’s atmosphere; measure proton, electron, and solar x-ray fluxes, and magnetic fields; transmit processed data from central facilities to regional stations; and transmit environmental information to NOAA from the thousands of manned and unmanned data-collection platforms on land, rivers, lakes, and the sea. Sms 2, together with its sister craft Sms 1 (launched 17 May 1974), provided continuous coverage of the Western Hemisphere, transmitting weather photos every 30 min. SMS photos would be made into film loops of clouds moving over oceans and land masses to help meteorologists determine what types of cloud formations and weather conditions might cause the destructive tornadoes and hurricanes that frequently occur over the eastern U.S. Sms 2 was the second in a series of two operational prototypes and one operational spacecraft (SMS-C, to be called Goes 1 in orbit) developed and funded by NASA to meet the requirements of the Dept, of Commerce’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) system. Under a NASA- DOC agreement, NASA was conducting a program to develop improved sensors and techniques—based on technology developed in its Tiros, Nimbus, and Applications Technology Satellite programs—for DOC’s operational program. Follow-on GOES spacecraft were being planned. Goddard Space Flight Center, which managed the SMS program under the direction of NASA’s Office of Applications, also had responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 9 Jan, 10 Feb, 23 April 75; NASA Releases 75- 6, 75- 27; GSFC Wkly SSR, 6-12 Feb 75)
