NASA announced selection of three contractors to negotiate for provision of various subsystems for the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft. The SMM, scheduled for launch in the third quarter of 1979, would carry instruments to investigate solar flares; the spacecraft would be built on the modular concept, so that its instrumentation could be readily changed or replaced. Fairchild Industries, Germantown, Md., would negotiate to provide the communications and data-handling subsystem at a proposed value of $2.5 million, for one protoflight model with options for up to six additional. The C&DH subsystem would provide ground and onboard control of all spacecraft and sensor functions, and of retrieval of housekeeping and experiment data. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., East St. Louis, Mo., would negotiate to provide the power module subsystem for the SMM at a proposed value of $2.3 million, with options for up to six additional. The power module, an unregulated system operating from a deployable solar array, would provide 1280 w at the beginning of its operating life. General Electric Space Div., Valley Forge, Pa., would negotiate to provide the attitude-control subsystem at a proposed value of $3.5 million, with options for up to six additional subsystems. The ACS would include reaction-control devices as well as a high-performance gyro inertial-reference unit, a pair of fixed electronic-scanning star trackers, a three-axis magnetometer set, and sun sensors. The SMM spacecraft, a 381-cm-long cylinder weighing about 1740 kg, would be powered with solar panels and fit atop a modular spacecraft base; it would be capable of launch on a Delta and retrieval by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Releases 76-203, 76-204, 76-205)
Newest international organization created to exploit space technology “for the benefit of mankind,” the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) was chartered in London after 4 yr of study and negotiation. A 1958 United Nations subgroup called IMCO—the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization—had been responsible for nautical matters of common concern to seafaring nations. The UN Secretariat first report on space activities and resources in 1972 noted IMCO’s interest in space for maritime purposes, particularly distress systems, safety of navigation and position determination, operation of maritime mobile services beyond the scope of existing methods, and improved maritime communications. IMCO proposed a new international maritime satellite system for exchange of telephone, telegraph, and facsimile messages and improvement of navigation. IMCO’s Maritime Safety Committee in March 1972 had formed a panel of experts to study and recommend a program of experiments and development work that would be necessary to form a new organization. The panel examined the financial, legal, technical, and operational problems of creating a new entity, reporting yearly to the safety committee. As the consensus favored formation of a new organization, the IMCO assembly resolved in November 1973 to convene an international conference early in 1975 to set up an international maritime satellite system. IMCO’s secretary general was to invite all UN member states and interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. The international conference, 23 April to 9 May 1975, was attended by delegates from 45 nations and observers from 15 international agencies and other organizations. The conference set up two working committees, one to discuss relationships between governments and their telecommunications and maritime entities and the distribution of powers between the member states and the INMARSAT council; the second working group would consider procurement and financial policy. The conference concluded that an international intergovernmental organization was needed to administer a worldwide maritime satellite system. It agreed to reconvene early in 1976, appointing an intersessional group to draft recommendations on four points: relationships between governments and designated entities, distribution of powers between assembly and council, type and number of appropriate international instruments, and procurement policies. The first conference concluded with a recommendation that all countries permit operation of ship stations (onboard terminals) in certain radio-frequency bands within harbor limits and other waters within national jurisdictions. As the first session ended, representatives of 13 Western European countries and the United States agreed on major elements of the organizational arrangements that would form the proposed system. The arrangements envisioned the designation by a government of an entity to assume its responsibilities with INMARSAT, vesting of management in a strong governing body with investors making policy in proportion to their use of the system, and a procurement policy awarding contracts on the basis of price, quality, and most favorable delivery time. These issues had been debated during the organization of INTELSAT. INMARSAT differed, however, because of the maritime interests involved (ship owners, maritime unions, national maritime ministries and regulatory bodies) and the presence of the USSR historically had favored international organizations composed of governments only, having been reluctant to enter “mixed” organizations involving states and private enterprises, such as INTELSAT. The working group’s first session in London in August 1975 included representatives of 37 countries and 8 international organizations. The U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement on the basic roles of governments and operational entities, adopted by the session, which also developed a procurement policy. At the second session in October 1975, 31 countries and 6 international organizations were represented; this session discussed membership rules, investments, and information policy. The third session, held in December 1975 at Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was attended by representatives of 26 countries and 4 international organizations. It set up two committees, one to deal with financial, the other with nonfinancial, matters. The U.S. representative commented on “the cooperative spirit” shown at the three sessions. The international conference resumed in London in February 1976 with representatives from 47 countries and 16 intergovernmental agencies and international organizations. Texts of two documents—a convention to be signed by governments, and an operating agreement to be signed by signatories (governments, or their designated entities)—were adopted in large measure, with some revisions. Three articles of the convention not decided were the maximum voting power of each council member, the question of permitting reservations to the convention, and the official and working languages to be used. The conference agreed to a third session to resolve these points, setting up a preparatory committee for the formal establishment of INMARSAT. The third session of the conference, called on Sept. 1, 1976, was attended by delegates from 47 countries and observers from Yugoslavia, as well as delegates from 23 international agencies. The delegates agreed that no reservations would be made to the convention or the operating agreement, and decided to omit the matter of language from the convention. Preconference negotiations had led to a consensus on the ceiling permissible on a council member’s vote, setting 25% of total voting participation as an upper limit; this wording was accepted by the conference. Observers noted significance in the languages in which the new convention was printed: English, French, Spanish, and Russian. (Stephen E. Doyle, INMARSAT . . . Origins and Structure, 13 April 77) As the long-awaited picture transmission from the Viking 2 landing site on Mars finally appeared at JPL, scientists were surprised to see rocks and more rocks in the Utopia region where they had expected steep sand dunes. Boulders were so numerous that driving a vehicle across the Utopia plain would be a challenge, Walter Sullivan wrote in the NYT. The scientists had hoped that the damper climate at the Viking 2 site might give more definite clues to organic life than the ambiguous reports from the Viking 1 lander experiments. They said they were delighted with the clarity of the photographs and the speed with which they were transmitted once the communications problem was solved. A tilt in the horizon appearing in the pictures meant either that one footpad of the lander was resting on a rock (according to Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, head of the surface-imaging experiment), or that the lander was on a slope (according to Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.). Martin expressed concern about getting the second lander back on schedule after the difficulties it had encountered on descent. Although communication had been reestablished with the orbiter’s main antenna after an unexplained stability problem had pointed its transmitters out of earth’s range for about 12 hr, the lander might have suffered from a rocky landing when one shock absorber failed to function. An apparent tear was visible in the rim of the 76.2-cm aluminum dish on the Viking 2 lander, which Martin said probably resulted from the landing, but did not affect the radio signals to earth. Only direct communication with the lander would show whether damage had occurred to the body and its electronics systems. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. pointed out that both Viking landing sites had been chosen purposely “for their blandness,” as free as possible from geological hazard; the rocks visible in the Viking 2 transmission were evidence of “an enormous exuberance of geological processes.” Meanwhile, two of Viking 1 ’s three biological instruments repeated their samplings of Mars soil from the plain of Chryse, with ambiguous results. The experiment that used nutrients to detect life processes in the soil registered about the same number of radioactive counts (suggesting that the nutrient was being metabolized) as the first trial had. The photosynthesis detector registered only a third as much activity as the first sample, however. The NYT pointed out that the Viking 2 lander would deploy its instruments in an environment different from that of Viking 1. Utopia, nearer the Martian north pole than Chryse, was expected to have a layer of water-containing permafrost underlying the surface; as the Martian summer was at its warmest in the Utopia region, scientists hoped for a better chance of life-identifying experiments at the Utopia site. Exobiologists had noted that, if Viking 2 results were more suggestive of life, they would feel encouraged; if the results were the same as those from Viking 1, this at least would show that the first reports were reliable. {NYT, 5 Sept 76, 1, 4-5; WStar, 5 Sept 76, A— 1; WPost, 5 Sept 76, An editorial in the NYT said the Viking engineers from government and private industry had needed luck to achieve two successful landings in two attempts; luck would have been inadequate without the “superb design and technical foresight” that had anticipated and forestalled many problems. {NYT, 6 Sept 76, 14) Project Manager Martin reported 5 Sept, that what had appeared to be a tear in an antenna was probably dirt, spattered up when Viking 2 landed. The successful uncaging of the Viking 2 seismometer met with cheers from the geophysicists on the project who had been marking time since the Viking 1 instrument failed to unlock. Dr. Nafi Toksoz, a seismologist from MIT, said that lack of data from more than one point on Mars would make triangulation (and precise location of seismic disturbances) impossible, but even one instrument might answer questions about the nature of the planet’s interior and the level of tectonic activity. He predicted that Mars would be “more active than the moon and less active than the earth.” {W Star, 6 Sept 76, A-3) As Viking 2 prepared to reach for soil samples, project scientists speculated on the possibility of mobile landers to explore the terrain and collect samples for study on earth. Dr. Elliott C. Morris of the U.S. Geological Survey said he felt like a child with nose pressed against a candy-store window, the “goodies forever beyond his reach.” Like the Soviet Lunokhods that moved about on the moon, Mars landers with wheels or tractor treads could be set down in a relatively flat area and sent into mountains, canyons, and craters far more dramatic than similar features on earth. Project Manager Martin noted that such a mission could be launched in 1981 to land on Mars the following year: a backup lander in storage at Martin Marietta’s Denver plant could be modified to make it mobile, and a spare orbiter was in storage at JPL, control center for the Viking missions managed by LaRC for NASA. Walter Sullivan of the NYT commented that the vivid detail in the panoramas transmitted from the cameras on the two landers had given the viewers the urge to go on over the horizon to see what lay beyond. (NYT, 7 Sept 76, 21) The first weather report from the Viking 2 lander disclosed that Mars weather was almost the same in the northern latitudes as in the tropics this time of year, except that winds in the northern regions shifted more often. Dr. Seymour L. Hess of Fla. State Univ., leader of the Viking weather team, said the findings were as predicted, the winds changing in patterns similar to those in similar regions on earth. Bitterly cold temperatures on the Utopia plains—warmer than at Chryse, where the nights were longer—were no colder than Arctic or Antarctic temperatures at night on earth. The soil at Utopia appeared red in the Viking 2 photographs, but not as red as the surface at Chryse. The red color resulted from oxidation of iron in the Martian soil, which had an iron content of 14%, richer in iron than almost any soil on earth. The Viking scientists theorized that the paler soil at Utopia resulted from the presence of water, which would wash out some of the redness by forming hydrates or sulfates with other minerals in the soil. (W Post, 8 Sept 76, A-7)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a new approach to issuance of 2 parallel contracts, to be awarded for studies of a space industrialization effort that would run from 1980 to 2010. One of the study contracts would be awarded to an aerospace firm, the other to a research or “think-tank” firm, to obtain different viewpoints. The proposed work would consist of 2 phases, each lasting about 8 mo, and each contract would cost about $200 000. Replies to today’s requests for proposals were due 29 June, and contracts were to be awarded this fall. Whereas the space program had so far emphasized scientific and other exploratory activities, space industrialization would emphasize production of goods and services for economic benefit. First phase of the study would define goals, establish the rationale for a space program on the basis of terrestrial alternatives, and set up a time frame with options and budgetary considerations. The second phase would study future mission opportunities and the optimum role of man in the program, responsiveness of the concepts to national and industrial needs and goals, and technological implications as against costs. (MSFC Release 76-98; NASA Release 76-107)
Johnson Space Center awarded a $96 000 contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. of Denver for a study of equipment needed to construct a solar-power satellite (SPS) in geosynchronous orbit, in or about 1990. The 9-mo contract called for conceptual design and system definition of equipment to support construction of large space systems in orbit, assuming use of the Space Shuttle, and for defining development and maintenance costs of such equipment. (JSC Release 76-62) —JSC selected Alpha Bldg. Corp. of Houston for negotiations leading to award of a $1 369 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract for construction support services at the Center, including minor construction and other site work—alteration of laboratory systems, facilities, utilities, roads, sewers, walks, etc.—required by space programs and normally for projects estimated at $10 000 or less. The contract would begin 1 December 1976 and end 30 November 1977, with the option for the government to extend the contract for two additional 1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-63) November 1976
Women would definitely be admitted to the U.S. space program, the Chicago Tribune reported, and NASA would make a formal announcement in July. Only one woman—Russia’s Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited for 3 days on Vostok 6 in June 1963—had been in space so far. The U.S. space women would fly on the Space Shuttle scheduled to be operational by 1980; the exact number had not been determined, but they would form part of a group of 15 mission specialists who would be chosen within the coming year. Screening, evaluation, and physical examination of applicants would be completed by Dec. 1977, and selectees would join NASA as candidates for space flight by July 1978. (B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
An around-the-world auto race planned for mid-1976 as part of the U.S. Bicentennial celebration would feature a 1914 Model T Ford, tracked by a NASA satellite from the starting point in Paris to its termination in New York City, NASA announced. The car, driven by Goddard Space Flight Center employee Robert H. Pickard, would carry a 13.6-kg electronics package that would transmit the car’s ground speed to the random-access measuring system (RAMS) carried on NASA’S Nimbus 6 meteorological satellite that covers the entire globe once every 12 hr. Nimbus 6 would relay information to GSFC through a ground station in Alaska. The auto race would demonstrate use of the RAMS system for ground tracking applications where transmissions could encounter various kinds of interference; normally, RAMS would collect data from instruments on moving platforms such as balloons or buoys to allow calculation of wind or sea-surface movements. Pickard, a car enthusiast, had worked in the space program since the Vanguard days and was presently project manager for the comsat-metesat system called GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellite). (NASA Release 76-23)
Eight nations located on the equator had claimed sovereignty over the orbital locations of space satellites stationed above their territory, the Washington Star reported. The foreign ministry of Colombia listed the nations as Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Congo, Kenya, Uganda, Zaire, and Indonesia. (WStar, 11 Dec 76, A-4) , of the formation after an airlift to the site from the McMurdo Sound station. The body of rock in the Pensacola Mts., first reached by explorers in 1957 and first studied in the 1965-66 season, was a layered structure produced by eruptions from earth’s interior and “strikingly similar” to productive formations elsewhere in the world, such as the Bushveld complex of S. Africa, the Stillwater formation of Montana, and the Sudbury region of Ontario. A Soviet party in the Shackleton Range to the northeast, a similar area, reported findings which the leader of the USGS group, Dr. Arthur B. Ford, hoped to visit by air. Dr. Edward S. Grew of UCLA, who had spent the Antarctic winter at the Soviet Molodezhnaya base, had been working with the Russians from a temporary camp in the Lambert Glacier, near which “a mountain of iron” was reported recently. Meanwhile, a Natl. Science Foundation project that aimed at drilling a hole through the Ross Ice Shelf was proceeding with the participation of 10 nations, seeking to explore the depths below the ice for data on the Antarctic bottom water, indirectly responsible for much of the world’s oceanic food, and to learn whether the ice sheet might eventually slip into the sea, raising global sea levels by as much as 10 meters. Countries participating with the U.S. in the Ross Ice Shelf Project (RISP) were Australia, Britain, Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Soviet Union, Switzerland, and West Germany. The NYT commented editorially that the Antarctic continent posed a number of scientific problems still unanswered in the age of space that had seen visits to and returns from the moon; close photographs of the moon and planets; and regular reports by man-made instruments on the surfaces of Mars and Venus. The RISP—an example of “continued, steady, quiet international cooperation” in Antarctic research—was “one of the great success stories of the post-1945 world,” encountering temporary setbacks that would be overcome in time as were those of the space program, the NYT added. {NYT, 12 Dec 76, 1-1; 19 Dec 76, 26; 20 Dec 76, A-22)
The Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., NASA’s prime site for experimental research in aeronautics, was renamed the Hugh L. Dryden Flight Research Center in memory of the pioneer aeronautical researcher who was first Deputy Administrator of NASA, a position he held until his death in 1965. Dr. Dryden’s contributions to aeronautical research included investigation of high-speed airfoils, supersonic propeller-tip velocities, boundary layers, and airflow wind turbulence, and development of high-speed wind tunnels. He was director of the former National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics from 1947 until that agency became NASA in 1958. (NASA Release 76-7; FRC Release 1-76; Goddard News, Feb 76, 6)
President Ford would name Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of the National Science Foundation for the past 4 yr, to head the recently reestablished White House Office of Science and Technology, the New York Times reported. The post had been abolished by President Nixon 3 yr ago “amid reports that he did not like the advice he was getting from it, particularly concerning antiballistic missiles and supersonic planes,” the Times said. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine had reported earlier that 4 conservative Republican senators had warned President Ford that Stever’s nomination would be an “affront” to Congress; the NSF had been a target of some congressmen because of funding projects that Congress considered questionable, Av Wk said. Other candidates for the position had shied away because of a possible change in administration after the forthcoming elections. Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) urged quick action on the nomination; the Senate Appropriations Committee had just cut $1 million from a $3.3-million budget estimate for the Office of Science and Technology. (NYT, 22 July 76, 37; Av Wk, 5 July 76, 13) with pleasure at the accomplishment,” when “it was commercial time . . . and the 9 a.m. programs.” Viewers were “left wondering whether there was really an event of such magnitude being televised or more science fiction,” the Star commented. (WStar, 21 July 76, B-l) Commentary on the Viking landing on Mars: The Chicago Tribune hailed the mission as “an epoch-making success . . . The achievement is the greater because the world has known from the beginning what we were attempting to do. There would have been no way to hide a failure.” (C Trib, 21 July 76, 1-7) The Phila. Inquirer called the landing “another giant leap for mankind” that “underscores the sophistication of unmanned spacecraft . . . Risks can be taken . . . that could not be justified with persons aboard ... Its performance in the first hours on Mars speaks more eloquently than words.” (P Inq, 21 July 76, 5-A) The NY Times said the TV networks were criticized for their coverage; Dr. J. Richard Keefe, former NASA scientist now at the Univ. of Louisville, said the coverage was “downright disgusting . . . Talk about being blase about space exploration, this was just incredible ... I think the population has become apathetic about the whole space program. It’s kind of sad, I think.” Spokesmen for the network told the Times they had given 20 to 25 min of coverage, showing the 2 pictures transmitted by Viking 1 and released by JPL where the transmission was received. NBC said its New York City switchboard had about 30 calls asking for more; ABC reported 25, and CBS reported 8 or 10. ABC said the number of calls was significant “for the time of day.” “What they may not have understood was that we showed whatever we had,” the spokesman said. “That was it.” (NYT, 21 July 76, 12) The Wall Street Journal said in an editorial that it could not “speculate with any confidence on why yesterday’s Viking / landing on Mars was important. And yet we are confident that it was.” The TV networks that “spent tedious hours broadcasting the dullest political convention on record” a wk ago “were preoccupied with game shows” while Viking was sending back its first pictures of the surface of another planet. However, those who said the $1 billion cost of the project was wasted unless Viking’s cameras pick up “ something interesting, like a local resident,” would be missing the point, WSJ added. The project demonstrated application of the most advanced technology to a single objective, advanced managerial skills as “a triumph of human organization,” and left mankind with the psychic effects of the visit to another planet. “ . . . After each leap deeper into space, nothing is quite the same again.” (WSJ, 21 July 76, 22) A Washington Star editorial said that Viking 1 may have “ended generations of fanciful imaginings” about life on Mars, and asked if it was worth 7 yr of effort and $1 billion “to get a rather sobering view of what our imaginations told us was a fascinating planet.” Although it was much too early to predict the “ultimate scientific harvest,” the Star said “we have no doubt that the ultimate payoff will be more than adequate in scientific if not in fictional terms.” (W Star, 22 July 76, A-14) The first color photograph of Mars, showing a dramatic blue sky against a rust-red soil surface, was in error, Viking project scientists announced. Astronomer Carl Sagan said that someone had given the wrong weighting to the color filters in reconstructing the electronic image on earth, and that corrected photos would show a pinker sky. The seismometer on the Viking lander had apparently jammed and would impair detection of “marsquakes” unless corrected; Lou Kingsland, deputy mission director, said the proper command might not have been issued or the problem might be in the electrical circuits. {WStar, 22 July 76, A—1) Having successfully set down the Viking 1 lander in a safe spot, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., announced that Viking 2 would be sent to a region likely to be more scientifically interesting even with less assurance of safe touchdown. Cydonia, a region halfway between the Mars equator and north pole, was considered because of a greater likelihood of water, required for the presence of life as we know it. Viking project scientists said they were eager to survey a site as different physically from the desert Chryse site as possible. Viking 2, still more than 1.6 million km from Mars, would arrive in orbit there early in Aug. and land about 4 Sept, if all went well. Debate on the second landing site focused on possible hazards in the northern region, out of range of the radar signals that led to choice of the first site. Astronomer Carl Sagan said the first landing was “reasonably lucky,” with chances of success calculated at only 60%, and the northern site would be less promising. However, he and the other scientists voted overwhelmingly for Cydonia because, as Sagan said, “it is not only the probability of success but the significance of success” that merited consideration. (WStar, 22 July 76, A-6) Asked about the role of luck in the successful Viking 1 landing on Mars, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., replied, “I don’t plan on luck .... I believe that most of what you call luck you make yourself. It’s people doing that extra job ...” Martin’s management approach during his 8 yr with the Viking project had been to “get into the details of everything .... I’ve never known any other way to be successful .... It inspires and motivates the next level of management to get involved.” (ATT, 22 July 76, 24) The “most electrifying new information” received from Mars since the Viking 1 landing was that the Martian atmosphere contained 3% nitrogen, an element essential to life as we know it, said the NY Times. Until this week, the absence of nitrogen on Mars had been the most compelling argument against existence of life “in any form” on Mars; now this argument had been removed. (ATT, 22 July 76, 30) JPL scientists were still hedging on the color of the Martian sky, after announcing that photographs released earlier showing a blue sky might have been processed wrongly. Astronomer Carl Sagan noted that the “boos given to (the) announcement about a pink sky reflect our wish for Mars to be just like the earth.” Dr. Thomas Mutch, leader of the Viking imaging team, said computer verification of the filtered signals for color reconstruction could take another wk or two. (WStar, 23 July 76, A-l) Viking Mission Director A. Thomas Young told a news conference that the problem with the lander’s soil-sampling arm was probably an error in the computer command that failed to drop a locking pin near the arm’s “wrist.” A new set of commands to extend the arm further and free the pin would be sent 24 or 25 July. The arm would scoop up soil and drop it in a hopper on the spacecraft that would distribute it to 3 biology experiments aimed at detecting signs of life on the planet. Other scoops would be used for chemical analysis. (ATT, 24 July 76, 1) Besides the trouble with its soil sampler, the Viking 1 lander was having radio problems, said Project Manager Martin. One of two receivers getting direct communications from earth was not working properly, and the radio for relaying data from the lander to its orbiter was operating in a low-power mode. Also, the instrument for detecting “mars-quakes” had not been released from its “caged” position on the lander despite repeated commands. A special scientific team was checking to see if all the problems were related, perhaps in the computer signals to the electrical circuitry. ( W Star, 23 July 76, A-3) Mars was a very much richer and larger planet than the airless and waterless moon, said a NY Times editorial, with a firm surface and virtually every essential required for life. Barring the catastrophe of a nuclear war, Mars could be sustaining a human population “by the time of this nation’s Tricentennial,” the paper said. (NYT, 25 July 76, A— 16) “I really do not know what the fuss is all about—landing on Mars, I mean. I landed there 40 years ago,” said Buster Crabbe, who played both Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers in movies of the 1930s. Crabbe, who won the 400-m freestyle swimming gold medal in the 1932 Olympic games, was hired by Paramount Pictures to do a Tarzan film, and wentron to star in space pictures. “People still remember old Flash,” the 68-yr-old Crabbe said. “Here I am still around, no ill effects from my space travel .... I do feel sorry for our space people though, having to go through all the things we did years ago. I don’t think they know what’s in store for them. Just wait till they run into the clay men and the hawk men and the shark men.” (NYT, 25 July 76, E17; Tucson Ariz. Daily Star, 30 July 76, A-19) Viking 1 did not relay any picture of life-sized Martians to earth because it landed in the wrong place, charged columnist Art Buchwald in the Wash. Post. Buchwald reported his friend, a science-fiction buff, as saying the scientists were interested only in finding “a smooth place to set down the camera.” If the/Martians sent a camera to earth, the smoothest place to land it would be the Sahara desert. “If you lived on Mars you wouldn’t pitch a tent on some barren spot where nothing was happening,” argued the friend. “If Viking had landed next to one of their canals, the Martians would have sailed their tall ships up to it and given us the greatest show ever seen on television.” (WPost, 25 July 76, H-l) A series of simple commands from earth freed the mechanical arm on the Viking 1 spacecraft reported to have jammed 22 July. The extendable arm would be able to dig into the Martian soil as planned, and the second Viking spacecraft would be able to land in Cydonia now that the Chryse area could be explored. The Viking was commanded to extend its arm twice as far as previously and to rotate it several times to free a locking pin inserted to protect the arm from vibration during its flight in space and landing on Mars. The command was timed to precede transmission of a spacecraft camera image taken soon after receipt of the command; the boom would not be in the picture if it had not responded to the order to extend itself in front of the camera eye. When the picture came in a half hour later, the mechanical arm was in clear view, and a surface shot clearly showed the locking pin had fallen free. Flight directors had not succeeded in uncaging a seismometer, composed of 3 delicate balancing beams to detect movements in the planet’s crust, that had been wired together for protection from vibrations. Spacecraft computer signals to electrify and burn the wire were not received, and a second command bypassing the computer apparently failed also. Detection of marsquakes might have to depend on Viking 2, scheduled to land in the Cydonia basin about 4 Sept. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) The atmosphere of Mars was once 10 times thicker and richer in gas than it is today, and “we could breathe that atmosphere” if it were richer in oxygen, said Dr. Tobias Owen of the State Univ. of N.Y., a member of the project science team at JPL, where the first samplings by the Viking 1 mass spectrometer were analyzed. Mars’s atmosphere was now 95% carbon dioxide, 2 to 3% nitrogen, 1 to 2% argon, 0.3% oxygen; earth’s atmosphere is 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.9% argon-40, and 0.03% carbon dioxide. “Mars is an intermediate planet between the earth and the moon,” said Dr. Owen. “We do not see a hugely abundant biology, but that doesn’t say there’s none at all.” Color pictures of the Martian surface near the Viking lander revealed a soil even redder than in the original picture received last week. Rocks strewn over the desert sands exhibited a red coating laid down years ago when Mars’s atmosphere was richer in oxygen and water, “through oxidation of the iron and hydration of the minerals,” said Viking geologist Alan S. Hinder. “We propose to test the hypothesis by cracking open one of the red rocks ... to see if there is any rust inside.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-l; W Star, 27 July 76, A-3; C Trib, 27 July 76, 5) Viking 1 ’s mechanical arm scooped its first sample of the Mars surface 28 July, leaving a sharp-edged trench clearly visible in a picture transmitted afterward by the unmanned lander. The 3-m arm, a tube about 38 mm in diameter, ended in a sharp-edged scoop that could dig into the surface with a force of about 13 kg if necessary. When the cover snapped shut on the sample, the arm retracted and swiveled to sift the sample into a funnel feeding into the “biology box.” This container, about the size of a large milk carton, encased the 3 experiments designed to detect life. Two other experiments, also located under funnels, were the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to detect organic molecules and an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer to identify inorganic materials, Sensors inside the funnels would tell whether the samples were sufficient. The 3 biology experiments were the “pyrolytic release” experiment of Dr. Norman Horowitz, to look for microorganisms that used the sun as a source of energy like photosynthesis on earth to build organic compounds, through exposure of the sample to radioactive carbon dioxide under artificial sunlight; a “labeled release” experiment by Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., to look for signs of microbial metabolism by tracing radioactive organic compounds injected into the Mars sample to see if they were consumed, releasing gaseous wastes that could be detected; and a “gas exchange” experiment by Vance Oyama of NASA’s Ames Research Center to provide a rich variety of foods in a liquid form—“chicken soup”—to the Mars sample and iook for changes in gas composition inside the experiment chamber that would indicate the food was being used. The biology-box samples would incubate for from 5 to 12 days before results were announced, and a positive finding would be confirmed by subsequent control experiments. The science team anticipated a long wait for any kind of answer, as well as the possibility that the answers might be contradictory. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief scientist for Viking, pointed out that results would be difficult to interpret: “you have to put yourself on the level of a microbe,” he added. The microbes might drown in the liquid, ingest the wrong food, or burn up in the warm experiment chambers. (W Star, 28 July, A-l, A-5) One of the five soil-testing experiments on Viking 1 did not receive enough soil to actuate it, project officials announced, and two attempts to start the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer working on a sample apparently failed. Project Manager Martin said the flight engineers were not yet able to determine what went wrong, because the sampling arm apparently worked as planned but the sample never got into the instrument. The motor driving a stirring rod to brush particles through a strainer did not come on, and scientists speculated the sample might still be sitting on the strainer. A photograph of the trench dug to obtain the sample had shown that the soil was surprisingly cohesive, “like wet sand,” according to Princeton Univ. scientist Dr. Robert B. Hargraves. After delivering soil to the experiments in the biology box, the mechanical arm made 2 attempts to dig and deliver a sample to the mass spectrometer but the instrument did not signal receipt of the sample either time. It was not clear, Martin said, whether the arm lost the soil on the swing back or was off the mark when it deposited the soil, or the soil in the hopper never filtered down to the instrument. The arm responded properly to the following command and delivered a spoonful of soil to the x-ray spectrometer with no difficulty. (ATT, 29 July 76, 1; W Post, 29 July 76, A-3; W Star, 29 July 76, A-3; WSJ, 29 July 76, 1) Viking project scientists debated the makeup of the Mars soil sample that might have been too thick to filter into an instrument opening. Dr. Ronald Scott said that, although the material was somewhat cohesive, “certainly something must have gotten through.” Deputy Mission Director Kingsland said the most likely causes of the apparent malfunction were failure of the mechanical scoop to obtain a full sample, or failure of the “level full” indicator in the instrument to signal properly. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, chief of the gas chromatograph experiment, said the arm might have come up empty from the trench after scooping for the biology experiments, and that a repeat attempt next week would take both possible explanations of the problem into account. Kingsland said the material seemed to have a consistency “something like wet clay.” Dr. Scott emphasized that this did not indicate water in the soil. The other instruments seemed to be processing their samples normally, and results from the inorganic-chemistry sampling in the x-ray spectrometer should provide the first assay of Martian soil as early as tomorrow. (ATT, 30 July 76, A-22; WStar, 30 July 76, A-5; CTrib, 31 July 76, 2) The first experimental results from Mars, returned 30 July by Viking 1 ’s lander, showed that the surface consisted of iron, calcium, silicon, titanium, and aluminum, in amounts that would be determined within a few days. The entire surface around the lander was covered with a very thin coating of vivid orange-red iron oxides that gave the plant its red or rusty appearance. “Mars is a painted desert,” said Dr. Gerald Soffen, one of the project scientists. Dr. Priestly Toulmin, leader of the inorganic-chemistry team, noted that Mars soil up to now could be analyzed only by long-distance methods such as light reflections from the surface; Viking had “picked up a piece of Mars and put it into an analytical instrument.” Dr. Benton Clark, also of the inorganic-chemistry team, said that Viking had not detected trace elements like vanadium or molybdenum considered essential for plant growth on earth; this did not mean the elements were not present, nor had elements like arsenic been detected that would make earth soil sterile. The results “do not rule out the possibility of some form of life,” Dr. Clark added. Results from the 3 biology experiments would be transmitted to earth within a few days. (NYT, 31 July 76, A—1)
NASA’s aviation safety reporting system (ASRS) received nearly 1500 reports in its first 3-mo operating period, which ended in mid-July, NASA announced. As a result of information in the reports, NASA forwarded 130 alert bulletins to the Federal Aviation Administration. Pilots and aircrew members submitted 62% of the reports, and air traffic control personnel 34%, indicating broad support for the program within the aviation community. About 99% of the reports included reporter identification that would permit NASA to follow up on the data if necessary; follow-up was used in more than 150 cases. Twelve of the reports concerned aircraft accidents and were forwarded to the Natl. Transportation Safety Board and the FAA as required; none of the reports contained information relating to a criminal offense. All other reports had the reporters’ names removed, as specified in the agreement between NASA and the FAA, before the information was forwarded. Review of the information so far had revealed some “less obvious problems” with the national aviation system, NASA said, and analysis would proceed shortly: problems included equipment malfunction, communications breakdown, flight operations, and personnel workloads. (NASA Release 76-177)
The Viking 1 on its way toward Mars might have lost the use of one of its ovens just as Viking 2 was reported last week to have done, project officials said. Each of the Mars landers carried three ovens to heat surface samples for analysis by a gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer that would determine atmosphere elements and search for organic material that would indicate biological or nonbiological activity. Loss of one oven on each craft would not affect the operation of the instruments, but would mean that only two instead of three soil analyses would be done. A separate biology instrument on each lander would search directly for life forms in soil samples. A monitoring device on the ovens was suspected as the cause of the test-data anomaly. (NASA Releases 76-14, 76-15)
Two scientific experiments carried on last July’s Apollo-Soyuz (ASTP) mission had produced spinoffs that would benefit sufferers from phlebitis and leukemia. Each of the experiments had used electrophoresis—passing an electric current through a solution to separate differing types of cellular matter—under the weightless conditions of space flight to produce results unobtainable in earth’s gravity. One experiment used human kidney cells in isolating pure samples of the 5% of cells that manufactured an enzyme (urokinase) effective in removing blood clots from veins and arteries, with major potential for treating persons with conditions such as phlebitis. The separated cells, frozen and returned for use as starters in a culturing process, provided 6 to 7 times more urokinase than the original sample. The other spinoff was the successful testing of a preservative medium developed for use on the ASTP mission that would make it possible to perform transfusions of a certain type of white blood cells in the treatment of leukemia; the preservative, used to freeze granulocytes on the mission, actually improved the survivability of the cells so that a stock of the material could be kept frozen for use upon demand, instead of searching for donors with resultant delay in emergencies. (NASA Releases 76-3, 76-5)
The boost given by the Viking Mars missions, now nearing an end, to those concerned with the space program might persuade Congress of the virtues of possible future projects, Science magazine reported. Describing 15 Sept, testimony of Dr. John E. Naugle, acting associate administrator of NASA, before a House subcommittee, the magazine said “some of the juicier projects the agency has in mind for the 1980s” might include a roving-vehicle mission to Mars, shipped aboard a Solar Sailor, “the closest thing the agency has ever proposed to a genuine space ship.” The Solar Sailor would be driven by solar pressure—light reflected from the sun, collected by huge lightweight sails—and was referred to as “a reusable interplanetary spacecraft,” Other future projects would be a Global Information Services satellite system to combine earth sensing, meteorological and pollution observation, data transmission, and navigation uses, all such information to be available to the public at receiving stations or home terminals; some sort of solar-energy collection system, either on the ground or in space; and moving “a segment of our industrial society into space . . . where there is abundant solar energy and an almost inexhaustible vacuum to act as a sink for thermal and chemical pollution.” Naugle and other agency spokesmen had noted that such plans were still in the design stage and the agency was not ready to discuss them in detail; however, Science commented, the Viking success might mean that for NASA “perhaps the sky will be the limit, after all,” (Science, 1 Oct 76, 39)
More new discoveries would be made in space than on the ground during the first 10 to 15 yr of Shuttle operations, a colloquium on bioprocessing in space was told by James H. Bredt, NASA program manager for space processing. The meeting of more than 200 industrial and academic bioscience researchers at Johnson Space Center heard reports on Space Shuttle and Spacelab capabilities and status. Noting that Spacelab would be able to carry 300 to 400 experiments, more on each flight than all other previous manned space missions combined, Bredt urged the audience to submit experiment programs that would make use of the new national resource. Participants recommended formation of a small group of bioscientists to advise NASA in discussions of space processing suggestions, and scheduling of followup meetings to define areas of interest so that programs could be developed before instrumentation development began. NASA spokesmen said more than 1400 experiment proposals for Shuttle flights were on hand, and Shuttle flight opportunities covering the first 2 Spacelab missions would be announced later this year. (Av Wk & Sp Tech, 29 Mar 76, 53)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, named the Ames Research Center to lead a program to strengthen helicopter research and development and serve as a focal point for industry participation and program management. A special helicopter management advisory group had made a presentation to Fletcher 28 May reviewing research needs and stressing the need for improvements in helicopters if the U.S. industry were to get a fair share of the market. Overall direction of the program would come from ARC; Lewis Research Center would conduct research on propulsion, and Langley Research Center would do research in structures and materials, avionics, and noise, ARC would also conduct research in aeromechanics, including technology integration and large-scale testing and simulation. (NASA Release 76-112)
Congress’s Joint Committee on Defense Production, inquiring into government-contractor activities involving hospitality or gratuities toward federal employees, revealed that Rockwell International Corp. had entertained Eugene A. Cernan and Ronald E. Evans, NASA astronauts, at a facility on Bimini in the Bahamas, in addition to 11 other NASA employees who had enjoyed hospitality at a hunting lodge in Md. Both Rockwell and Northrop Corp., another NASA contractor, ran hunting lodges on the eastern shore of Md. where 13 NASA employees and one former employee had acknowledged acceptance of entertainment. The DOD had announced it would reprimand its chief of research, Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, and dock his pay, for accepting a similar weekend from Rockwell. (W Star, 19 Mar 76, A-l; WSJ, 17 Mar 76, 17)
President Ford named Shuttle Orbiter 101 the Enterprise, over the objections of NASA officials who preferred the name Constitution and had planned the Orbiter rollout ceremonies for 17 Sept., Constitution Day. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had paid a 45-min visit to the White House to brief the President on the Shuttle program and to discuss the naming. The name Enterprise, illustrious in U.S. naval history, had been given to the first nuclear-powered carrier, to a World War II carrier, and to an American sloop in the Revolutionary War. The name Constitution had met with objections that the Shuttle was considered an international effort in which several countries would participate. Aviation Week magazine commented on the “power of an aroused involved public—especially in an election year” in getting nearly 100 000 fans of the TV series Star Trek to sign letters and petitions asking the White House to have the first Orbiter named Enterprise (after the space ship in the series) rather than Constitution, the name favored by NASA officials. Av Wk said the officials were concerned about commercialization of the name Enterprise in association with the TV show. The Washington Star in an editorial said it was “pathetic” that the public desire for drama in outer space had not been killed by the mundane discoveries on Mars, Venus, and the moon, and predicted that “nothing exciting will happen in the real-life Enterprise,” even though the naming incident confirmed a public desire “to associate space with adventure and suspense.” (WPost, 9 Sept 76, E-9, A-2; WStar, 19 Sept 76, E-l; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 26; 27 Sept 76, 11; Marshall Star, 15 Sept 76, 1)
The U.S. Navy launched an experimental ocean-surveillance satellite—part of the Whitecloud system developed by the Naval Research Laboratory—on 30 April from Vandenberg AFB aboard an Atlas launch vehicle, reported Defense/Space Business Daily. The satellite was in a near-circular orbit of 1122-km apogee, 1100-km perigee, inclined 63.5°, with a period of 107.5 min. (SBD, 20 May 76, 21) NASA Hq conducted a news conference on the Viking mission to Mars, with Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science; Robert Kraemer, director of planetary programs; Walter Jakobowski, Viking program manager; James Martin, Jr., Viking project manager; and Dr. Gerald S. Soffen, Viking project scientist, to review the mission and answer questions. Dr. Anthony Calio, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science, opened the session by recalling the work done on Viking over the past 7 yr that would culminate in Viking’s reaching Mars within the next few weeks. The U.S. for the first time would be operating 4 spacecraft simultaneously, 2 in orbit and 2 on the planet’s surface. Kraemer mentioned Galileo’s sighting of Mars in 1609, the detection of “eanali” on the planet’s surface by Schiaparelli and others in the 1800s, and Percival Lowell’s founding of the Lowell Observatory in 1894 followed by his publication of reports on “Mars and Its Canals” and “Mars as the Abode of Life.” Edgar Rice Burroughs, author of the Tarzan stories and “grandfather of science fiction writers,” began writing stories about civilization on Mars that had kept the public “waiting ever since to get down to the surface and see what is there.” Although, as Kraemer pointed out, 4 Mariner missions had shown that civilization did not actually exist on Mars, nothing had ruled out the existence of life, and that was a purpose of the Viking mission. Jakobowski reviewed the history of Voyager, Surveyor, and Viking, especially the 1971 Mariner flyby that revealed Mars as a dynamic planet. Martin, Viking project manager at Langley Research Center, said the 2 Viking spacecraft had been flying for a long time and had turned in “exceptionally good” performance; this would be the first mission to use optical navigation to confirm radio-tracking data, and the first set of results had shown the spacecraft to be “right on course.” Martin added that—as an expression of confidence in his team—a quiet period had been declared the coming week when most of the flight team would be on vacation; “the team needs that time off to get ready for a pretty active and hectic summer,” he said. A.T. (Tom) Young, Viking mission director at LaRC, showed slides of mission operations and possible landing sites, reviewing the reasons for site selection and what NASA hoped to learn in both scientific and engineering areas, concluding with a summary of expected activities during the first 20 days on Mars. Viking-mission audio from JPL would be available starting about 15 June. Dr. Soffen noted that the scientific questions about Mars covered more than the presence of life there, which was only one of 13 investigations to be conducted by Viking, and suggested that the press representatives “ought to prepare yourselves from an educational point of view about all the experiments other than just the biology.” The first question raised by the press was on the indicators of a safe landing; Martin replied that there would be 5—telemetry from a footpad switch; startup of the lander computer, accompanied by turnoff of the descent-engine heaters; drop on equipment-power bus with shutoff of entry equipment; and switch in data rate from the orbiter-to-lander 4-kilobit rate to a 16-kb rate for sending pictures to the orbiter. A question about turning on the backup lander computer got a detailed response involving detectors and switches in a complex procedure that occur when “the second computer hollers for help,” as Young put it. Other questions concerned dust storms, camera resolution, and chances of success; Soffen concluded by noting “if we knew the answers, we wouldn’t have to do this mission.” (Text, 20 May 76; NASA Releases 76-90, 76-98)
The U.S. Navy Dept, selected General Dynamics Corp. to develop its cruise missile, under a $34.8-million contract that would cover costs of integrating systems into the prototype. GD won the award after 2 yr of competition with Vought Corp., a unit of LTV; the Navy recently finished a series of tests comparing prototypes made by the 2 companies. Last week the Navy had ordered Vought to stop work on its version, after the company had reported cost overruns and the missile performed badly under testing. The cruise missile, a jet-powered weapon with an advanced guidance system, would fly at low altitudes to make detection difficult. The sea-launched version could be put into submarine torpedo tubes and fired from under water as well as from ships. In both the Navy version and the Boeing missile being tested by the Air Force [see 5 Mar.], McDonnell Douglas Corp. was maker of the guidance system and Williams Research Corp. the engine manufacturer. (WSJ, 18 Mar 76, 2)
Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, last man to leave footprints on the moon’s surface when he commanded Apollo 17 in 1972, would leave government service 1 July. Cernan, a Navy captain, would complete 20 yr in the Navy in June and would retire from both the Navy and the astronaut corps. Selected as a NASA astronaut in 1963, Cernan had had 3 space missions (including 2 (lights to the moon) and was the second American to walk in space, when he was pilot of Gemini 9 in June 1966. As lunar-module pilot of Apollo 10 in May 1969, he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had flown the module within about 15 km of the moon’s surface in a full-scale rehearsal of all but the final moments of the first lunar-landing mission 2 mo later. In Dec. 1972, Cernan and Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt landed at Taurus-Littrow during the last scheduled manned lunar mission. In 1973, Cernan became special assistant to the Apollo program manager, working on the joint U.S.-USSR Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; in Sept. 1975, he became chief of training operations in the astronaut office. (NASA Release 76-47; JSC Release 76-20; W Star, 16 Mar 76, A-2)
Marshall Space Flight Center and Dryden Flight Research Center officials signed an agreement to conduct jointly a comprehensive program of tests on the parachute recovery system for the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster. The program, to begin early in 1977, would consist of drogue-parachute tests and main-parachute tests, using single parachutes, and test deployment of the 3-parachute cluster (actual flight configuration) to be used in recovery of the solid rockets, largest ever flown. The parachutes, some 36.5 m in diameter, would be the largest used in the space program; Apollo spacecraft parachutes were about 24.5 m in diameter. The Dryden center would provide the B-52 aircraft for the test drops, as well as the flight and maintenance crews, and would perform the tests over the National Parachute Test Range about an hour’s flight from Edwards AFB in Calif. MSFC engineers would evaluate the test data to determine the adequacy of the system. (NASA Release 76-94; DFRC Release 6-76; MSFC Release 76-87)
An enormous explosion in central Siberia that shook the world 68 yr ago might have been caused by the crash of a nuclear-powered spaceship from an alien planet, according to the Soviet news agency Tass, reported in the Washington Star. Tass quoted scientist Aleksey Zolotov, who had just returned from a survey of a remote river valley at Tunguska. On 30 June 1908, a blast estimated as up to 2000 times more powerful than the first atomic bomb had shaken measuring devices all over the world and had been heard nearly 1200 km away from Tunguska. Trees had been uprooted as far as 50 km from the site, and ground tremors had thrown to the ground horses that were pulling plows as far away as 380 km. Most scientists had attributed the explosion to the impact of a meteorite or comet with a mass of 10 million tons and measuring mor' than 90 meters across. Zolotov told Tass that his survey team had found higher than normal radioactivity in remnants of trees near the site; also taken were samples of permafrost soil. “Our investigation . . . seems to confirm our assumption that what took place in the Tungus taiga was a nuclear explosion,” Zolotov said. “It is from this point of view that we are exploring the possibility of the artificial origin of the Tungus cosmic body.” Tass did not give figures for the radiation study, nor did it identify Zolotov beyond saying he was a “noted Soviet scientist . . . who has been studying the Tungus mystery for years.” (WStar, 15 Oct 76, A-4) 17 October: Two recently published hooks on “the worst disaster in aviation history—the crash of a Turkish Airlines DC-10 outside Paris that killed at least 346 people in March, 1974—” alleged that the disaster was not only preventable but was predicted in detail years before it happened, the Washington Post reported. Destination Disaster, by an investigating team from the London Sunday Times, aimed at inspiring another congressional investigation into “corporate and governmental interworkings that contributed to the disaster,” the Post said; The Last Nine Minutes, by Moira Johnston, was a more subjective and personal account of the same crash. Senate and House hearings in the summer of 1974 had revealed that a technically similar accident in June 1972 had exposed an error in the design of the DC-10: a faulty locking system for the door of the large cargo compartment. The 1972 mishap had resulted in a “gentlemen’s agreement” between the administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and the president of the Douglas Division, McDonnell Douglas, that the lock would be fixed but that FAA would not issue a public and legally binding “airworthiness directive” mandating the repair. After the agreement was reached, the director of product engineering for the Convair Division of General Dynamics, subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas for the fuselage (including the door), wrote a long memorandum expressing concern about the door. Neither this memo nor another Convair memo on the question of liability for the cost of modifications ever reached McDonnell Douglas, the authors said, although evidence existed that McDonnell Douglas was fully aware of the problem nevertheless. Turkish Airlines, which was responsible for maintenance after the DC-10 was delivered, was sharing in liability settlements with McDonnell Douglas, General Dynamics, and the FAA, according to attorneys, who said total liability from the crash would probably set a single-accident record. The Post noted that FAA had issued 147 airworthiness directives in 1973; in 1974, year of the crash, the number was 299; in 1975, the number rose to 445. Private consultant Charles 0. Miller, former chief of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board’s bureau of aviation safety, who had gone to Paris to assist in investigation of the Turkish Airlines crash, said in a recent interview that the Convair memoranda and other documentation that provided background to the technical decisions had been turned up by the liability lawyers rather than by the crash investigators or by congressional investigators. (W Post, 17 Oct 76, A-l, A-12)
The Marshall Star reported on a Bicentennial celebration at MSFC’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., that included planting of a “moon” tree to commemorate the 7 th anniversary of the first Apollo landing. Michoud was the place where giant Saturn moon rockets were fabricated. Participating in the program were Lt. Gov. James Fitzmorris of La.; MSFC Director Dr. William R. Lucas; and Robert Littlefield, manager of the Michoud facility. The tree was a pine grown from seed carried to the moon and back in 1971 oh the Apollo 14 mission as part of research into effects of weightlessness on seed germination. The U.S. Dept, of Agriculture had planted the returned seeds, and the seedlings had been set out in various public areas over the U.S. such as in Philadelphia’s Washington Square. As the tree was planted in front of the Michoud administration building, a time capsule was deposited to be opened during the nation’s Tricentennial in 2076. The capsule contained documents, tapes, and pictures relating to the space program. (Marshall Star, 21 July 76, 4)
NASA announced award of a $7-million contract to General Electric Co. and the Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. for design and construction of the world’s largest windmill to be located at one of 17 possible utility-company sites where it could produce energy for as many as 500 homes a yr [see 30 July]. Sponsored by the Energy Research and Development Administration and NASA, the project would be directed by LeRC’s wind-power office. Richard L. Puthoff, program manager of LeRC’s wind-power office, said that wind as an energy source could provide 5 to 10% of U.S. needs at maximum efficiency and usage. The 100-kw system built in 1975 at LeRC’s Plum Brook test area had been used as an experimental apparatus in developing the large windmill. (NYT, 8 Aug 76, 20; WSJ, 6 Aug 76, 6)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, who had retired in 1972 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Long-Range Planning at NASA Hq, said in a Washington Star interview that he had been brought to Washington in 1970. to “lend clout to NASA’s ability to get its appropriations.” His assignment had been to present to Congress the program of a manned expedition to Mars; “so many national problems” had arisen that Congress would not commit itself to another multibillion-dollar space program, and the reusable space shuttle was the only element of the concept that survived. Dr. von Braun recalled that NASA’s resources were cut to about a third during his last 2 yr at NASA, and the new organization with which he was associated—the National Space Institute—was created to “reach large numbers of people” and broaden public support of basic science, “where it is much more difficult to predict the payoff.” “Remember,” he added, “nuclear energy, which ultimately was used in the hydrogen bomb, was discovered because some astrophysicists were interested in what keeps the sun hot.” (W Star, 20 Jan 76, A—1)
A proposal for consolidating about 60 current federal programs— in areas such as health, education, child nutrition, and social services—into “block grants” to the states, with few strings attached. Proposed spending for defense represented a turnaround of sorts: defense spending had fallen for a while after Vietnam, then rose again in FY 1975 with the end of the draft and conversion to higher priced all-volunteer armed forces with an upward pressure on wages. The outlay in FY 1977 would be for weapons; more than half the recommended increase would go for procurement, research, and development. Defense at $101.1 billion would constitute a fourth of the total budget, as in recent years, and Social Security about another fifth. Interest on the public debt would add a tenth; these three items would account for more than half. Five other basic budget items—Medicare-Medicaid, unemployment compensation, civil service retirement, and veterans benefits—would make up three fourths of the total, leaving only a fourth of the total budget for all remaining government spending. Science, represented by $23.5 billion in federal R&D spending proposed for FY 1977, would use more than half that amount for military projects; the space program would get $3.6 billion, only 4% more than the current year and much less than price escalation. Highest priorities for increases in civilian spending on science would be colleges and universities, which would get $2.6 billion in research funds, and the National Science Foundation, which would get $812 million. NASA, under the proposed budget, would postpone purchase of one of the Space Shuttles for a year, and would drop its plan for a Mars-Jupiter-Saturn explorer. At the height of spending for the Apollo program 10 yr ago, civilian and nonspace science got 20% of R&D funding; in FY 1977, it would get 37%. (W Star, 21 Jan 76, A-l, A-10, A-ll; W Post, 22 Jan 76, A-l, A-l4, A-15, A-16; NYT, 22 Jan 76, 1, 24, 25, 26) At a hearing on solar power from satellites conducted by the subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Deputy Administrator George M-Low and Dr. John M. Teem, ERDA’s Assistant Administrator for Solar, Geothermal, and Advanced Energy Systems, were questioned closely by Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky), subcommittee chairman, on the ERDA and NASA responsibilities for the program. Testimony revealed that ERDA had prime responsibility for solar, as well as other, power-generating concepts, and that NASA had not requested funds for developing an independent program but was working on solar-power ideas to use in satellite missions. Primary goal of ERDA’s program, Dr. Teem testified, was development and demonstration of terrestrial solar-energy applications that were commercially attractive and environmentally acceptable: solar thermal electric, photovoltaic, wind, and ocean-energy conversion. Dr. Teem pointed out that the FY 1977 budget included no direct funding for energy R&D for NASA, as the basic responsibility rested with ERDA. Dr. Low added that, when ERDA decided that research should proceed, NASA would do the work with ERDA funding. (Text, pp. 192-227)
Three NASA employees were among 16 career federal employees selected as winners of the Natl. Civil Service League’s 1976 career service awards. In ceremonies at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., those honored included former astronaut Michael Collins, third U.S. man to walk in space, selected for his work with the Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum, of which he had been director since April 1971; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC; and Charles F. Hall, Pioneer project manager at ARC, where he had worked since 1942 beginning with NACA. (WStar, 23 Oct 76, C-8; WPost, 19 Oct 76, C2)
The Viking 1 lander touched down safely on a plain at the western edge of the Chryse region of Mars at 7:53 am EDT, 11 mo to the day after its journey of more than 700 million km through space began at KSC Launch Complex 41. Landing was within 17 sec of the predicted time; velocity at impact, predicted to be 2.4 ± 0.9 kps, was actually 2.49 kps. Within minutes of the landing, the Viking began relaying a photograph of one of its footpads on the nearby surface up to the Viking orbiter for transmission to earth; a panoramic view of the landing site followed. Distance from earth to Mars at landing time was more than 322 million km, and radio waves took 19 additional minutes to travel back to earth to signal touchdown. Spacecraft controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory broke into applause and cheers when the data arrived showing a successful landing; telemetry showed the descent curve fitting preplanned values as the lander’s aeroshell, supersonic parachute, and terminal descent engines braked the descent to the surface of Mars. The site at Chryse Planitia was chosen for the landing after Viking orbiter data and the giant telescope at Arecibo, P.R., showed that the primary landing site and the first alternative were too hazardous. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, who was at JPL for the landing, said that the intensive search for a safe landing site “really paid off.” The Mars landing came on the 7th anniversary of man’s first landing on the moon 20 July 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. President Ford, who telephoned JPL with congratulations after the landing, asked Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC if there were plans for a Viking 3. Martin replied that there were not, but that his team was “ready to take on Viking 3 plus Viking 4, 5, and 6.” The Viking 2 was expected to go into orbit around Mars about 7 Aug. (Mission Status Bulletin 35, 20 July 76; Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 1)
The board of governors of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that, at its recent meeting in The Hague 19—27 May, it adopted a 10-m class Standard B ground station to supplement the Standard A station long the foundation of INTELSAT’s global system. Currently, 114 Standard A ground stations with 30-m antennas were operating throughout the world, as well as 29 smaller stations used for domestic service, telemetry, tracking and control, monitoring, and limited telecommunications between 2 or 3 destinations. Broadest use of the Standard B station would be in developing countries that had limited telecommunications requirements. Under study for some years, the Standard B.station would use single-channel-per-carrier (SCPC) equipment that allowed routing of traffic on a circuit-by-circuit basis instead of in large groups or bundles, minimizing the capacity loss associated with smaller antennas; it also worked with voice activation, which would be mandatory, using satellite capacity for telephone service only when activated by voice signals. Adoption of the second standard for international service would mean a 40% drop in rates paid for use of the satellites, plus ability to route traffic to any ground stations equipped to receive the user’s signals, with no restriction on the total amount of traffic. Previously, the drain on satellite power limited small ground stations to providing service to only 1 or 2 other points. (INTELSAT Release 76-17-1) Viking 1 would scan and map the surface for 2 wk; its cameras would photograph the prime landing site near an ancient rift valley, and other instruments would measure surface temperatures and search the Mars atmosphere for signs of water. The new orbit would bring Viking over the planned landing site once each 24.6-hr Mars day (called a sol). The 2 wk of photographs and measurements were needed so that scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where the flight had been directed since launch in April 1975, could choose the safest and most interesting spot for their 4-ton bird to alight. The landing attempt would be the first U.S. try at putting a spacecraft down on another planet; the USSR had made 5 unmanned attempts, 3 on Venus and 2 on Mars. The 2 Venera spacecraft had survived on the surface long enough to send back 1 picture each; the third crashed. One Mars spacecraft had crashed, and the other was blown over after it landed by winds clocked at more than 300 kph. After Viking’s braking engine was fired, the main job of flight directors would be to navigate it into a path where its orbit would be lowered again, with apogee reduced from about 19 000 km to 12 500 km. The firing was successful 19 June, and the Viking neared the end of a 690-million-km voyage that began 10 mo ago. William J. O’Neill of JPL said the precision of the flight could be likened to “shooting a basketball in Los Angeles and putting it through a hoop in Madison Square Garden in New York City.” Viking was following a northeasterly path around Mars that would bring it within 1450 km of the planet’s surface; flight directors planned a second maneuver to bring it still closer over an area 20°N of the equator, called Chryse, where Viking would attempt to land 4 July, selected as a good place to search for signs of life or fossilized life that thrived when a river flowed there a billion years ago. Harold S. Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey, chief geologist for Viking, said that Chryse resembled California’s Death Valley or the water-worn dry valleys of Nevada or Wyoming, where ancient rivers overflowed their banks millions of years ago to deposit alluvial soils on the valley floors. Rock and soil in the Chryse valley appeared red from millions of years of iron oxide deposits brought down by the river overflow; Masursky and his colleagues hoped that the red soils would contain organic molecules, signs of a once-existent life on Mars. A photograph taken 19 June and released by JPL on Sunday, 20 June, showed the “awesome” Valles Marineris from about 360 000 km up— parallel canyons south of the Mars equator that, if extended together on earth, would reach from Calif, to Penna. The smaller was about 3 km deep, 64 km wide, and 645 km long; the larger was 6 km deep, 96 km wide, and more than 3200 km long. (Arizona’s Grand Canyon, largest on earth, is about 2 km deep, 21 km wide at its greatest breadth, and only 350 km long.) The northern hemisphere of Mars appeared covered with haze, which scientists said was probably from water vapor misting out of the cold surface as the sun warmed it during the longer summer days. Successful firing of the braking engine at 1:25 pm EDT Monday, 21 June, put Viking 1 into a lower orbit so that its cameras could begin to photograph steep slopes, craters, boulder fields, and other potential obstacles. On 27 June, Viking project manager James S. Martin announced that the 4 July landing was off; pictures of the primary landing area showed “too many unknowns,” and the site appeared too hazardous to risk landing without investigating other sites. As the Viking 1 cameras could not distinguish objects “smaller than a football field,” objects as yet invisible could endanger the landing. However, as there was no assurance of any hazard-free area roughly 20 km by 100 km anywhere on Mars, some scientists had wanted to go ahead with the planned landing. Previous closeups taken by Mariner 9 were not as detailed as those from Viking, and dangerous details of the primary landing site became more obvious with photos from Viking 1 coming in more clearly. The New York Times reported that the first alternative site was an area called Chryse Phoenicia, a basin about 30 km northwest of the original site; if that site appeared too rough, scientists would look at Tritonis Lacus, about 6400 km east of Chryse, although if this happened, the landing might be delayed until as late as the first wk of August. Project Manager Martin suggested delaying the Viking 1 landing, if it were not down by 25 July, until the Viking 2 (now 8 million km away) arrived in Mars orbit; possibly 2 Viking spacecraft might be orbiting simultaneously. JPL said flight tracking and control facilities there were insufficient to handle full operations of both spacecraft simultaneously, and a number of preorbital maneuvers for Viking 2 would be required starting about 27 July. John Noble Wilford said in the New York Times that the earliest possible Viking 1 landing would be 9 July, and other alternatives would take longer. Scientists, he said, were “dismayed by the rugged Martian terrain”—the primary landing area being heavily pocked with craters, steep escarpments, and a sprinkling of knoblike features probably remnants of erosion like that in the Grand Canyon. On 28 June, Viking 1 photographed a site about 300 km northwest of Chryse—the “northwest territory”—after pictures of the prime site showed it to be far more rugged than expected; the scientists wanted a landing as close as possible to the original site because they thought it offered the best chance of finding signs of existing or fossil life. The alternate site would be somewhat flatter and safer, but less interesting scientifically, O’Toole said in the Post 29 June. Photographs released 29 June at JPL showed a plateau in the Chryse valley originally picked as the Viking 1 landing site, where a curving and rugged coastline at the plateau’s base could have been formed only by an ocean-like surf. Pictures taken from an altitude of about 1450 km showed a crater with lava-flow traces more than 30 km wide, “a truly enormous scale” according to chief geologist Masursky. “The biggest lava flooding ... on earth are the basalt floods on Iceland, which are no bigger than a few kilometers across.” Temperature changes mapped by Viking were also dramatic: instruments on Viking registered differences of more than 60°C (140°F) between day and night in the same parts of the planet. Dr. Hugh H. Kieffer, atmospheric scientist on the Viking team, said that the atmosphere on Mars was almost perfectly transparent to sunlight, as little water was present to absorb it; “whatever sunlight reaches the planet gets right to the surface, which then radiates the heat back to the atmosphere to warm it up.” An instrument aboard Viking could tell when day broke on the Mars surface although it had no way of “seeing”; it measured water vapor in the atmosphere, and registered its presence when the sun warmed the permafrost that “literally pops [water] into the atmosphere when that sun hits the surface first thing in the morning,” according to Dr. Barney Farmer of JPL. Besides surveying possibilities for its own landing, Viking 1 was photographing potential landing sites for Viking 2 to give scientists an idea whether they might have to shift sites for that spacecraft also. (W Post, 12 June 76, A-12; 19 June, A-3; 20 June, A—1; 21 June, A-9; 22 June, A—17; 28 June, A-3; 29 June, C-4; 30 June, A-27; ATT, 21 June, 10; 28 June, 17; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 14)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
Rear Admiral Stuart J. Evans had been named NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Procurement, effective 1 June, NASA announced. Adm. Evans, the Deputy Chief of Naval Procurement, would assume his new post after retiring from the Navy 31 May 1976. He would succeed Rear Admiral Kenneth L. Woodfin (Ret.), present Assistant Administrator for Procurement, who had announced his plans to leave NASA after a year’s service to join a private firm. Adm. Woodfin had been Deputy Chief of Naval Material (Procurement and Production) before coming to NASA. (NASA Releases 76-68, 76-78)
NASA announced it would cosponsor a conference 21 Sept, at the Univ. of Conn, on transfer of biomedical instrument technology. The conference, also sponsored by the New England Research Applications Center, the Conn. Dept of Commerce, the Conn. Product Development Corp., and the Univ. of Conn. Health Center, would display technology developed by NASA for the manned space program to manufacturers and show how the technology could be applied to develop improved medical equipment and techniques. Hundreds of improvements based on NASA technology were already in use by the medical community, ranging from bio-isolation garments to a rechargeable cardiac pacemaker. At the conference, medical experts from NASA Hq, JSC, and NASA’s biomedical and technology applications teams would describe the types of technology available to industry and the medical community, and the role NASA could play in helping to commercialize new products. NASA’s program of licensing patents would also be explained. (NASA Release 76-144)
Officials of the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) threatened a slowdown at major U.S. airports in the form of strict adherence to rules on spacing of aircraft, the Chicago Tribune reported. The union, in a salary dispute with the U.S. Civil Service Commission, would use the slowdown to protest failure to raise flight controllers’ pay. Federal Aviation Administration rules would permit a separation between airplanes of from 4.8 to 8 km; if controllers spaced flights the full 8 km apart, schedules could be delayed by as much as 6 hr at busy airports such as Chicago’s O’Hare. The tactics, although inconveniencing travelers, would not affect air safety, said PATCO president John Leyden. FA A had issued a request that controllers ignore the slowdown. (C Trib, 30 July 76, 5)
Successful testing of a solar receiver developed with heat-transfer technology used by Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International Corp., for the U.S. space program was “a major step forward in development of solar electricity generating systems,” said Dr. Jack Silverman, director of energy systems for Rocketdyne. Using a large field of mirrors individually focusing the sun’s rays to a central receiver on a high tower, where the concentrated heat served to boil water into superheated steam, the system generated the steam at 1366 K and 738 newtons per cm". The central receiver was exposed to high heatflows approaching those encountered in rocket engines, and many times higher than those in conventional steam boilers. The development program was sponsored by the Energy Research and Development Administration; Rocketdyne was also under contract to McDonnell Douglas and ERDA to develop a similar receiver and thermal storage subsystems for a 10 000-kw solar electricity-generating pilot plant to be in operation by the end of the decade. (Rockwell Release RD-9) called Comstar D-l after achieving orbit. (NASA Release 76-75; NYT, 13 May 76, 51; Comsat General Release CG 76-115; MOR M-491-201-76-01 [postlaunch] 27 May 76)
LaRC announced that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking project, would resign in December to become vice president for advanced programs at Martin Marietta Aerospace. Martin, who came to LaRC in 1964, had managed the Viking project since 1968, directing work at JPL, at Martin Marietta’s facility in Denver, and at universities and subcontractor plants throughout the U.S. Martin Marietta had been prime contractor for the Viking project. LaRC said that G. Calvin Broome, Viking mission director, would become Viking project manager 15 Nov., directing the 18-mo extended mission from the control center at JPL in Pasadena, Calif. (NASA special anno., 5 Nov 76; LaRC Release 76-37; ATT, 6 Nov 76, 9)
The House passed, 330 to 35, and sent to the Senate an authorization bill of $3.t billion for the nation’s space programs for FY 1977, slightly less than the administration request, but $ 133 million more than for FY 1976. Research and development authorizations totaled $2.77 billion, nearly $10 million more than requested. The Space Shuttle would use $ 1.29 billion in R&D money, plus $40 million for 8 construction projects. (W Post, 23 March 76, 6)
President Ford announced his intention to nominate Alan M. Lovelace, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, to succeed George M. Low as Deputy Administrator. Lovelace had occupied his position since September 1974. Before coming to NASA, he had been director of research and development for the Air Force Systems Command at Wright-Patterson AFB, 0., 1967-1972; director of science and technology for Air Force R&D, assigned to Andrews AFB; and acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Research and Development for the Air Force in October 1973. The nomination required Senate confirmation, but no opposition was expected; if the Senate did not act by the end of the week, before its 4 July recess, confirmation might be delayed until after 19 July. (Pres Doc, 21 June 76, 1072; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 21; NASA Release 76-118)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
First FRG-U.S. venture was the German research satellite GSR-A, launched in Nov. 1969 and titled Azur in orbit. a solar orbit that would put it between 44 million and 144 million km from the sun, 3 million km closer than its twin, Helios 1, launched 10 Dec. 1974. Each Helios carried 7 experiments of West German scientists and 3 from the U.S. The experiments would investigate solar processes and events such as coronal, solar-wind, and interplanetary fields and waves; cosmic rays, both solar and nonsolar; dust particles and zodiacal light; and celestial mechanics. Helios 2 was the first spacecraft carrying a detector for gamma-ray bursts in space, whose cause and source had not been identified since discovery in 1969. Combining Helios data with information from other satellites might pinpoint the direction of the sources and permit their identification with visible celestial objects. The Helios spacecraft weighed 376 kg, with a 1.75 m cylinder carrying conical solar arrays on each end that gave it a spool shape; with deployable booms extended, Helios 2 would measure 32 m tip to tip. The solar arrays would provide a minimum of 240 w at aphelion—much more when closer to the sun—to power the data handling and transmission. Scientists also hoped for more information on the unexpected concentration of micrometeorites found by Helios 1; about 15 times more of these particles were detected within 53 million km of the sun than had been observed near the earth. Cost of the 2 Helios missions was about $260 million, of which the German share was about $180 million for spacecraft units, 7 experiments, and command and data-acquisition expenses; mission control would be at the German Space Operations Center near Munich. The U.S. paid for the 2 launch vehicles and the 3 U.S. experiments, plus support services, a total of about $80 million. A third Helios had been considered for launch in 1980 to measure solar activity at the height of the 11-yr cycle and to study Comet Encke. (NASA Releases 75-317, 76-2; MOR S-823-76-02 [prelaunch] 7 Jan 76, [postlaunch] 23 Jan 76; NYT, 16 Jan 76, 27)
The failure of Soyuz 23 to rendezvous with Salyut 5 indicated that the USSR was still encountering the technical and procedural problems that had beset its manned space program for the past 15 yr, said Aviation Wk & Space Technology magazine. The failure was the seventh in 11 attempts to complete various space-station missions and the second in a row for Salyut; the unplanned water landing that concluded the failed mission was the first in Soviet space history, but was attributed to “nothing more than bad luck,” said Av Wk. The rendezvous-system failure was the fourth Soyuz mission plagued by procedural errors or hardware malfunctions associated with docking: Soyuz 3 failed to dock with Soyuz 2 in 1968, Soyuz 8 failed to dock with Soyuz 7 in 1969, and Soyuz 15 had been unable to rendezvous and dock with Salyut 3 in 1974. Because the failure of a system on the Soyuz 23 ended its mission rather than any problem with Salyut 5, Western observers wondered how soon the Soviets would attempt to reman the space station, which Av Wk referred to as “military.” (Av Wk, 25 Oct 76, 23)
Officials of U.S. airlines told Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman, Jr., in an all-day hearing that lack of government help in financing the costs of government-imposed rules for quieting planes could lead to severe setbacks in service, such as wholesale groundings, diminished competition, fuel waste, less relief from noise, and possible loss of the national lead in aircraft technology. The airlines had suggested a plan last spring to set aside a fourth of the 8% ticket tax for replacement or refitting of planes that exceeded the new noise limits. Opposed to this plan was James C. Miller 3d, assistant director of the administration’s council on wage and price stability, who said that he would favor a “pollution tax,” imposed on planes inversely to the amount of noise suppression achieved, rather than “a subsidy from the public purse.” Secy. Coleman said he would make a recommendation to the outgoing Ford administration by the end of Dec. New noise rides promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration, DOT, were to take effect on 1 Jan., setting up a 4- to 8-yr timetable for replacing or refitting aircraft that did not comply with stringent limits on noise. (NYT, 2 Dec 76, 21)
NASA’s cancellation of a mission to Uranus by withholding funds in a severely restricted budget for FY 1977 had produced a “Uranus option” plan, sponsored by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, that would take a spacecraft destined for Saturn and give it the ability to go the extra distance to Uranus as well. In an interview with the New York Times, John R. Casani—deputy project manager of the Mariner project at JPL—said the necessary trajectories had been plotted, and modification of the spacecraft remote-sensing instruments to use at Uranus was already under way. Of the two Mariner missions scheduled for launch in Aug. and Sept. 1977, to fly by Jupiter in 1979 and Saturn in Nov. 1980andjan. 1981, the first mission would remain unchanged. The second Mariner, trailing the first by 9 mo, would fly a lower speed trajectory to allow a bigger slingshot effect from Saturn’s gravity for propulsion toward Uranus; the slower speed would also allow flight controllers to decide on the basis of the first Saturn flyby whether to use the second Mariner for a closer look at Saturn or to go for Uranus. The second choice would mean that, by 1985, U.S. spacecraft would have looked closely at all the planets of the solar system except Neptune and Pluto; a Mariner flyby of Uranus between Nov. 1985 and Jan. 1986 would take the spacecraft further out into the solar system, toward Neptune. Obtaining data on Neptune would take “a miracle,” Casani said, although the JPL engineers would not rule out the possibility. The infrared spectrometer on the second Mariner would be improved in sensitivity to detect the temperature of Uranus, twice as far from the sun as Saturn is, and 20 times as far as earth; also, the spacecraft would be able to photograph Uranus, 4 times the diameter of earth, and gather data on its magnetic field, atmosphere, and other physical properties. The Mariner missions to Jupiter and Saturn would cost about $305 million; addition of the trip to Uranus Would add about $21 million to the cost of the mission. (NYT, 1 Mar 76, 11)
Veteran astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Apollo commander of the U.S.-Russian Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975, received the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1975, the Natl. Geographic Society announced. Gen. David C. Jones, USAF Chief of Staff, presented the award, honoring the late Air Force Chief of Staff and given annually to the member of the Air Force, military or civilian, who contributed most significantly in the preceding yr to U.S. progress in aerospace. Maj. Gen. Stafford’s citation noted “outstanding contributions ... by his participation in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . . . [He] was instrumental in establishing the necessary rapport and spirit of cooperation vital to the success of the mission. Under his leadership, the Apollo crew laid the basic groundwork for future international technological achievements in space and proved that the United States is the acknowledged leader in space exploration.” Attending the ceremony with Stafford’s Air Force colleagues and officers of the Natl. Geographic Society were former astronaut Michael Collins, now director of the National Air and Space Museum, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, formerly Secretary of the Air Force and Deputy Administrator of NASA, now Administrator of the Energy Research and Development Administration. (NGS release, 30 Sept 76) During September: Ames Research Center’s Astrogram published an interview with the center’s first female aircraft mechanic: a co-op student, Maria-Elena Sanchez, enrolled in a airframe and power mechanics course at the College of San Mateo. She was one of four females in the program, whose total enrollment was about 200. As a mechanic at ARC, Ms. Sanchez was performing general maintenance and upkeep on Lear jets and the Cessna 402; for her work at Ames, she was receiving both monetary compensation and college credit. The college program required a student to attend for about 30 mo a school approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, then pass a written, oral, and practical test to receive a license in Airframe and Power Plant Mechanics. Ms. Sanchez, who held a commercial pilot’s license and had been flying since 1971, said she hoped to complete the program and obtain the A&P license within a yr. (ARC Astrogram, 9 Sept 76, 1)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
Employment in the U.S. aerospace industry continued downward, the annual employment survey by the Aerospace Industries Association said. Employment figures would fall below 900 000 by the end of 1976, compared with 925 000 at the start of the year. Peak employment in the industry was 1 500 000 in 1968. The predicted decline, amounting to 3.5%, would be spread among all sectors of the industry; greatest decline—about 6000—would be in employment on aircraft programs, much of it in plants producing transport aircraft. The continuing erosion of the high-technology manpower base was principally due to slackening demand for commercial jetliners, uncertainties in export markets, the level of government commitment to new or replacement military aircraft, and reduced investment in the space program, the report said. The forecast was based on data provided by 48 major firms representing more than 65% of total aerospace employment. (Aerospace News, 26 Apr 76)
Harris M. (Bud) Schurmeier, manager since 1972 of the Mariner Jupiter/Saturn project at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was named Assistant Laboratory Director for Civil Systems, JPL Director Bruce C. Murray announced. The new post would direct Civil Systems activities at JPL, begun in the 1960s to apply specific JPL capabilities in technical and management areas to critical problems of society, including technological transfer to energy, environment, biomedical, and transportation systems. Replacing Schurmeier as manager of the Jupiter/Saturn project that would send 2 instrumented Mariner spacecraft to the giant outer planets next year would be John R. Casani, former manager of JPL’s Guidance and Control Division. While serving as Mariner Jupiter/Saturn project manager, Schurmeier had also acted as Deputy Assistant Laboratory Director for Flight Projects for the past 6 yr; the latter position would not be filled immediately. (JPL release 5 Apr 76)
GSFC Director Dr. Robert S. Cooper presented a Group Achievement Award to the AIDSAT team for “the highly successful international demonstrations in which leaders of over twenty-five underdeveloped countries were shown the potential benefits to be derived from the application of satellite communications and remote earth sensing.” The demonstrations had taken place over a 90-day relocation period during which the Ats 6 was moving from its position over India to a new geosynchronous position over the western Pacific. The team—led by former GSFC engineer Paul McCeney, NASA Hq Office of Applications, as AIDSAT program manager; A1 Whalen of GSFC, as project manager; and John Wilhelm of the Agency for Inti. Development, as program coordinator—undertook to produce 27 programs for broadcast to as many nations over the 3-mo period. Three technical teams carried portable terminal equipment to three clusters of nations: A, consisting of Thailand, Oman, Jordan, Sudan, Mali, Cameroon, Uruguay, Ecuador, and Jamaica; B, consisting of Bangladesh, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Libya, Upper Volta, Central African Republic, Bolivia, Surinam, and Costa Rica; and C, consisting of Pakistan, Kenya, Morocco, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Argentina, Peru, and Haiti. Goddard engineers Dave Nace, John Chitwood, and A1 Whalen were managers of the A, B, and C clusters respectively. The high-level government officials and businessmen in the participating countries who took part in the programs included eight presidents, three prime ministers, a king, and a sultan. Each country received virtually the same 2.5-hr program format, which began with a personal taped message from U.S. President Ford and presented films on remote sensing and on earth-orbiting communications and meteorological satellites, ending with an hour of two-way direct video communications between panelists in the U.S. and the host country. Millions of viewers in the host countries watched the programs by direct or delayed broadcast over national TV networks, some seeing the first colorcasts ever received in their country. The historic experiment in telecommunications technology transfer fulfilled a promise to make U.S. technology available to developing nations, given by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger in May 1976 at the U.S. Conference on Trade and Development in Nairobi, Kenya. (Goddard News, Dec 76, 3-4)
Detente, to be meaningful to U.S. scientists, must include progress toward more intercommunication and openness, said Dr. Bruce Murray of CalTech and Merton E. Davies of RAND Corp. in an article in Science magazine. Noting that for nearly 2 decades the space program of the U.S. and the USSR were bound together through rivalry, competition, and— most recently—cooperation, the authors found it appropriate upon completion of the Apollo-Soyuz mission to review relationships between the 2 countries and focus on areas of possible common interest. The interrelationship with the Soviet space effort had stimulated both societies and had influenced the character of individual programs, the authors said. Future joint activities could take three forms: data exchange, cooperative experiments, and joint operations. Examples cited were exchanges of weather-satellite pictures, lunar soil and rock samples, and limited data on Mars obtained during simultaneous missions in 1971; the U.S. biological experiments carried on Cosmos 782, launched and returned to earth in 1975; and the joint operation of Apollo-Soyuz, which demonstrated the practicality of such missions despite differences in language, institutions, technology, and style. Joint scientiflc progress in space would depend on broader social objectives and activity, supported by popular enthusiasm for intellectual and generally human adventure, the authors said. (Science, 11 June 76, 1067)
Addressing the Utah Air Force Association’s Bicentennial program in Salt Lake City, NASA’s Deputy Administrator George M. Low gave a status report on ongoing projects such as Landsat, Viking, and the Space Shuttle, then speculated at length on accomplishments in space that might be celebrated on the occasion of the U.S. Tricentennial. Referring to “the beginning of the industrialization of space,” using the first-generation reusable space-transportation system called Shuttle to set up the first factories in space, he said “the real breakthrough” would come with energy collected from the sun and beamed down with microwaves to provide all the electrical needs of a major city. None of this technology, he added, was beyond today’s knowledge. He then forecast a cleanup of earth’s environment, communications applications of all kinds, and exploration of outer space made possible by discoveries using the Space Telescope, ending with descriptions of space colonies that would “become the real frontier.” He concluded by stating that “all of my projections are overly conservative” and could all become reality long before the end of America’s third century. (Text)
The Dept, of Transportation announced that the Federal Aviation Administration had awarded a $125 363 contract to York Univ., Ontario, Canada, for a program to measure ozone and the oxides of nitrogen present in all aircraft-engine emissions in the stratosphere. The program, to begin in the spring of 1977 in cooperation with NOAA’s Aeronomy Laboratory in Boulder, Colo., would use detection instruments lifted by balloons to an altitude of more than 35 km for the first simultaneous measurement of three types of nitrogen oxides and ozone; determining the high-altitude level of nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, and dinitrogen pentoxide would be an important step in finding the role of these oxides in maintaining the ozone balance. The contract would support the High Altitude Pollution Program, started in 1975 as part of DOT’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program; York Univ., which participated in CIAP, had in 1972 provided the first data on the stratospheric density of nitric oxide under the direction of Prof. Harold Schiff, a pioneer in the field. (DOT Release 76-122)
The “Historic Redstone Test Site” at MSFC, neglected since the final Redstone test firing in Oct. 1961, would be restored to its original appearance as an exhibit for visitors during the Bicentennial celebration, MSFC announced. The interim test stand, as it was called, was built by the U.S. Army in 1953 and used to test moderate-range Redstone rockets. On 31 Jan. 1958, a modified Redstone renamed Jupiter-C launched into orbit the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1. Another modification of the Redstone tested on the stand was the Mercury-Redstone, one of which powered the first U.S. manned space flight—that of Alan Shepard in May 1^61. The stand was the site of 364 test firings between 1953 and 196lRafter which it was retired from a space program that had become much more sophisticated. Painted in its original colors and designs, and with a Redstone borrowed from the Army Missile Command installed on it, the site would appear much as it did 15 yr ago in its new role as an historical exhibit. (MSFC Release 76-32)
NASA would buy the Department of Defense’s 2 Space Shuttle orbiters if the administration would give NASA an extra $835 million or so for that purpose, Aerospace Daily reported after a meeting between George M. Low, departing NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, DOD’s chief of research and engineering. The 2 agencies reportedly agreed that the nation needed 5 orbiters—2 more than NASA had planned to buy—and that NASA should buy them. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld were reported ready to meet to “firm up a proposal” to the Office of Management and Budget and to President Ford; 0MB might contest the need for 5 orbiters, Aerospace Daily said. (Aero Daily, 21 June 76, 22)
Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator of NASA, announced that he would leave government service at the end of June to become president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, where he received his bachelor’s degree in aeronautical engineering in 1948 and master’s in 1950. He had been a trustee of the institute since 1971. In 1949 Low became an aeronautical research scientist at NACA’s Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in Cleveland. When NASA was formed 9 yr later, he came to Hq^ as Chief of Manned Space Flight and was chairman of the committee that planned the Apollo lunar landing program. He became Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight before transferring to the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston in Feb. 1964 as Deputy Director. In April 1967 after the Apollo 204 fire, Low became manager of the Apollo spacecraft program; under his leadership, the spacecraft was redesigned, manned space missions resumed 23 mo later, and Apollo 11 made the first manned lunar landing in July 1969. Appointed Deputy Administrator of NASA by the President in Dec. 1969, Low negotiated the agreements with the USSR that led to the Apollo-Soyuz flight and other cooperative space projects. (NASA Release 76-54; Admr’s letter, 19 Mar 76; NYT, 20 Mar 76, 17; Marshall Star, 24 Mar 76, 1)
NASA announced that it would modify equipment and facilities used in the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz programs for use in future space programs, and that it would dispose of remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware that had no future application. Disposal would eliminate storage costs, free storage space, and make facilities available for ongoing programs, the agency said. The action marked the transition of U.S. manned space activity from use of expendable vehicles to use of the reusable Space Shuttle, scheduled to undertake its first mission within 3 yr. Although NASA, at the request of Congress, had kept its remaining Saturn-Apollo flight hardware since April 1975 in minimum-cost storage, to be able to restore it to flight condition if needed, the backup Skylab workshop and Apollo-Soyuz backup docking module had been transferred to the National Air and Space Museum; twenty-two H-l rocket engines from Saturn stages had been transferred for use in Thor-Delta vehicles. Much of the remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware would probably be turned over to the Smithsonian Institution, and other equipment would be screened for use in the Shuttle or other programs. (NASA Release 76-206)
NASA announced signature of an agreement between the Universities Space Research Association (USRA) and the Langley Research Center to provide university participation in the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) space research program managed by LaRC, which would use the Space Shuttle to launch and retrieve an earth-orbiting multipurpose-experiment carrier starting late in 1979. USRA was established in 1969 through the National Academy of Sciences as a consortium of 50 universities in the U.S., through which the academic community could work with NASA on scientific and technological developments in the space program; its headquarters was at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. The agreement with LaRC called for USRA to solicit, select, and implement university experiments for each LDEF mission, with funds provided by the sponsoring organizations. NASA would also seek participants in the LDEF program through a formal announcement of opportunity inviting private companies, research and engineering institutes, and other government agencies to provide space experiments for LDEF missions. (NASA Release 76-99)
Isaac T. Gillam IV, NASA Hq Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles, was designated Director of Space Shuttle Operations at Dryden Flight Research Center, effective 23 May. In his new position, Gillam would be responsible for development of test support facilities, institutional support of test operations, and flight and industrial safety for test operations in support of Shuttle carrier-aircraft testing and orbital approach and landing tests conducted at DFRC. Before coming to NASA Hq in 1963, Gillam served in the U.S. Air Force as pilot, missile launch crew commander, and ROTC instructor; he had done graduate work at Term. State Univ. while serving as assistant professor of military science. From 1963 to 1966, he was resources management specialist at NASA Hq and was then appointed Assistant Delta Program Manager in the Launch Vehicles Directorate. Named Delta Program Manager in Sept. 1968, he became Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles (including Delta and Scout) in June 1973. He received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work in the launch-vehicle program. (NASA Release 76-96)
Physicians at Johnson Space Center were gathering data on female physiological performance and tolerance limits as a basis for establishing criteria in recruiting NASA’s first women astronauts. Women employees of the center were asked to volunteer for testing on a treadmill and in a lower body negative-pressure device, to see whether women responded differently from men of comparable age to treadmill exercise and to stresses on the circulatory system induced by decreased pressures on the lower body. On the treadmill test, researchers would monitor the subject’s heart rate and blood pressure as they varied the speed and tilt of the moving treadmill. The pressure device, encasing the subject from the waist down, would have the pressure reduced while researchers monitored the reaction of the cardiovascular system to the change in pressure. NASA had issued a call for at least 30 Space Shuttle astronauts (15 pilot candidates, 15 mission specialist candidates) in July 197 6, with a closing date of 30 June 1977. Selection would be completed by December 1977. (JSC Release 76-65)
Ceremonies at GSFC honored 45 members of the team responsible for NASA’S Delta rocket, the “workhorse” of the agency’s most dependable launching systems. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher and Deputy Administrator George M. Low participated in the event. Delta placed NASA’S first communications satellite (Echo 1) into orbit 12 Aug. 1960; through January 1976, 119 Deltas had been launched. The Delta’s reliability and economy had made it the primary vehicle for commercial spacecraft, international users, and operational meteorological systems. The number of reimbursable launches for non-NASA users had increased over the years; of the 11 Delta missions scheduled for 1976, all but 2 would be launched for foreign or commercial users on a reimbursable basis, better than 80% of the total. Delta’s payload capability had risen from 68 kg to 910 kg. As Dr. Fletcher remarked, “Delta is becoming a standard against which to measure the conduct of NASA’S business in the future.” (NASA Release 76-27)
Dr. John L. Me Lucas, head of the Federal Aviation Administration, predicted that the U.S. would produce a second-generation supersonic transport, probably in cooperation with the Europeans, as a followup to the Concorde program. Speaking at a luncheon of the Air Force Association and in a subsequent interview with the New York Times, Dr. McLucas said that Congress probably would enact legislation to sharply reduce aircraft noise over the next 6 to 10 yr by modifying and replacing present aircraft. Biggest question would be how much financial help the airlines would get to carry out the plan: McLucas predicted that the airlines would have to settle for loan guarantees rather than outright subsidy. Calling the aviation industry “an endangered species,” he said it was threatened by low profits, lack of capital for new equipment, and absence of a national aviation policy; he asked for more cooperation between industry and government, and exploration of joint projects with European partners. “A joint effort to advance . . . the design of the next-generation SST would be in keeping with this new spirit of international cooperation,” he added. Dr. McLucas was secretary of the Air Force until President Ford transferred him to head the FAA. (NYT, 17 June 76, 49)
Jan A. Bijvoet (pronounced byfoot) of the Netherlands arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center where he would on 1 April become the new representative of the European Space Agency (ESA) in the Spacelab program office. Most of his career had been with transatlantic cooperative programs; from 1961 to 1970, he had worked for NATO as a senior scientist in the evaluation methods section of SHAPE’S technical center. Before coming to MSFC he had spent 6 yr in ESA’s aeronautical satellite program, a joint activity of ESA and the Federal Aviation Administration. At MSFC Bijvoet would be responsible for technical and managerial liaison between NASA and ESA on the Spacelab program. He succeeded Robert Mory, who had been at MSFC since the beginning of the Spacelab program in 1973 and had been reassigned to the Paris office of ESA. (MSFC Release 76-70)
Charles W. Mathews, NASA Associate Administrator of Applications, retired after 33 yr of government service with NASA and its parent organization, NACA. As a member of the science staff at the Langley Research Center since 1943, he was chairman of the group that developed specifications for the Mercury spacecraft before NASA was established. When Mercury became an official program in 1958, Mathews transferred to Houston (now the Johnson Space Center), serving as manager of the Gemini program. Upon completion of Gemini, Mathews went to NASA Hq as director of the Skylab program (then known as Apollo Applications Program); in 1968, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and remained in that position until 1971. Awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson in 1966 for contributions to the manned space program, Mathews received the award a second time in 1969 for contributions to the first manned lunar landing. At his retirement, he stated that he would “continue to devote effort to the further realization of the tremendous potential of space . . .” (NASA Release 76-38)
The European Space Agency announced plans for a NASA presentation on current status of the Space Transportation System to be held in Paris 12 to 14 May, for about 250 representatives of governments, national institutes and agencies, and industry of the ESA member states. Opened by Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, the program would be introduced by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Alfairs. Other NASA speakers would be John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight; Chester M. Lee, director of space transportation system operations; and Harold E. Gartrell, deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration'office. The Space Transportation System would include the U.S. Space Shuttle and the ESA Spacelab, as well as a new upper propulsion stage and a U.S.-developed tracking and data system. ESA representatives scheduled to present the Spacelab portion of the 3-day program would include Bernard Deloffre, director of the Spacelab program for ESA; Heinz Stoewer, Spacelab project manager; Jan J. Burger, Spacelab payload adviser; and Jacques Collet of ESA’s planning directorate. (ESA release 10 May 76)
Ames Research Center announced award of a $939 000 contract to Rattelle Memorial Institute of Columbus, 0., for aid in administering an early-warning aviation safety system for the Federal Aviation Administration. Under the 2-yr contract, Rattelle would implement a reporting system to obtain from persons in the national aviation system information on potential threats to flight safety; the reports would be processed to preserve anonymity of the informants and to make the data quickly usable to avoid or reduce aircraft accidents. An aviation-safety reporting system instituted by FAA in May 1975 had met with reluctance on the part of the public to report directly to a regulatory agency. NASA, invited to act as a third party, agreed to act as collection point for safety reports to encourage participation by pilots, controllers, and others using the nation’s airways. (NASA Release 76-52; ARC Release 76-34)
Commercial supersonic transatlantic transport service began with the arrival of Concorde aircraft from London and Paris at Dulles airport near Washington, D.C. The Anglo-French plane had been barred from New York’s John F. Kennedy airport under a ruling by the Port Authority of N.Y. and N.J. after Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, British Airways Concorde rolling out at Dulles Airport near Washington, D.C., after first touchdown 24 May 1981. (Photo courtesy British Airways) Jr., granted limited scheduled flights into the U-S, for a trial period not to exceed 16 mo [see 5 Jan.-4 Feb.]. The Concordes arrived at Dulles 2 min apart, British Airways arriving at 11:54 am EDT and Air France at 11 ;56, taxiing into a nose-to-nose position in front of the main terminal building. About 8000 persons were on hand for the landing, many of them leaving their cars and walking in on the limited-access highway because of the traffic backup; of the crowd, airport officials estimated that only about 20 were there to protest the Concorde landings. The French flight carried 80 passengers, the British flight 75; both Air France and British Airways had limited passenger payloads to 80 on Concorde flights until they gained more experience with the aircraft’s fuel consumption. The two carriers had selected Monday for the inauguration of North Atlantic service because neither would ordinarily offer a Washington-bound flight that day. Air France planned 3-per-wk flights, leaving Paris on Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday and returning to Paris on Monday, Thursday, and Saturday. British Airways would offer 2 trips per wk, leaving London’s Heathrow on Thursday and Saturday and returning on Friday and Sunday, One-way fare London to Washington would be $633.60; Paris-Washington, $827. The difference would arise from fluctuations in currency exchange. The trip took 3 hr 50 min for the Air France plane, spending 2 hr 53 min at supersonic speeds on the way. The British plane timed on its return flight took 3 hr 57 min. The Federal Aviation Administration had instrumented the Dulles airport with 8 permanent and 5 portable recorder units to measure the perceived noise in decibels (pndh) for a data base on all airport noise and especially Concorde noise. {NYT, 25 May 76, 1; W Post, 25 May 76, A-1, Av Wk, 24 May 76, 27; 31 May 76, 22) universities were resource persons for 4 news briefings per day, each scheduled for an hr or more, and 5 science workshops, meeting in the morning and afternoon each day, with a wrapup session the afternoon of the third day. Topics discussed were Jupiter’s atmosphere and weather; magnetosphere and radiation belts; origins, characteristics, and composition of the planet and its moons; origin of life on the planet; and Pioneer 11 targeting toward Saturn upon its departure from the vicinity of Jupiter. Pioneer findings about Jupiter—characterized by low density and high mass, 318 times that of earth, containing three quarters of the planetary material in the solar system—included discovery that Jupiter’s Great Red Spot, three times the size of earth, was not the only such spot; several smaller ones detected in the atmospheric flow around Jupiter moved in and out of the area occupied by the Great Red Spot without losing their own identity. Pioneer measurements of Jupiter properties— internal heat, composition of its moons—permitted the first detailed calculations of the process that formed the planet. Its history was apparently that of a failed star: it went from a gas cloud to a body heated red-hot by gravitational contraction, then to a 4.5-billion-yr cooling, still in process, that made it resemble a “white dwarf.” The four planet-size inner moons—Jupiter’s “Galilean” satellites—proved scientifically the most interesting; they exhibited a regular density gradient and composition that constituted the best direct evidence for Jupiter’s history. The protostar phases deduced for both Jupiter and Saturn indicated that the outer solar system underwent 2 different periods of relatively high temperature. Jupiter had retained for 4 billion yr its primordial heat, which could be neither radiated nor conducted away because of the planet’s composition. A “new metal”—liquid metallic hydrogen, simplest of the alkaline metals—identified only inside Jupiter is thought to constitute the planet’s interior, beginning about of a quarter of the distance from the surface to the center. As the substance has low thermal conductivity and is opaque to radiated energy, the heat cannot be dissipated, and the temperature at Jupiter’s center is about 30 000°, 6 times that of the surface of the sun. As Jupiter’s liquid regions are too hot for life, living organisms would have to exist in its gaseous atmosphere. Between the temperatures for freezing and boiling water, Jupiter’s atmospheric pressure increases with depth from 5 times earth’s atmospheric pressure to 10 times. Pioneer data suggest slow atmosphere-turnover times of months or years that would permit survival of atmosphere-borne life, said Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma of the Univ. of Md. Jupiter was 1000 times as large a region for forming complex organic molecules as earth, and a wide variety of environments would be available. The origin of life on a planet would depend less on huge time periods than on how often nature mixed the proper ingredients in the proper environment, Dr. Ponnamperuma said; enough billions or trillions of attempts could produce a highly complex molecule able to replicate itself. The fact that Jupiter’s atmosphere might provide hospitable sites for life raised the problem of contamination of that atmosphere by earth organisms riding on atmosphere probes launched by the U.S. and other countries. Pioneer also found that Jupiter acted as a giant vacuum cleaner, sucking small dust particles from a vast region of space (comparatively little dust was present in the Asteroid Belt), and 170 times as many meteoroids were striking Jupiter’s atmosphere as struck the earth in areas of similar size. Concentrations of these particles at Jupiter would be the result of the planet’s enormous gravity field. Jupiter’s magnetosphere—a million times the volume of earth’s—was found to leak high-energy electrons; Jupiter was the major source of such electrons in the solar system, and the sun and Jupiter were the only known important sources of high-energy particles in the solar system. The energy of these particles was constantly increased by recirculation through the planet’s radiation belts, said Dr. James Van Allen of the Univ. of Iowa. Earthorbiting satellites and other spacecraft had detected Jupiter electrons as far away as Mercury, said Dr. John Simpson of the Univ. of Chicago; an input of more than 100 billion watts would be needed to maintain the observed energies. Jupiter was also known to be the strongest radio source in the sky, except for the sun; the massive radio bursts were caused by the moon Io moving through the Jovian magnetic field, said Dr. David Morrison of the Univ. of Hawaii. Scientific detective work revealed that the bursts occurred every 21 hr—half of Io’s orbital period—and one of 3 places on Jupiter’s visible surface had to face the earth, which Pioneer data proved to be true. (NASA Releases 76-80, 76-91; NYT, 31 May 76, 14)
Prompted by the crash of a TWA flight near Dulles Airport that took 92 lives in Dec. 1974, the Federal Aviation Administration hired 6 veteran airline pilots to analyze air traffic-control procedures, but the findings were so scathing that the report had not been released, said an editorial in the Washington Star. The National Transportation Safety Board this week issued its findings in the case with a “rare dissent” in assigning blame for the Crash. The Star pointed out that, although the Air Line Pilots Assn, disagreed with the majority finding of pilot error and the Professional Air Traffic Controllers disagreed with the minority finding of ground-control error, leaders of both groups—and members of the board—all questioned FAA handling of its responsibilities. The Star called on new FAA administrator John McLucas, sworn in in Nov., to make air safety his highest priority. (W Star, 26 Jan 76, A-14)
Aerospace contracts valued at about $1 billion were hanging fire as DOD and NASA struggled over which agency would ask Congress for funds (beyond those already appropriated for development and testing) to pay for 2 additional Space Shuttles, said the New York Times. NASA’s commitment of 1971 was to develop the Shuttle system at a cost of about $6.9 billion, to include 2 Shuttles, the start on a third, and a series of preoperational flights into orbit beginning in 1979. The NASA plan envisioned a total of nearly 600 Shuttle flights in the 12 yr beginning with 1980, with a fleet of 5 Shuttles averaging an annual 60 flights starting in the mid-80s. DOD had earmarked $1.5 billion for Shuttle expenses by 1981, including $700 million for refurbishment of Vandenberg AFB in Calif, for polar-orbit Shuttle launches and $190 million for facilities at Cape Canaveral, Fla., plus $178 million for development of an interim upper stage ( a solid-fuel rocket to be ordered by the Space and Missile Systems Organization of the USAF from Boeing Aerospace, for boosting Shuttle-payload spacecraft into extremely high orbit). DOD had been maintaining for 2 yr that it would not have money for the 2 final Shuttles; Dr. Malcolm Currie, DOD Director of Research and Engineering, told Congress during budget testimony 3 March that paying for the orbiters would exceed what DOD considered “cost effective” amounts for participation in the shuttle program. DOD’s refusal to pay had caused “consternation among planetary scientists,” the NYT said, because NASA might be forced to cut much of its scientific space program in the 1980s to pay for 2 more Shuttles within a fixed budget. However, the matter should be resolved within a few wk, the article added. (NYT, 24 Aug 76, 37)
A joint U.S.-British astronomy project to study the remnant of an exploded star failed when a rocket-motor malfunction kept the x-ray telescope aboard from acquiring its target, a supernova remnant called Puppis A some 10 trillion km from earth. An English Skylark sounding rocket fired from the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia carried a NASA-designed flight telescope, fabricated and assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center, to obtain information on evolution of stars and the formation of neutron stars. Although the telescope assembly, as well as the detectors and electronics supplied by the United Kingdom, worked perfectly, a hole burned through one side of the rocket’s aft end produced more spin than the despin device could offset, said Richard Hoover of MSFC, principal U.S. investigator for the project. “Even with the residual spin, we scanned a portion of the sky in the area of the prime target and acquired data on the diffuse x-ray background [a secondary objective] . . . but we couldn’t lock on Puppis A in order to get a high-resolution map as desired.” The payload was recovered by parachute about 160 km down-range in excellent condition, Hoover said. (NASA Releases 76-62, 76-92; MSFC Release 76-54; MFSC Star, 17 Mar 76, 3)
In a special message to Congress, President Ford requested an increase in federal spending to $24.7 billion for scientific research and development in the energy, defense, and space programs. Ford said his request for the 1977 fiscal year, an 11% increase over 1976 estimates, included $2.5 billion for basic research. The budget asked $2.6 billion for energy R&I), a 35% increase over 1976, including funds for nuclear power, development of solar and geothermal energy, and fusion power; major increases were for energy conservation and for research on fossil fuels to improve direct combustion of coal for production of oil and gas. The President also asked congressional conferees to act quickly on bills to establish the Office of Science and Technology. (W Star, 22 Mar 76, 7)
America’s Bicentennial year might be called the “Year of the Communications Satellites,” NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher told participants at the Conference on Satellite Communication and Public Service meeting at GSFC. Recalling that Alexander Graham Bell had unveiled the telephone at the Philadelphia Centennial exactly a century ago, Dr. Fletcher quoted an observer’s statement that, of all the gifts young America had received on its 100th birthday, the telephone proved to be the most valuable; in 197 6, of NASA’s 19 launches, 13 had been communications satellites, which might prove the most valuable gift received by the U.S. on its 200th birthday. Comsats were in use by 107 countries or territories on 6 continents, Dr. Fletcher said, and more than a billion people—one of every 4 on earth—could witness an international event as it happened “live by satellite.” Not only had comsats been able to do current jobs better and cheaper, they had also opened new possibilities for public service. Development of small inexpensive simple earth stations would permit sending needed information to millions of people without present access to it, Fletcher said; very large antennas and high transmitter power in space would make it possible to use receivers on earth “not 30 feet in diameter, or even 10 feet, but the size of your watch crystal,” he added. To get the larger, heavier spacecraft into orbit, Fletcher predicted use of the Space Shuttle, making “runs to space on a regular schedule, carrying people and cargo for communications, scientific research, earth resources inventory, materials processing, and other tasks.” Use of the Shuttle would reduce the cost of putting a satellite in orbit from more than half to less than a quarter of the total cost of design, construction, and launch. Fletcher called on members of the conference to help NASA define the public purposes to be served by “an imaginative space program” that would involve users in its development from the outset. (Text; NASA Release 76-202)
The Federal Aviation Administration would stick to its deadline for modifications to McDonnell Douglas DC-10 jumbo jets to withstand sudden depressurization, the Washington Post reported, as FAA Administrator John L. McLucas withdrew from subordinates the authority to extend a 1 Dec. 1977 deadline set at the recommendation of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board. The modification, which applied also to Lockheed L-101 Is and Boeing 747s, was ordered after the 1974 crash near Paris of a DC-10 whose cargo door blew off in flight, resulting in the death of 346 persons on board. Depressurization of the plane crushed control cables running beneath the cabin floor. An official at FAA had granted a 1-yr extension of the deadline in Oct. 1976—without Me Lucas’s knowledge—but all U.S. airlines flying DC-10s had agreed to comply with the original deadline. Compliance dates for the L-1011 and 747 were 31 March 1978 and 30 June 1978, respectively. (WPost, 30 Nov 76, A-9) During November: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that, during the 69th annual general conference of the Federation Aero-nautique Internationale in Oct. in Iran, the 1975 FAI gold space medal was awarded jointly to Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the Apollo crew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and to cosmonaut Alexey Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz 19 crew. Stafford and his crew, Donald K. Slayton and Vance Brand, also received the De La Vaulx medal for establishing during the joint mission the world absolute records for duration, distance, and altitude in group flight, as well as the V.M. Komarov Diploma for outstanding performance in space exploration during the previous year. Their Russian counterparts also received the De La Vaulx medal and the Komarov award. Astronauts Slayton and Brand also each received the Yuri Gagarin gold medal, created by the FAI in memory of the first man in space, for their role in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes. Stafford also accepted on behalf of the U.S. ASTP team the Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics, for the planning and execution of the first international rendezvous and docking mission in space. (NAA newsletter, Nov 76)
The Space Segment Board for Aerosat met at Frascati, Italy, to review proposals for development, production, launch, and 7 - yr operation of two satellites [see 22 Jan.]. The space segment of the Aerosat program, conducted jointly by the European Space Agency, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, and the government of Canada, would provide an experimental system of satellite communications between transoceanic aircraft and the ground, leading to guidelines for an operational system to be established by the Inti. Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). During the program, two satellites would be launched into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean, separated by about 25° longitude, with a 7-yr lifetime; the first launch would occur in 1979, and the second 8 mo later. The space board, representing ESA, Canada, and Comsat General Corp., reviewed the proposals submitted by General Electric, Radio Corp. of America, and TRW; all were reported to be of “a commendably high technical standard,” but the price submitted by GE was below that of the other two. The board therefore authorized negotiation with GE toward award of a fixed-price contract. (Comsat General Release CG 76-120; ESA release 10 Sept 76) the passengers originate in the U.S. The statement also called for more flexibility in charter rules, the addition of domestic feeder routes to strictly international carriers such as Pan Am to fill seats between domestic cities, and elimination of cross-subsidization (promotional discounts) so that economy-fare passengers would not subsidize bargain-fare customers. (NYT, 9 Sept 76, 5)
“No useful data” appeared in photographs taken during the artificial-eclipse experiment on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine, quoting U.S. scientists who examined the photographs. This view contrasted with earlier Soviet statements. The experiment consisted of Apollo’s blocking out the solar disk while pictures of the corona were made from the Soyuz. According to the magazine, many NASA officials and U.S. scientists “believed privately before the flight that the Soviet experiment would produce only marginal results.” (Av Wk, 26 Apr 76, 11)
The USSR would probably put men on the moon within 10 yr to do more ambitious exploration than that done by U.S. astronauts, according to a report on Soviet space programs 1971-1975 by the Science Policy Research Division of the Library of Congress’s Congressional Research Division. Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, II, chief of the Science Policy Research Division, stated in the report that the USSR did not abandon lunar plans when Apollo 11 got to the moon in July 1969, but that the Soviet program had been plagued with “hardware and systems . . . quite inadequate by our standards.” In a summary of Dr. Sheldon’s report, the Washington Star noted his statement that the “race for the moon” was closer than many believed at the time; “the Soviets probably wanted to send the first manned flight around the moon by November 1967, when a test failed.” Although a Soviet Apollo would probably not appear for the next 3 yr, Dr. Sheldon said, “within the decade there will probably be a Soviet landing on the moon that will be a generation beyond the Apollo flights . . . .” Describing the extensive Soviet military uses of space in addition to scientific and economic purposes, the report noted “the seriousness and steadiness with which the Russians are adding to their space facilities and their space operations, building versatility and experience in depth.” The report did not mention the absence of this element in the U.S., the Star noted. The report would be published later in 1976 by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, for which it was prepared. (WStar, 2 June 76, A-3)
A select committee of the National Academy of Sciences, named 2 yr ago at the request of four federal agencies, recommended a 2-yr delay before banning aerosol sprays containing fluorocarbons. The group advised three “urgent” measures: drafting of legislation to regulate fluorocarbon usage when the need arose; action to require labeling of products containing fluorocarbons, so that consumers could stop using them if they wished to do so; and a campaign by public health agencies to reduce people’s overexposure to sun and the resulting malignant melanoma, incidence of which had been increasing by 10 to 15% a year, about a third of the current 8500 yearly cases being fatal. An international conference on threats to the stratospheric ozone, meeting at the State Univ. of Utah, heard Dr. James G. Anderson of the Univ. of Mich, report findings from a 28 July balloon flight of chlorine and chlorine monoxide at 35- to 42-km altitudes in quantities twice as abundant as predicted by theorists. The results had not been available when the NAS findings were issued. The NAS had said that a selective ban on fluorocarbon spray-can propellants would be necessary within 2 yr. The international conference also heard a report that nitrous oxide in the air was increasing steadily as a result of many factors (including fuel combustion and bacterial digestion of fertilizers), becoming as serious a threat to the stratospheric ozone as the Freons, with a 20% ozone reduction possible by the end of the 20th century. Bags of exhaust gases obtained from a federal test center for auto emissions had shown that the catalytic converters designed to remove hydrocarbons from exhaust had permitted considerable release of nitrous oxides. Dr. R. J. Cicerone of the Univ. of Mich, had estimated that automobile contribution of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere within a yr was about a million tons. Researchers from the Univ. of Calif. Livermore Laboratory at Lawrence had told a meeting of the American Chemical Society that better methods of analysis were needed to permit accurate predictions of the effects of contaminants on the stratospheric ozone. Supersonic transport operations, for instance, were known to affect the stratosphere but not enough was known about the forty-odd possible chemical reactions at high altitude to say if or how the ozone layer was damaged. William H. Duewer, a chemist on the Livermore team, added that, even if all the chemistry were pinned down, the effect of SST operations could not be determined precisely until meteorological factors were fully accounted for. The next 1 or 2 yr should provide new insights into these stratospheric processes, the team said. (NYT14 Sept 76, 1; 17 Sept 76, A14; W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-l; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 49) The biology experiments, which did receive soil samples, were progressing with their tasks. The gas-exchange experiment had already indicated a slower response to oxygen leaving the soil in its test chamber than was shown by a similar Viking 1 instrument at Chryse, where a high oxygen count had been considered a possible indication of life activity. Scientists had decided the reading probably resulted from “an exotic chemistry.” Dr. Harold P. Klein, chief biologist on the project, said the lower readings at Utopia might simply indicate “less oxidizing substances at the Viking 2 site.” The other two biology instruments were incubating their soil samples; both were transmitting data on background radiation for use as reference points later in the experiments, which would use radioactive counts to determine the presence of microorganisms. After seeing a picture of the lander’s arm, showing that it had rotated 180° instead of 45° as it should have, flight directors diagnosed the problem as failure of a switch. Project Manager Martin said it would be possible to override the switch and get the arm moving again by Friday, 17 Sept., when flight directors would order the arm to continue delivery of a soil sample to the x-ray instrument. At a news conference 16 Sept., project scientists reported that the first measurements from the labeled-release experiment showed 33% more radioactive gas count from the Utopia sample than had come from the Chryse soil: 10 000 counts per minute (compared to 7500) or 20 times the amount of gas that would be registered in the absence of metabolic activity. The scientists still refused to say the activity was proof of life, noting that, if organisms were picking up all the nutrients in the instrument, it should record up to 15 000 counts per minute. The gas-exchange experiment, which had detected some signs of activity in the Utopia sample but less than Viking 1 found in the Chryse sample, apparently provided an argument against the “exotic chemistry” theory because of the prolonged increase of carbon dioxide in the test chamber. Dr. Vance I. Oyama of Ames Research Center said of this result, which might be attributed to chemical reaction, “if it persisted and was accompanied by other changes, we can ascribe it to biological changes.” No decisive report had come from the pyrolytic-release experiment, considered the least ambiguous of the detectors. Project geologists meanwhile were scanning the photographs from both Viking orbiters and landers, noting especially the enormous scale of Martian topography. “Everything we see is ten times anything on earth,” said Dr. John Guest of the Univ. of London, adding that earth in comparison was almost as smooth as a billiard ball. Most prominent features on Mars were the volcano Olympus Mons whose base on earth would reach from New York City to Montreal, and a canyon long enough to stretch from New York to Salt Lake City. The plateau on which the Mars volcano rested stood more than 9 km high, taller than Everest, earth’s highest mountain. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey suggested that the outsize features of Mars existed because of the lack of plate movement on the planet. Mars, like earth, appeared divided into two “provinces” geologically, one area heavily cratered and higher, therefore assumed to be older; the other area was lower and smoother, considered to be younger. This division might be typical of all bodies of the inner solar system, as a similar distribution of “provinces” appeared on the moon and on earth. {WStar, 13 Sept 76, A-5; 15 Sept 76, A-2; WPost, 14 Sept 76, A-12; 16 Sept 76, C-l; 17 Sept 76, A-4; ATT, 17 Sept 76, A14; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7)
Further press comment on Soviet “hunter-killer” satellites appeared in the Chicago Tribune, Washington Post, and New York Times, prompted by reports of the piggyback launch of Cosmos 881 and 882 on 15 Dec. Columnist Nicholas von Hoffman noted Pentagon denials that the USSR had used laser beams to destroy an American satellite and claims that the Soviets had been practicing knockouts only on their own targets; but the physical safety of the U.S. was “more in jeopardy now than ever,” he concluded, adding that “of course, we’ll put our money into aggressive basic research efforts to stop the Russian hunter-killer satellites.” Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post described the launch and recovery of two Soviet satellites said by intelligence experts to be larger, newer versions of the hunter-killer craft, flown into orbit and back to base after circling the earth once, a move the experts said was to prevent China’s tracking the craft by radar. O’Toole said the Soviets were believed to have carried out 16 experiments in the past 9 yr in which unmanned spacecraft followed target satellites into space and blew themselves up to remove the targets from orbit; these tests stopped in 1971, but resumed in Feb. 1976 after the launches of China 5 and China 6. The two Soviet spacecraft followed an unusual flight path, similar to those taken by manned Soyuz satellites, and were also unusual in returning to earth after so brief a flight. The New York Times reported the launch on 27 Dec. of Cosmos 886, which “apparently attempted to intercept” Cosmos 880, launched 9 Dec. “The hunter satellite never came closer than one mile to its target . . . and finally disintegrated on its third orbit,” the NYT noted, adding that Cosmos 880 was still in orbit. The NYT story went on to describe the Cosmos 881 and 882 launch, “at first thought to have been such a test,” as actually connected with the manned space program. No effort had been made to interfere with U.S. space vehicles, and the 27 Dec. launch—the USSR’s fourth test of a satellite interceptor this year—had been classified as a failure by intelligence sources, the NYT said. (C Trib, 4 Dec 76, 1-7; W Post, 18 Dec 76, A—1; NYT, 31 Dec 76, A6)
A Spacelab simulation mission known as ASSESS II would be flown jointly next spring by NASA and the European Space Agency, and the payload specialists for the 4-engine jet mission would be named shortly, NASA announced. ASSESS was the acronym for airborne science Spacelab experiment-systems simulation. Carlos C. Hagood, NASA mission manager for Spacelab 2 and ASSESS, said two U.S. candidates would be named as prime payload specialists, with a third as backup; ESA would also select prime and backup specialists. Launch date of the 10-day mission had been set for 15 May 1977. The mission would be flown in the Galileo II, a Convair 990 operated by Ames Research Center, one of several ARC flying laboratories supporting research activities internationally. The aircraft would fly 6.5 hr each day, and the payload specialists would remain in the plane and work another 6 hr on the ground; their off-duty time would be spent in a van containing living quarters connected to the aircraft. ASSESS was developed to involve individual principal investigators (Pi) in defining and operating the scientific payload; to study the investigator working-group (IWG) concept, providing Pis a means of full and direct visibility into mission management and a direct channel for making recommendations; to evaluate the concept of PI selection of payload specialists; and to validate a concept for training and cross-training Pi-selected payload specialists. MSFC was lead center for the ASSESS II mission. Dr. Anthony C. DeLoach was MSFC mission scientist; ESA mission scientist was Dr. John Beckman of the European Space Research and Technology Center at Noordwijk, The Netherlands. ESA mission manager was Johannes de Waard, based in Porz-Wahn, West Germany. NASA candidates for payload specialist would be selected by NASA members of the investigator working group, and European candidates by the ESA members; the selections would be recommeded to the ASSESS program manager, Bernard T. Nolan of NASA Hq Office of Applications. (MSFC Release 76-158)
NASA issued 2 major reports—SP-386, “Outlook for Space,” and SP-387, “A Forecast of Space Technology 1980-2000”—prepared by a task group initiated by Administrator James C. Fletcher in June 1974 to examine the civilian role of the U.S. space program during the coming 25 yr. The group included 20 representatives of NASA and 1 from the USAF. “Outlook for Space,” according to the foreword by Fletcher, was “an impressive analysis of the services that space systems and technology might provide the world of today and tomorrow,” and related this analysis directly to national needs and human purposes. “A Forecast of Space Technology,” according to a preface by study director Donald P. Hearth, “was an important element of the study and provided key inputs to the study and its conclusions.” The technology forecast was conducted by a team from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, supported by representatives of other NASA centers; Jack N. James and Rob Roy McDonald of JPL led the technology team. This report forecast developments in technology of acquiring, processing, transferring, and storing information, energy, and matter. “Outlook,” on the other hand, identified future objectives of space programs and prepared background information that could serve as a basis for development of program plans. Objectives were established as earth-oriented or extraterrestrial; categories of need were either physical (provision of food, shelter, health, security, education, good environment, and the work necessary to obtain these) or needs of mind and spirit (the quest for knowledge, the need to explore the unknown, the sense of accomplishment in the face of challenge). The 3 conclusions of the report were that a space program could help fill the need to improve food production and distribution, to develop new energy sources, to meet new challenges to the environment, and to predict and deal with natural and manmade disasters; that the space program could answer the need for intellectual challenge, exploration, and knowledge that would help humanity understand its relation to the universe; and that those in charge of the space program must make it recognized as meeting these public needs. Efforts recommended by the study group would be in data management, predictive modeling of future missions, advanced communications, space processing, and a permanent space station. (Text) February 1976
ESA announced plans to award to Messerchmitt-Bolkow-Blohm of West Germany, as prime contractor for COSMOS (a consortium of European aerospace companies), two contracts worth a total of about $55.38 million (U.S.) for definition of the Exosat satellite (phase B) and for subsequent design and development (phase C and D). Subcontractors from ten member states of ESA would share in satellite development. Exosat, scheduled for launch in 1980-81 by a Delta or Ariane vehicle, would measure position, structure, spectral and temporal characteristics of cosmic x-rays between — 0.1 kev and +50 kev. Work on the 12-mo phase B contract would begin in Jan. 1977. (ESA release 13 Oct 76)
Two NASA laboratories had spearheaded “the most ambitious effort so far to detect radio emissions from distant civilizations,” Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. The project, known as SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), would use a specially constructed device called a multichannel spectral analyzer with various radio telescopes to scan simultaneously a million different frequency bands within a range known to scientists as the “waterhole.” This part of the spectrum lies between the frequencies emitted by hydrogen atoms adrift in space (1420 mhz) and those from hydroxyl, composed of one hydrogen and one oxygen atom (1662 mhz), which combines with hydrogen to form water; the frequency range had been chosen as “a logical rendezvous for intelligent creatures trying to make contact for the first time.” Ames Research Center would have primary responsibility for program management and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use its worldwide network of antennas besides providing instruments for the multichannel system, including a data processor capable of handling 6 million channels. NASA officials noted that the search would not depend on deliberate efforts at communication by other civilizations, citing the detectable radio energy emitted by the earth in normal space operations, television transmissions, and so forth. (NYT, 2 Nov 76, 16)
The Federal Aviation Administration would use 15 new twin-jet Sabreliners to do a nationwide airways navigation-system checking job that formerly took about 50 older aircraft to do, according to a report by Rockwell International Corp., makers of the Sabreliner. The old Civil Aeronautics Administration (predecessor to FAA) in 1932 had hired 2 pilots in singleengine planes to inspect beacon markers—then the only night-navigation aids for air travel—as well as to check safety at emergency landing fields. The report reviewed the advent of radio-range transmitters, omnidirectional signals, and instrument-landing systems, for which the FAA operated a Flight Inspection National Field Office based in Oklahoma City with field offices in the continental U.S., the North Atlantic, and the Caribbean. Until recently, safety checks had been the job of a fleet of military-surplus C-47s (commercially called DC-3s) known in World War II as Gooney Birds. These became unsatisfactory with the advent of the jet age, and Sabreliners were added to the fleet in 1968. FAA officials noted that the new twin-jet could cruise at 435 knots, compared to 150 knots for the DC-3s scheduled for retirement in June 1976. (Skyline, Spring 76, 34)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
