The future of Japan’s space program was not a sure thing, the Wall Street Journal said. Those who had claimed that a program of launching satellites for resource-rich, technology-poor nations would increase Japan’s technological growth and ensure a supply of raw materials had met with complaints that the program wasted tax money and that Japan should have relied on the U.S. and NASA to orbit the payloads. Japan’s space agency would have to convince official and public skeptics of the program’s value, the paper said. {WSJ, Mar 29/77, 44)
The Natl. Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., counted its 7 millionth visitor, Mrs. Elizabeth Weber of Queens, N.Y. However, she and many other visitors exemplified the fading public interest in space: none of them recognized the date as the 16th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s historic feat, man’s first spaceflight. A NY Times article contrasted the festive feeling at the museum (the capital’s largest tourist draw) and the almost melancholy mood at NASA Hq across the street. NASA employees had cause for despair, said the article, with a space program rarely in the public eye and funding that had delayed long planned projects. Even President Carter, during a cursory 30-minute inspection of the museum, omitted mention of the space program or the space agency. (NYTApr 13/77, D-10)
DFRC reported it had made further study of the effect of insects sticking to the leading edges of aircraft wings [see A&A76, Nov. 23] by flying a small jet transport from four airports (Los Angeles, San Francisco, Sacramento, and San Diego) to study actual environments from which long-range commercial flights would be made. The program, conducted jointly with Langley Research Center, was part of NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program to achieve 20 to 40% fuel savings in a 1985 long-range transport aircraft. Such a craft would probably use laminar flow-control technology, depending on smooth airflow over the leading edge of the wings; insects adhering to the wings had made the airflow turbulent, canceling the fuel savings achieved with the laminar flow. NASA had equipped the wings of the test aircraft with a modified leading edge consisting of 5 panels of different materials, to demonstrate changes in the airflow caused by insects adhering to the different surfaces; it had also added a water cleaning system to study its ability to either wash off or keep off the insects encountered during takeoff and climb. It had then flown the plane over alfalfa fields and sewage ponds, and at Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, to encounter as many different quantities, kinds, and sizes of bugs as possible. Bob Baron, DFRC project manager, said results indicated a need for some sort of washing system to reduce effects of insect impacts on the laminar-flow surface. (DFRC Release 40-77)
NASA officials, assuming a constant purchasing power for the agency over the next 10 to 15yr, had made plans for some 560 Shuttle flights between 1980 and 1991, averaging 60 flights per yr between 1985 and 1991, Nature reported. Assuming a maximum payload of about 29 500kg, Shuttle users (including NASA, DOD, other government agencies, private industry, and foreign organizations) would pay fees from $3000 for a simple automatic payload to $20 million for the entire cargo bay. NASA had claimed a 40% savings in launch costs for the Shuttle compared to expendable rockets; a higher discount for U.S. users would increase its cost-effectiveness. Nature said early Shuttle critics, like space scientists who viewed it as a competitor for limited NASA resources, were now supporting the Shuttle as a research tool. (Nature, Apr 7/77, 489)
ESA announced that the U.S. delegation to an Aerosat Council meeting in Washington, D.C., Sept. 15-16, had notified it that lack of funds would prevent the Federal Aviation Administration from proceeding with the program as contemplated. The Aerosat memorandum of understanding had provided that ESA, the government of Canada, and a U.S. company (ComSatCorp was selected in 1974) would proceed with development, production, launch, and operation of the satellite, with ESA and the FAA (leasing from the U.S. firm) using the comsat capability in equal portions. (ESA Release Sept 19/77)
JSC reported that another 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report for individual interviews and physical examinations; the group included 17 pilot and 3 mission specialist applicants. Eight of the applicants were from the USAF; 6, Navy; 2, Marines; 4, civilians. Of the more than 8000 applicants, about 200 would go to JSC for screening, the final group due in mid-Nov. and selections in Dec. (JSC Release 77-54; NASA Release 77-205)
NASA announced it would participate in a joint agro-environmental monitoring system that would improve crop management in the state of Virginia through knowledge gained from the automated data-collection and processing systems developed for satellite and space-exploration programs. Funded by Wallops Flight Center at Wallops Island, Va., and by the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. at Blacksburg, a network of data collection stations would automatically track “degree-day” units necessary for the emerging of certain insects or diseases; when a certain total was reached, the system would alert a farmer to spray his crop. Savings would result from reduced use of insecticides during less effective periods, reduced possibility of pollution, and fewer requirements for labor and equipment. Loyd C. Parker, Wallops project manager, said design work was complete and by early spring the five monitoring stations and central computer should be ready for use. (NASA Release 77-6)
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
Calif. Gov. Edmund G. Brown, Jr., hailed the advent of the space age at a Space Day gala in Los Angeles sponsored by 11 aerospace companies and the United Bank of Calif. More than a thousand persons attended the exhibit, prelude to the Shuttle orbiter free flight Aug. 12 over the Mojave desert. The program included two space movies, as well as speeches by Carl Sagan on planetary exploration, Gerard K. O’Neill on space colonies, and Jacques Yves Cousteau on spaceflight and the oceans of the world. [WPost, Aug 12/77, A-9)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced that President Carter had declared July 16-24 as a U.S. Space Observance, the dates chosen by Congress to coincide with the anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing as well as Apollo-Soyuz and the Viking 1 landing on Mars. Dr. Frosch said that the president’s recognition of NASA achievements “should serve as inspiration and encouragement to all of us.” (NASA anno July 14/77)
NASA announced that the Office of Management and Budget had called for an agency ceiling of 23 237 permanent positions by the end of FY 1978, 500 fewer than current. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, deputy administrator, said work force adjustments to meet the goal would include greater use of contractor R&D; consolidation of applications work at ARC, GSFC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories; reduction of support manpower at JSC, KSC, and MSFC; consolidation of GSFC data management; transfer of helicopter research from Langley Research center to ARC; and reductions in support office and facility staff agencywide. MSFC would lose 150; Lewis Research Center, 108; JSC, 90; KSC, 80; LaRC, 77; GSFC, 74. DFRC, Hq, and Wallops Flight Center would lose 30, 20, and 5, respectively. The shift in programs would add 45 to ARC and 6 to NSTL. (NASA Release 77-185)
JSC announced that another set of 20 Shuttle astronaut candidates would report to the center Oct. 17 for physical examinations and individual interviews. All of this group would be mission specialist applicants, 8 of them women. Applicants screened at JSC so far had totaled 140, 77 of them pilots and 63 mission specialists; the 17 women were all mission specialist applicants. (JSC Release 77-59; NASA Release 77-218) •
NASA announced it had scheduled the first free flight of the Shuttle orbiter for 8am PDT Aug. 12 at Dryden Flight Research Center. Briefing the press Aug. 11 would be Deke Slayton, ALT program manager at Johnson Space Center, and John Young, chief of the JSC astronaut office; Chet Lee, Hq director of Space Transportation Systems operations, speaking on payloads, pricing policies, and users; and Aaron Cohen, manager of the orbiter project at JSC, on orbiter systems. (NASA Release 77-158; DFRC Release 26-77)
NASA announced it had selected Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Space and Communications Group for negotiation of a $33 million contract to build, test, and deliver three geostationary operational environmental satellites, GOES-D, -E, and -F, as follow-ons in the synchronous meteorological satellite (SMS) series providing near continuous high quality observation of the earth and its environment. The GOES spacecraft would carry a visible infrared spin-scan radiometer atmospheric sounder (VAS) to obtain day or night cloud cover photos of the portion of the earth viewed from geostationary orbit, with temperature readings at various levels of the atmosphere; the $33 million contract did not include the three VAS instruments being produced under contract by Santa Barbara Research Center. They would also carry a space environment monitoring system of three separate sensors to monitor solar emissions. Goddard Space Flight Center would be project manager for the GOES systems developed and procured by NASA on a reimbursable basis for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which would operate the spacecraft after launch and checkout by NASA. (NASA Release 77-170)
Johnson Space Center announced that a sixth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report this week for individual interviews and physical examinations. This group, all mission specialist applicants, included one woman. (JSC Release 77-56; NASA Release 77-215) •
NASA launched Italy’s first experimental domestic comsat SIRIO from ETR at 7:50pm EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37 670km apogee, 229.7km perigee, and 23° inclination. At 10:57am EDT on Aug. 27, its apogee boost motor fired it into a near-circular orbit where it would drift by Sept. 8 to a station on the equator above the west coast of Africa at about 15°W. NASA would transfer operation to the Telespazio VHF/SHF control center at Fucino, Italy, about 45 days after launch. Italy’s National Research Council (CNR) would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle and support services, estimated at $15.7 million, as agreed in March 1975. The Satellite Italiano Richerche Industriale Orientata (industrial research-oriented Italian satellite), 2m (6.5ft) high and 1.4m (4.6ft) in diameter, weighing 398kg (8781b) at liftoff, would transmit TV and voice data at super high frequencies (SHF) from Europe to North America in adverse weather conditions. The project had begun in 1969 as part of an ELDO program, specifically to carry out a communications experiment in the 12 and 18GHz bands proposed by Prof. Francesco Carassa of Milan Polytechnic Inst. The idea of using higher frequency ranges (30 to 60GHz) because of overcrowding on conventional frequencies had offered the advantages of greatly increased traffic in communications, less interference with present ground and satellite communications, and the use of small ground terminals. The Compagnia Industriale Aerospaziale (CIA) had designed and developed the spacecraft and was responsible for system management and orbit operations. Defense/Space Daily said the original Aug. 17 launch date had slipped because of possible interference between the SIRIO antenna and the third-stage system that might hinder separation. The NY Times said that “adverse wind conditions” Aug. 16 that delayed a test launch of the Navy’s Trident missile had automatically postponed the SIRIO launch. AvWk said that the SIRIO launch was important to Italy not only technically but also politically: it said NASA officials believed major changes would have occurred in the Italian government if the spacecraft had failed. (NASA Release 77-152; KSC Release 140-77; MOR 492-209-77-01 [prelaunch] Aug 9/77, [postlaunch] Nov 9/77; D/SD, Aug 22/77, 275; NYT, Aug 17/77, A-ll; A VWk, Sept 5/77, 23)
KSC reported that an experimental homemade airplane built by John Murphy of the center’s Technology Utilization Ofc. had used a NASA-developed winglet set to increase its efficiency by about 8%. Murphy had begun work on the plane in Dec. 1976 from plans by a California designer and had completed it on June 12. Except for the engine and engine mount, the plane consisted entirely of fiberglass and styrofoam and weighed only 6301b. Its lOOhp Continental aircraft engine could carry two passengers at 200mph, requiring 1000ft for takeoff and about 2000ft for landing. Murphy, a graduate of Georgia Tech, had been flying for 30yr and owned another aircraft that he had built himself. He had completed 24 of the 50hr flying time needed for Federal Aviation Administration approval, so that he could fly it to the annual meeting of the Experimental Aircraft Assn, in Wisconsin later this summer and show it off to the designer. (KSC Release 128-77)
The NY Times reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, testifying at the Senate hearing on confirmation of his nomination as NASA administrator, had told the committee that no U.S. manned landing on Mars could occur before 1990. If NASA had an operating Space Shuttle by 1980 that could be used to assemble a vehicle in space and to store the fuel needed for a trip to Mars, work on a manned Mars ship could begin in 1984 or 1985 at the earliest, Frosch said, with completion a year or two later. (NYT, June 7/77, 13)
More than half the 1497 reports received under the NASA aviation safety reporting system (ASRS) in its second quarter of operations included unsolicited recommendations for solutions of a variety of air-traffic problems, NASA announced. The reports, dealing with air operations nationwide, reflected an increase in the quality of reporting for the period ending Oct. 14, 1976, the agency said. NASA’s ASRS had been designed as an “early warning system” consisting of voluntary reports submitted by pilots, air traffic controllers, and others in the national aviation system. During the first and second quarters, an average of 100 reports came in each wk; the number of reports from pilots declined during the second quarter, with reports from controllers now constituting half rather than a third of the total. At least three-fourths of all reports concerned incidents occurring in controlled air space, and some type of flight plan had been filed in 84% of the flights described. NASA had prepared and sent to the Federal Aviation Administration a total of 58 alert bulletins during the report period. NASA personnel had initially screened all ASRS reports to remove the names of persons reporting; the reports went for analysis to the ASRS office of Battelle’s Columbus Division in Mountain View, Calif. Attempts to verify information in 340 of the reports, by telephone contact with the reporter, were successful in 270 instances. Names of persons were removed to protect the right of free comment without fear of reprisal, and 80% of the reports were reviewed within 2 working days of their receipt. (NASA Release 77-30)
NASA announced it would hold a briefing at Hq Aug. 4 on the scientific studies to be conducted by the Voyager spacecraft scheduled for launch later this year toward the giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, and possibly Uranus. Participants in the briefing would be Dr. Noel W. Hin-ners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science; Dr. Edward Stone, Calif. Inst, of Technology, project scientist; John Casani of JPL, project manager; Dr. Bradford A. Smith, Univ. of Ariz., leader of the imaging science team for the Voyager project; and Dr. James W. Warwick, Univ. of Colo., principal investigator for planetary radioastronomy. (NASA Release 77-155)
NASA announced that the first 20 of about 200 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to JSC Aug. 2 for a week of individual interviews and physical exams. Ten of the group were from the USAF, 7 U.S. Navy, 2 Marines, and 1 civilian. Although all the initial group had been pilot applicants, NASA expected the number interviewed at JSC would divide evenly between pilot and mission specialist applicants. NASA would complete processing by mid-November and hoped to select as many as 20 astronaut candidates in each of the two categories in December. Candidates would report to JSC in 1978 for 2yr of training and evaluation; final selection as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. (JSC Release 77-42)
NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise successfully went through its fourth free flight with its streamlined 57001b tailcone off, increasing drag and reducing the altitude achievable by its 747 carrier (to about 18 000ft) as well as the distance it could glide after separation. Three previous free flights, tailcone on, had lasted about 5.5min each; this time the Enterprise, fitted with 16 0001b of dummy engines with nozzles 8ft in diameter, wide enough for a man to stand upright in, would have a glide time of only about 3 min. Pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly, alternating at the controls of the orbiter, brought it to a stop on a runway at Edwards AFB after recording a touchdown speed of 212mph and 5000ft of landing roll. NASA’s goal had been no more than 9000ft of landing roll, showing that the orbiter could land at any major airport in the world. Fitzhugh L. Fulton, pilot of the 747 carrier plane, said the aerodynamic resistance created by the dummy engines had caused “heavy shaking” on both the orbiter and the 747 during the hr-long ascent to launch altitude. Tom McMurtry, copilot of the 747, said the turbulence resembled “what you might get in a commercial airliner . . . only we couldn’t change altitudes to get away from it as an airline pilot does.” NASA officials said the last free flight, scheduled for Oct. 26, would end with the microwave landing system controlling the touchdown. (DFRC Release 31-77; postflt rept, free fit 4, SpSh orbiter ALT; NYT, Oct 13/77, A18; WPost, Oct 13/77, C-ll; LA Times, Oct 13/77,1; JSC Roundup, Oct 14/77, 1; W Star, Oct 13/77, A-10; C Trib, Oct 13/77, 1-13)
Two main items in NASA’s $4 billion budget request for FY 1978 — the Jupiter-orbiter mission and the Space Telescope—had met with strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported in the NY Times. The items were two of three major new starts sought by the agency; the third, a new earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C), had not been opposed, nor had additional funding for Space Shuttle development. NASA officials had not expected opposition to the Jupiter project, which had the endorsement of numerous scientists and the White House and had been authorized for eventual development by both houses of Congress. However, Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) had persuaded the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which he chaired, to block funds for the Jupiter project in view of charges by many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of its funds on planetary science rather than on deep-space astronomy, which would be the aim of the Space Telescope. The House Appropriations Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote accordingly. NASA had concentrated its Jupiter appeal on the Senate appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime critic of NASA spending, who had nevertheless been impressed by JPL officials who argued that the Jupiter project should receive immediate funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982 when Jupiter would be relatively close to earth, which would not occur again until 1987. Without the new start, JPL would have to lay off 300 to 400 scientists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch of two Voyagers this summer. If the Senate should approve the Jupiter project and reject the telescope, a conference committee would have to settle the matter; NASA might have to choose between the two projects, or to start both with greatly reduced first-year funding, Wilford noted. (NYT, June 10/77, A-17; Nature, June 23/77, 659)
JSC reported that NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had approved development of a teleoperator retrieval system to be flown no later than Feb. 1980 as a Skylab-revisit mission. JSC would be responsible for integrating the TRS into the Shuttle and for planning and operations. Harold E. Gartrell, assistant manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development office at JSC, would manage JSC activities for the Skylab revisit and would work with the Shuttle program office on integrating that mission with the Shuttle orbital-flight test planners. His office would be responsible for interfaces outside JSC in preparing and conducting the mission. (JSC Roundup, Dec 23/77, 1) •
NASA announced appointment of Andrew J. Stofan as deputy associate administrator for the Office of Space Sciences, effective Jan. 8, 1978, succeeding Dr. Anthony J. Calio who had become associate administrator for the Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Stofan had been director of launch vehicles at Lewis Research Center since July 1974; he had begun there in 1958 as a research engineer, assigned in 1962 to the Centaur project and becoming project manager of the Titan-Centaur vehicle in 1970. (NASA Release 77-245)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) would present the gold space medal, given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum, at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records. Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of 2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed circuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine aircraft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.) Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting 107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich, for being the only person to win the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its environment. The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77) During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Aircraft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
JSC announced that three life sciences specialists would begin a 7-day simulation of a typical Spacelab mission planned for the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Living aboard a high-fidelity mockup of the Spacelab and Shuttle-orbiter crew deck would be physician Dr. William E. Thornton, mission specialist, and Dr. Carter Alexander, payload specialist, both of JSC, plus payload specialist Dr. Bill A. Williams of ARC. Dr. Thornton would perform medical monitoring and health services for the simulation crew. ARC had shipped a rack of 20 life sciences experiments to JSC for the simulation, and JSC had provided 6 other experiments. Life sciences payloads like the simulation experiments would be flown on the Spacelab missions to show the effects of space on living organisms, improve health care for the crews of actual missions, and help in designing life-support systems for space and earthbound clinical research and health care. (JSC Release 77-32) May IS: NASA announced the expected arrival of a USSR research ship off the Virginia coast near Wallops Flight Center about June 1 to participate in a series of rocket launches to investigate ionization sources in earth’s upper atmosphere. The research ship Professor Vize would operate offshore as the Soviet launch platform. The joint American-Soviet particle intercalibration (JASPIC) project would compare techniques used by both nations to measure the intensity of electrons and protons entering the lower ionosphere, and to define the role of these particles in nighttime ionization of the lower ionosphere in the midlatitudes, thought to cause high-latitude auroras. The researchers would base comparisons on results of 4 sounding-rocket launches from Wallops and 5 Soviet MF-12 rocket launches from the ship. One of the NASA rockets would release a chemical cloud that might be visible over the east coast. A similar joint activity in Aug. 1976 had launched 22 pairs of rockets over a 2wk period. U.S. and Sov et scientists had decided in 1975 that discrepancies shown by the scientific literature in measurements of ionosphere energetic particles might arise from instrumentation differences, and had agreed to joint measurements and subsequent comparisons at the same time and place. (NASA Release 78-71)
JSC reported the 8th group of Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to the center Oct. 25 for physical examinations and interviews. The 20 mission specialist applicants in this group were all military except for one civilian; they represented the USAF (13), the Army (3), the Navy (2), and the Marines (1). The group included one woman, USAF Capt. Jane L. Holley. Of the 160 applicants screened at JSC, 77 wanted to be pilots and 83 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-66; NASA Release 77-225)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA administrator, announced that the planetary probes scheduled for launch Aug. 20 and Sept. 1 would be named Voyager 1 and Voyager 2. The two craft would view Jupiter, Saturn, and their respective satellite systems, and might also look at Uranus and Neptune. JPL had designed and built both probes. In March 1979 Voyager 1 would pass within 357 000km of Jupiter, the solar system’s largest planet, and go on to rendezvous with Saturn in Nov. 1980, passing within 209 000km of the ringed planet’s cloud tops and within 6430km of Titan, Saturn’s largest moon and the only satellite in the solar system known to have an atmosphere. (NASA Release 77-41)
NASA announced that a third group of 20 astronaut applicants, all in the mission specialist category, would report to JSC Aug. 29 for a week of individual interviews and physical examinations. Eight of this group were women; all 20 had Ph.D. or medical degrees, or both, and one had a degree in veterinary medicine. (NASA Release 77-176)
WFC announced it would officially open a new management education center Sept. 30 with Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, presiding. A unit of the Hq office of professional development, the center would offer short-term residential programs (3-day seminars to 2-wk courses) designed to train future agency leaders. (WFC Release 77-12; NASA Release 77-202)
NASA announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for the 30 to 40 openings as Space Shuttle astronauts after a yr-long recruiting effort. Candidates selected would report in 1978 for a 2yr training period at Johnson Space Center. Of the 8037 applicants, 6735 were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot; 1142 of the applicants were women. NASA would announce selections in Dec. 1977. (NASA Release 77-145; JSC Release 77-39)
NASA announced that it and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed to continue joint technical, scientific, and operational activity developed in the Apollo-Soyuz mission July 1975 by starting studies of 2 programs, one for a joint orbited manned flight, the other for an international space station. The agreement signed May 6 by Acting NASA Administrator Dr. Alan • M. Lovelace and May 11 by Anatoly P. Aleksandrov, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, envisioned preliminary project documents within 6 to 12mo and definitive documents within a yr, noting that the working groups should proceed on the assumption of a first flight in 1981. Working groups to study experiments, basic and applied, and the operation of a Salyut-Shuttle mission would be named within 3 days after the agreement became effective; a third group, which would consider development of an international space platform, would be appointed within 2mo. NASA stressed that neither side would be committed beyond initial studies, and either could proceed with its own space station interests, (NASA Release 77-98; NYT, May 18/77, A15)
The NY Times reported that a team of two Soviet crewmen, accompanied for a time by a woman plant expert, had completed a 4mo stay in an isolation chamber to test an artificial environment designed for long interplanetary space missions. The team had breathed oxygen and consumed water and food produced by miniature wheatfields and vegetable gardens occupying about half the space of their 1260ft2 test chamber called Bios 3. The plants, grown by hydroponics (mineralized solutions rather than soils), had exuded enough moisture for drinking and household needs and had provided a third of the proteins and fats and half the carbohydrates in the crew diet, supplemented with dehydrated rations of animal fats and proteins stored for the mission. The Times quoted an Izvestia story describing the experiment and reporting “no significant changes in the physiologic, biochemical and psychological functions of the subjects. Their weight has also remained virtually the same.” Dr. G. Lisovsky, head of the Controlled Biosynthesis Laboratory of the Krasnoyarsk Physics Inst, in Siberia, said that earlier experiments in the series begun shortly after the Gagarin flight of 1961 had tried chlorellas (green single-cell algae) as a source of protein and B-complex vitamins for long space trips. The algae had yielded sufficient oxygen and water but did not provide a balanced diet; researchers had then used early-maturing wheat and vegetables. Agronomist Mariya Shulenko had done the cooking while checking out the hydroponics; after she left, Gennady Asinyarov and Nikolay Bugreyev had shared the job. (NYT, June 30/77, 28) During June: John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for space flight, was one of 92 persons honored by election to membership in the Natl. Academy of Engineering. His citation was for “contributions to engineering theory and practice and leadership of organizations that pioneered major space programs.” (NAS News Report, June/77, 7)
NASA announced that Dr. David R. Scott, director of Dryden Flight Research Center, would leave the agency Oct. 30 to form with others a firm in Los Angeles specializing in technology transfer. Deputy Director Isaac T. Gillam would be acting director until a replacement was selected. Before becoming director of DFRC in 1975, Dr. Scott had been deputy director since 1973. He had left the astronaut corps in 1972, having flown on Gemini 8, Apollo 9, and as spacecraft commander of Apollo 15 (fourth manned lunar landing, during which he was first to visit the moon’s Hadley rille and Apennine mountains). He had also been technical assistant to the Apollo program manager at JSC and special assistant in the Apollo spacecraft program office. (NASA anno Oct 12/77; NASA Release 77-217; DFRC Release 34-77)
NASA announced that LaRC had undertaken a program called CLASS (cargo logistics airlift-systems study) to see whether tailoring an advanced air freighter design to an integrated transportation system could mean air-cargo growth and higher carrier profits. NASA had negotiated twin study contracts with Lockheed-Georgia Co. and with Douglas Aircraft Co. to survey air-cargo operations at major airports; to estimate present and future air-cargo demand, based on shipper response to reduced cost and improved service; and to study the need for improved efficiency in air-cargo operations, and for research and technology to support the design of future cargo aircraft. The studies had begun June 1 and would continue for 1 lmo. LaRC would exchange information in the study with government and industry organizations including the Dept, of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Dept, of Defense, and private companies such as airframe manufacturers, air shippers, commercial airlines, and freight forwarders. (NASA Release 77-122; LaRC Release 77-26)
MSFC announced that all systems aboard the Heao 1 observatory launched Aug. 12 had been turned on and were operating as planned. Dr. Fred Speer, project manager for HEAO, said the observatory was already acquiring x-ray sources. Experimenters using Heao l reported they were pleased with the early performance of their instruments. (MSFC Release 77-153) Longest-lived lunar instruments were seismometers recording moon-quakes and hits on the lunar surface by outer space objects; four seismometers were still operating, and scientists said some could send data for up to 4yr more. Data from other instruments, monitored in a small control room at JSC, had included measurements of the moon’s field of gravity, heat inside the lunar surface, and solar wind and lunar ionosphere samples. Roy Kelly, a senior engineer for Bendix (manufacturer of the instrument packages), said the transmitters would be left on with no operational support available. An Aug. 26 NYT editorial said NASA’s decision to abandon monitoring was unfortunate because, if it continued the program “for just another year, there will be that much more data on lunar seismography and structure.” Apollo had cost the nation close to $30 billion; shutting down to save a few hundred thousand dollars seemed to be “a repudiation of one of the finest chapters in American exploration,” the paper said (NYT, Aug 23/77, 16; Aug 26/77, A-20)
ESA announced that NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, had signed at a meeting in ESA headquarters a memorandum of understanding on cooperation in NASA’s space telescope program. The European contribution would include a faint-object camera for high-resolution imagery in the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared portions of the spectrum, with associated photon-counting detector, to be left in orbit as long as considered scientifically useful; the solar array to power the scope; and support of a scientific operations center to be established by NASA for managing the observatory. ESA would get 15% of the observing time for the duration of the program in return for its participation, and would share data with astronomers in its member states and the international community. NASA would develop and integrate the telescope, launch it into orbit on the Shuttle, supply tracking and data-acquisition services, and maintain the telescope throughout the program. MSFC would manage the space telescope, Goddard Space Flight Center would manage instrument development and observatory operation, and the European Space Technology Center (ESTEC) would manage the ESA effort. (ESA Release Oct 7/77; NASA Release 77-212)
JSC announced that the 10th group of Shuttle astronaut applications would report to the center Nov. 14 for physical examinations and interviews. This group consisted of 24 mission specialist applicants and one pilot applicant; 17 were civilians, 1 a woman, and 8 were from the military—3 each from the USAF and Navy, 1 each from the Marines and Coast Guard. This group would bring the total to 80 pilot applicants and 128 mission specialist (21 women) applicants screened at JSC. In Dec., NASA hoped to name as many as 20 in each category for 2 yrs’ further training before final selection as astronauts. (JSC Release 77-75; NASA Release 77-236)
NASA announced the E.S. (Todd) Groo, associate administrator for center operations since 1974, would leave the agency July 23. Ray Kline would succeed him, remaining assistant administrator for institutional management. Deputy NASA Administrator Alan W. Lovelace said Groo had benefited the agency by clarifying the missions of the field centers and instituting training for future managers. (NASA Release 77-134; NASA anno June 29/77)
President Carter’s first budget proposal contained additional funds for NASA, Nature magazine noted. The new administration had recommended $13 million for studies of potential missions to Mars after Viking; the previous administration had requested $5 million. Planetary scientists, pleased with the increased budget request as well as with Carter’s recent remarks on the Space Shuttle, viewed these actions as presidential support of the space program. (Nature, Mar 3/77, 5; Spaceflight, Mar 77, 8)
LaRC announced it would hold the 33rd annual completion exercises Oct. 28 for 34 engineering technicians trained at the center. James P. Mitchell, deputy administrator of the Dept, of Labor’s Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, would be keynote speaker. LaRC Director Donald P. Hearth would preside at the ceremony and give special recognition to honor graduates. Woodrow W. Midgette, Jr., top honor graduate, would be speaker for the class of 1977, consisting of 7 electrical engineering technicians; 7 electronics technicians; 2 engineering draftsmen; and 18 engineering technicians in the areas of aerospace models, facility operations, materials processing, mechanical development, and systems environments. (LaRC Release 77-51) •
Six NASA rockets launched from Australia in Feb. would investigate stars, hot stars, white dwarfs, and exploding galaxies, NASA announced. Goddard Space Flight Center’s Richard M. Windsor, working as project manager with the Australian government, the Univ. of Adelaide, and several U.S. universities and scientists, would oversee launch of the lOm-long Aerobee sounding rockets from the Woomera range during the wk of Feb. 16-24. The Aerobee, which could lift a 181kg payload to an altitude of 210km, had carried nearly a thousand scientific payloads since it came into use in 1947. U.S. investigations would include a Columbia Univ. study of bursting x-ray stars to see if they resembled black holes; a Naval Research Laboratory study to determine whether the Large Magellanic Cloud resembled earth’s galaxy, comparing x-ray stars for luminosity, temperature, and fluctuation; another NRL study of x-ray sources in the Coma Cluster; a Johns Hopkins Univ. study of Alpha Centauri A, 4.5 light-years distant, and other stars similar to earth’s sun, for evidence of a solar corona in far ultraviolet; another JHU study, this one in UV measurement of early or “hot” stars, to obtain data for use in calibrating satellite-borne UV telescopes; and a GSFC study of the Large Magellanic Cloud using UV filters on a Schwarzchild camera to define distribution of hot stars, galactic dust, high-energy gas, young remnants of supernovas, and other celestial phenomena. (NASA Release 77-28)
NASA revealed the contents of the space and aeronautics exhibit that would appear in the U.S. pavilion at the 32nd Paris Air Show, under the theme “The Continuous Challenge: 50 Years Since Lindbergh.” NASA planned to display concepts of space communities and their construction; living, farming, and manufacturing in space; and solar-power stations in space, together with a 3-screen presentation of the 50yr of flight since Lindbergh. A 2.4m Shuttle model would include the European Space Agency’s Spacelab, part of a major international cooperative space program, in its cargo bay. Also on display would be the Galileo 2 flying laboratory, its interior configured to simulate the reusable Spacelab with facilities for space experiments in medicine, manufacturing, astronomy, and production of pharmaceuticals. A life-size model of Mars landscape viewed by the Viking lander would demonstrate space exploration, and Landsat stereo photographs of earth would show the increasingly routine use of space to survey crops and natural resources, monitor pollution and weather, and collect global weather data. Other models and presentations would show the scope of NASA programs such as government-industry work to halve fuel consumption by transport aircraft and to develop safer, more efficient, and more environmentally acceptable civil aircraft. (NASA Release 77-20)
strumented surface and transmit its findings to earth stations. After a silence of nearly lOyr, its revival was a puzzle to NASA officials who were checking circuit drawings still available. After notifying MSFC of the occurrence, GSFC network operations had sent a command from Australia’s Orroral station to turn off the satellite’s AM beacon, only to find that the FM beacon was also working. The transmitters, operating when the vehicle was in full sunlight, were sending strong signals; the network group had recorded signal strengths of both transmitters before commanding them off. (MSFC Release 77-130)
The Washington Post reported that NASA had asked Congress to let it use $100 million of Space Shuttle production funds to pay for higher costs and delays in developing the first two Shuttles. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA Administrator, told the appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that $65 million would bring production up to schedule and the other $35 million would go into contingency reserves that had run between $100 and $150 million; they were “down near zero right now,” Frosch said. Associate Administrator John ip. Yardley said the rocket to put the Shuttle into orbit was 5mo behind schedule; also running behind were computer controls and fuselage parts. Asked why NASA requested a fund shift that might cause problems in the future, instead of a supplemental appropriation, Frosch noted that twice when NASA had asked Congress for supplemental budget increases, it had had to wait until the next fiscal year for approval. (W Post, Dec 2/77, A-2) •
NASA belt-tightening measures that might cut pay for about 60 high-ranking JSC employees might have the same effect at KSC, Today newspaper reported. The Houston Post reported earlier that the JSC employees had heard their Civil Service job grades would be reduced, with possible loss of $5000 to $10 000 in annual pay to follow 2yr later. A JSC spokesman said the grade reductions had resulted from a slowdown in space programs requiring reorganization of the center. Similar grade reductions were a possibility for KSC, which had been told by NASA Hq to cut its operating budget from $119 million to $109 million. KSC Director Lee Scherer had ordered a freeze on new hiring to allow a complete review of operations and consideration of measures to save money. KSC’s director of public affairs, Charles Hollinshead, said activities subject to possible funding cuts after Oct. 1 would be “things we can cut that don’t impact the launch schedule [for expendable rockets] or Space Shuttle preparations.” (Today, June 3/77, 16A)
The Dept, of Transportation reported that the Federal Aviation Administration would demonstrate an advanced all-weather microwave landing system Dec. 5-9 at JFK International Airport using a NASA Boeing 737 to fly a series of curved approaches and automatic landings like those recently flown at other locations, most recently Buenos Aires. The Inti. Civil Aviation Organization had recently tested the equipment as a replacement for 40-yr-old instrument-landing systems. Beginning Feb. 22, the British government would demonstrate a different MLS on the same runway to obtain comparative data on the two systems; similar comparisons would proceed at other locations abroad. In March 1977 the ICAO all-weather operations panel had endorsed the MLS design proposed by the U.S. and Australia, to be considered by the full membership of ICAO meeting in 1978. (DOT Release FAA-118-77)
NASA Hq announced appointment of R.D. Ginter as assistant administrator for energy programs, effective Jan. 2. Ginter had been acting in that position since Sept. 1975, following the departure of astronaut (now U.S. Senator) Harrison H. Schmitt (R-NM). Ginter had joined NASA in 1960 after 8yr as a missile project officer with the U.S. Navy and served in a variety of positions, including chief of the Scout launch vehicle program, director of the Technology Applications Division, and director of the Energy Systems Division. He received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1966 for his work as program manager for the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle. (NASA Release 77-9)
NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERNO of Bremen, W. Germany, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload). Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif. Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)
The Chicago Tribune reported that astronaut Walt Cunningham had written “the first kiss-and-tell treatise about the space program,” a book called The All-American Boys, intended as a “candid, close-up, even critical look” at NASA, the space program, and his fellow “partynauts,” none of whom had dared to be as critical as Cunningham in his first “but probably not last” book. The review said the book was “about people—imperfect mortal men—and what happens when they suddenly find themselves cast as superheroes in a world that literally knows no bounds.” (C Trib, Nov 10/77, 1-17)
President Carter had suggested the U.S. and USSR “forgo the opportunity to arm satellite bodies and also forgo the opportunity to destroy observation satellites,” the W Post reported. Recent Soviet antisatellite experiments had alarmed Pentagon officials, who revealed that the U.S. military space program budget for FY 1978 was $478 million greater than the FY 1977 appropriation. (W Post, Mar 10/77, A-ll)
NASA announced it had joined with Rockwell Inti. Corp. in granting funds for a new solid-state electronics facility at Howard Univ., Washington, D.C., dedicated Sept. 20 at ceremonies with NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch as speaker, attended by more than 200 persons from NASA, Rockwell, Cornell Univ., ERDA, Bell Laboratories, and other public and private groups. Cornell Univ., a leading school in electronics research, had helped set up the Howard project at the request of Rockwell. (NASA Release 77-201)
JSC reported the first 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants were due for screening. Center Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that the quality of the applicants would make it “difficult to narrow the field . . . paring that number will be a real challenge.” (NASA Release 77-161) * NASA announced it had appointed Isaac T. Gillam, IV, deputy director of DFRC, succeeding Gerald D. Griffin, recently appointed deputy director of Kennedy Space Center in Fla. Gillam, who had directed Shuttle operations at Dryden in the current approach and landing tests, had joined NASA in 1963 after serving in the USAF as a pilot, missile launch Jcrew commander, and ROTC instructor. After receiving a B.A. from Howard Univ., he had done graduate work at Tenn. State Univ. and had been assistant professor of air science there. NASA had appointed him assistant manager of the Delta program in 1966 and program manager in 1968. In 1973, he became program manager for small launch vehicles, and had gone to DFRC in 1976. He had received NASA’s distinguished service medal for his work with launch vehicles. (DFRC Release 27-77; NASA Release 77-164; NASA anno Aug 4/77)
NASA launched a 280kg (6201b) geostationary meteorological satellite (GMS) for Japan from Cape Canaveral at 10:56 EDT on a Delta vehicle into an elliptical orbit, to be boosted at third apogee into a geosynchronous orbit at about 35 500km altitude over the equator south of Tokyo. Gms 1, known as Himawari in Japan, was that country’s contribution to GARP, the global atmospheric research project sponsored by the Inti. Council of Scientific Unions and the World Meteorological Organization. The cylindrical craft had carried a visible infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) and a space environment monitor to identify and photograph weather patterns from Hawaii to Pakistan and detect solar energy activity that might disrupt communications on earth. More than half the world’s tropical storms had begun in the western Pacific and eastern Indian Ocean, said Kazuo Watanabe, project manager for Japan’s national space development agency; Gms 1 could provide detailed weather photos and other data every 30min to give instant Warning of typhoons in the area. Watanabe noted that Japan had been depending on data from a U.S. satellite in polar orbit that furnished images only twice a day. (NASA Release 77-110; MOR M-492-101-77-01 [prelaunch] July 12/77; Hughes Aircraft Co. release July 12/77; NYT, July 15/77, A-8; W Post, July 15/77, A-22)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, reported on a nationwide poll of its members asking what three problems aviation faced today: the government rated first, then fuel costs and air traffic control, including the quality of weather information at airports. Inconsistent policies and the need for regulatory reform were the main complaints. U.S. efforts to control business arrangements for foreign military sales displeased 71%, who said the effort harmed U.S. aircraft manufacturers. Members wanted the U.S. to build an SST and open its airports to the Concorde (by an 84% vote); on subcontracting construction of some aircraft to European nations, to standardize and render interchangeable NATO’s military equipment, the members split 52 to 48% in favor of keeping the business at home. (NAA newsletter Nov 30/77) During November: The USAF reported completion of 40mo of tests in a joint U.S.-Canadian project using an XC-8A Buffalo military cargo plane from Canada with a huge air-filled rubber doughnut for landing gear, to prove the feasibility of an air cushion landing system for large transport aircraft. Tests mostly at Wright Patterson AFB consisted of 84 flights, 34 of them air cushion takeoffs and 39 landings on grass, snow, and hard surfaces, with 25mi of taxiing over the same surfaces and over obstacles. Wallace Buzzard, program manager for the USAF flight-dynamics laboratory, said that besides being able to operate on difficult surfaces the air-cushioned plane “also taxied smoothly over a 30ft-long ramp with a 9in dropoff, crafters 6ft in diameter, and ditches 2ft wide. An aircraft with a conventional landing gear simply can’t do those things; it would be seriously damaged if not wrecked.” The tests included numerous inflight inflations and deflations of the air cushion, and tests of flying quality: the pilot found he could control the aircraft in crosswinds as high as 20mph, letting the pressure assist him in moving it to a particular point although taxiing sideways. Whereas most planes would descend for a soft landing at about 3ft per sec, the air cushion plane could soft-land at a rate of 8ft per sec with a 6° nose angle. The XC-8A weighed 33,0001b during the tests without cargo; Buzzard said it could have tested the same fully loaded, probably becoming more efficient with increased weight. “Outfitting an aircraft weighing more than a million lb with conventional landing gear will be extremely difficult,” he said. “An ACLS could handle aircraft as heavy as 3 million lb and be competitive in weight with conventional landing systems.” (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 77, 1)
Johnson Space Center announced that the ninth group of Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Nov. 7 for physicals and interviews. The group, 21 mission specialist applicants and 2 pilot applicants, included 12 civilians; 2 were women, bringing the number of female applicants interviewed to 20. Of the military applicants, 5 were Navy; 4, USAF; and 1 each from the Army and Marines. NASA had screened 183 applicants so far, 79 seeking to be pilots and 104 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-70; NASA Release 77-232) •
NASA noted that Landsat 1, first satellite to focus specifically on earth and its natural resources, had completed its 5th yr in orbit. Launched July 23, 1972, with a life expectancy of only lyr, Landsat had monitored air and water pollution, geological resources, agricultural production, and potential water supply. Dr. Wernher von Braun had predicted that this program alone could give the U.S. “a return exceeding its total space program investment.” (NASA Release 77-150)
ASSESS 2 (airborne science/Spacelab experiment-system simulation), scheduled on May 16-26 at ARC, would simulate a Spacelab mission using NASA’s flying laboratory Galileo 2 (a converted Convair-990 jet transport) to acquire data on earth resources, atmospheric pollution, and infrared astronomy. A mobile van would isolate the crew (mission specialist Karl Henize of JSC and four payload specialists: Robert T. Menzies and David S. Billiu of JPL, and Claude Nicollier and Michael Taylor of ESA) when they were not flying. ASSESS 2 would also serve to rehearse Spacelab’s joint NASA-ESA management. (NASA Release 77-80; ARC Release 77-21; MSFC Release 77-67)
The initial phase of Shuttle approach and landing tests (ALT) that began Feb. 18 at DFRC might end ahead of schedule, DFRC announced, if the 4th and 5th flight of the combined 747-and-orbiter vehicles continued to meet program objectives. Donald K. Slayton, ALT program manager, said that if performance measured up to previous successful flights, the 6th test (now scheduled for Mar. 4) would be dropped. Program officials had praised the performance of the 747 and its piggyback passenger, Slayton said; flight data had verified preflight wind-tunnel test results and simulations conducted by Boeing. Early completion of inert tests with an unmanned orbiter would put the orbiter in its hangar a week ahead of schedule to prepare for its next flight, in the captive-active phase. Five flights scheduled in this phase would carry astronaut crews to perform systems checks and go through crew procedures as the 747 went through maneuvers up to, but just short of, actual release of the orbiter. Tests later in the summer would release the orbiter for an unpowered landing on DFRC’s dry lakebed. (NASA Release 77-36; DFRC Release 8-77)
The USSR had increased its military use of space, AvWk reported. Killer-satellite systems tested during 1976 appeared operational. The Soviets in 1976 had launched 33 reconnaissance missions (the core of their military space program) and apparently had added to their military comsat system as well. (AvWk, Mar 14/77, 63)
NASA launched the first high-energy astronomy observatory, HEAO-A, from ETR on an Atlas Centaur at 2:29am EDT into a near circular orbit with 456.3km apogee, 431.4km perigee, 93.5min period, and 22.75° inclination. Heao 1, nearly 19ft long and nearly 9ft in diameter, weighting 56261b at liftoff (including 29601b of experiments and an 8311b separation system), had a 6mo design lifetime but would carry enough consumables and orbit at an altitude to allow extension of its mission up to lyr. It would operate in 2 modes, pointing and scanning: its batteries would point continuously at the sun as the vehicle moved l°/day in the ecliptic longitude, and its detectors would scan in wide circles perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic. TRW had built the spacecraft equipment module (SEM) containing all the subsystems used by all the experiments for operation and control, and a mission unique experiment module (EM) filling the requirements of each payload segment. Dr. Fred Speer, HEAO manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, said the spacecraft, rotating end over end, would survey the entire sky within its 6mo lifetime. This launch was the first in a three mission program to study x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays emitted by stellar sources, the other launches to be in 1978 and 1979. The HEAOs would carry large and heavy scientific instruments needed for observations at the high-energy and low-flux levels of these phenomena. Estimated cost of the 3 observatories was $237 million. The original plan in 1968 had been to launch a 40ft vehicle weighing 22 0001b; budget problems had reduced the size of the undertaking. However, the x-ray detector built by NRL as 1 of 4 experiments carried by Heao 1 was the largest instrument ever flown on an unmanned satellite, weighing almost 10001b. The NRL package, called the large area x-ray survey, was a 7-module array 20 times as large as any of its predecessors that would map the sky by recording incident x-ray fluxes and would determine the spectrum, time, and intensity variations of newfound x-ray sources. NRL’s Dr. Herbert Friedman noted that known x-ray sources now numbered about 200; Heao 1 might increase the list to several thousand. Celestial sources of x-ray emission included white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes, products of stellar catastrophe, as well as quasars and radio galaxies; also, a class of ministars almost too small for detection by the biggest optical telescopes might emit radiation 10 000 times as great as all the radiant energy of earth’s sun. The other experiments on Heao 1 were a scanning-modulation collimator to make parallel observations, using instruments designed by Harvard and MIT, to pinpoint locations of sources and determine their structure; a cosmic x-ray experiment designed by NASA and CalTech, to look for diffuse x-rays or cosmic rays; and another experiment from MIT and the Univ. of Calif. San Diego, to look for hard x-rays and low-energy gamma rays. NASA planned a guest observer program for this mission, participants to be selected from responses to a “Dear Colleague” letter issued by the Office of Space Sciences. A malfunctioning rate gyro had delayed the planned June 30 launch; the Bendix-built instrument had been removed and returned to the manufacturer March 31, but further similar delays occurred [see July 26]. Early data from orbit showed spacecraft systems and experiments were operating normally. (NASA Releases 77-45, 77-56, 77-71, 77-83, 77-87; OSS rept S-832-77-01 [prelaunch] May 16/77, July 29/77; MOR S-832-77-01 [postlaunch] Aug 12/77, Apr 3/78; MSFC Releases 77-32, 77-64, 77-107, 77-142; KSC Releases 85-77,140-77; Spacewarn SPX-284; NYT, Apr 10/77, 23; Aug 13/77, 33; NRL Release 23-8-77S)
Candidates for the post of NASA administrator, according to the WPost, included Christopher C. Kraft, director of JSC; A1 Kelly and Rocco Petrone, former NASA officials; and Frank Moss, former chairman of the Senate Space Committee and an early Carter supporter. (W Post, Mar 21/77, A3)
LaRC announced that NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch would speak at the center’s annual awards ceremony Nov. 29, presenting awards for outstanding leadership, exceptional service, group achievement, and 45-yr service. LaRC Director Donald Hearth would present 4 awards for 40-yr service and 83 for 35-yr service. An award for outstanding volunteer service would go to 4 employees, and 3 would receive the center’s highest honor, the H.J.E. Reid Award, named for the man who had headed the center for 35yr, starting as engineer-in-charge in 1926 and retiring as director in 1961. The center would also make an award for technology utilization for the first time. (LaRC Release 77-55)
Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR, late in Dec. to begin training for flight positions on Soyuz/Salyut missions. Flight candidates from Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania were to arrive for training at the center during 1977. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9) February I: NASA announced it had received 1147 applications for its Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least 15 pilot and 15 mission specialist candidates. Deadline for applications would be June 30, 1977. Those selected would report July 1, 1978, to Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; appointment as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of the course. NASA had mailed 11 822 applications to persons outside the agency, and another 350 to employees at NASA centers. All the applications received so far had been from civilians; the astronaut selection board would receive applications from members of the military services just before the deadline. Most of the applications were for the mission specialist category: 922 for that group, 225 for pilot, and 118 for both. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would be responsible for vehicle systems. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in areas of consumables usage, experiment operations, and crew activities. Crews would number up to seven: commander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists (who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors of the payload being flown). Payload specialists would operate specific payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to recruit qualified minorities and women as Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 77-18)
Aviation Week reported that President Carter had nominated Langhorne M. Bond, state secretary of transportation for Illinois, to head the Federal Aviation Administration, and Quentin Taylor, FAA director in New England, as deputy administrator. (AvWk, Apr 4/77, 23)
The W Post reported that NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher would resign effective May 1. Appointed by President Nixon in 1971, Dr. Fletcher had headed the agency during the end of the Apollo project; the successful Skylab missions; the Apollo-Soyuz test project; and numerous unmanned missions including the launch of the earth resources monitoring system, Landsat, and the Mars probe Viking. Dr. Fletcher planned to return to private life after his resignation. (WPost, Mar 11/77, A3; NASA Release 77-48)
NASA announced that simulation of a 1980s Spacelab mission using the Galileo II (a Convair 990 jet transport converted to a sophisticated flying laboratory) would begin May 16 with the first of nine daily 6hr flights from ARC carrying four payload specialists and a mission specialist. Known as ASSESS (airborne science/Spacelab equipment-system simulation), the flights would rehearse NASA and ESA personnel in the roles they would perform in actual Spacelab missions, giving the managers practice in coordinating payload management between experiment operators on Spacelab and investigators on the ground [cf. Apr. 19]. The actual missions would be the first chance for scientific personnel without astronaut training to obtain in orbit data on earth resources, infrared astronomy, medicine, and atmospheric pollution. The Spacelab program that began in 1972 had included 6 simulations to gather data on Shuttle-Spacelab operations; the first set of flights, called ASSESS 1, had consisted of 5 simulations on Galileo over 6 days in June 1975. The new series, ASSESS 2, would fly a different route each of the 9 days, ranging over the Pacific and to the northern and southern borders of the United States, as far east as the Dakotas, and would end May 26. The Galileo II would fly to Paris May 30 for exhibition at the Paris Air Show, then fly to Cologne in West Germany where the ESA experiments would be removed. Mission specialist on ASSESS 2 would be astronaut Karl Henize of JSC with astronaut Robert Parker, also of JSC, as backup. NASA payload specialists on ASSESS 2 would be David S. Billiu and Robert T. Menzies of JPL, with Leon Weaver of MSFC as backup to both; ESA payload specialist would be Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, with Juergen Fein of West Germany as backup. The other payload specialist position would be shared by Michael Taylor of England (on 6 flights) and Klaus Kramp of West Germany (on 3 flights). The simulation would confine the crew to the aircraft and an adjacent mobile van containing living quarters similar to those available on the Shuttle. (NASA Release 77-94; ESA anno May 10/77)
NASA announced that Bradford Johnston, associate administrator for the Office of Applications since June 1976, would resign effective Sept. 30. Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, said that Johnston’s contributions to useful applications of space techniques had made the program more responsive to national needs. (NASA anno Aug 5/77; NASA Release 77-166)
LaRC reported that its plans for a trash-burning steam plant called Project RECOUP [see Oct. 6] had hit a snag when the center opened construction bids Dec. 7. All four bids were higher than expected, the lowest being about $1.4 million more than the government’s estimate, which was about $8 million. Funds available to the center for the plant, including contingencies, totaled no more than $8.4 million. Leo Daspit, LaRC project manager, said he would have to meet with his counterparts in the city of Hampton and at Langley AFB to “explore our options.” (Langley Researcher, Dec 23/77, 3) •
NASA announced that its aviation safety reporting system begun in 1976 for the Federal Aviation Administration had been a success, as evaluated by a NASA Advisory Council subcommittee established in Feb. 1977. During the system’s first year, pilots, air traffic controllers, and others working in national aviation had voluntarily submitted about 5500 safety-problem reports that had been fed into a computer to note trends and monitor corrections. Next evaluation would be in June 1979. (NASA Release 77-137)
NASA announced plans to launch the first Italian experimental comsat Sirio on or about Aug. 17 from ETR on a Delta vehicle. A large segment of Italian industry interested in space technology had worked on the spacecraft and would use the experience for future international space programs. In synchronous orbit over the equator off the west coast of Africa, the comsat would transmit voice, data, and TV in the superhigh frequency (SHF) range from Europe to North America; its experimenters would study propagation of SHF during adverse weather conditions including rain, snow, and fog. Use of SHF had become necessary because conventional frequencies were overcrowded. Italy’s research agency, Consiglio Nazionale della Richerche (CNR), had contracted with NASA for launch and support services until the craft reached its station 30 to 45 days after launch. The name Sirio was an acronym for Satellite Italiano Ricerca Industrial Orientata (industrial research-oriented Italian satellite). (NASA Release 77-152)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher gave the agency’s distinguished public service medal to United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, at a ceremony at the Natl. Air and Space Museum. Dr. Waldheim received the award for outstanding leadership as chairman of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space from 1965 to 1968 and from 1970 to 1971, and for “enduring contributions to the development of a constructive international consensus, during the critical formative years, on the challenging issues presented by man’s first uses of outer space.” (Text of presentation)
