Av Wk reported that Congress might override President Carter’s decision not to fund a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in NASA’s FY79 budget. Congressmen of both parties had said that a 4-orbiter fleet would limit the development of a civilian space program, making the U.S. extremely vulnerable in strategic use of space. Officials who considered addition of a fifth orbiter inevitable had pointed out that Carter’s decision to defer acquisition would increase Shuttle program cost by $235 to $250 million if the administration should later change its mind. Some congressmen had also expressed displeasure with the administration’s apparent inability to provide stated goals and directions for NASA’s space capabilities and with the attempt to cut NASA advance-planning funds. {AvWk, Feb 27/78, 20)
NASA’s role in basic and applied research under its charter—the Space Act of 1958—had created a paradox, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch said in a speech to GSFC employees, the Goddard News reported. NASA had been in the business of producing change, but the really interesting changes had not been predictable from past experience. “The interesting things happen because somebody not only changes the idea of how to solve the problem but questions the basic problem,” Frosch said. “Thus the R&D problem faced by the applications part of our agency is that of trying to do work that not only satisfies the perceived mission questions, but will change the nature of the mission, or change the nature of the problem.” Current NASA assignments included defining its R&D posture, deciding the proper balance of basic and applied research, selecting what problems to solve, and attaining the proper balance between in-house and contractor effort. Frosch discussed the proper role of NASA in future operational systems. He saw no great difficulty in NASA’s taking on certain operational jobs with judicious interpretation of the Space Act. The question remained of NASA’s operating national systems in a given part of the U.S. government. NASA’s R&D effort in applications satellites was leading, Frosch said, “into an evolving global information system. But if . . . it is to become useful, then it will have to be an operating system. I think we are going to play two roles in such a situation: one of these is to do the R&D to improve such a system, and the other is to take the leadership role of making sure that the valuable research gets turned into an operational system which delivers data in a reasonable way.” Frosch concluded that, although NASA does not want to be the ultimate operator of such a system, it might have to do so in the early stages: that is, NASA would be an initial operator with the intent of transferring the system to another operator, either another government agency or a contractor. “Temptations posed by continuing large and everyday operations might lead us into difficulty in remaining a lively R&D organization.” (Goddard News, Apr 78, 1)
NASA’s struggle to save 3 astronauts trapped in a foundering spaceship during the flight of Apollo 13 had begun the most harrowing 6 days in NASA’s history, NASA Activities reported in observing the 8th anniversary of the flight. The astronauts had heard a loud bang; when Fred Haise, Jr., scanned the instrument panel, he saw that one of the main electrical systems was deteriorating. The words Jack Swigert spoke to mission control long haunted NASA: “Houston, we’ve got a problem.” At the time of the explosion, Apollo 13 traveling at 2100mph was 205 OOOmi from earth and more than 50 OOOmi from the moon, with a dead mothership (Odyssey) that included the main propulsion engine. After moving the astronauts into the lunar module, NASA focused on getting the Apollo on course for home while conserving limited supplies of power, oxygen, and water. Not only had NASA employees worked round the clock, but also specialists and computers from North American Rockwell, the contractor; Grumman Aerospace Corp., manufacturer of the LM; TRW Systems, builder of the descent propulsion engine; and many others. NASA had decided to drop the service module and put the command module Aquarius into the correct attitude for earth-atmosphere reentry; when the latter entered earth’s gravity 216 277mi from home, it needed another course correction. The tnird descent-engine burn was successful, putting Aquarius into the proper reentry corridor. As the spacecraft drew closer to splashdown, one of the astronauts described to ground control what he was seeing: “There’s one whole side of that spacecraft missing . . . right by the high-gain antenna, the whole panel is blown out, almost from the base to the engine . . . it’s really a mess . . . man, that’s just unbelievable—looks like a lot of debris is just hanging out of the side near the S-band antenna.” The astronauts had returned safely to earth 142hr, 54min, 41sec after launch. As Jim Lovell said, “We do not realize what we have on earth until we leave it.” (NASA Actv, Apr 78, 14)
Preliminary results of a yr-long energy-conservation study at LaRC had indicated that a family could save money and energy using new technical systems developed in the space program, NASA announced. A family of four that volunteered to live in a conventional house equipped with unconventional technical systems designed to save energy and water, had achieved the following results: total energy used for all purposes, including heating and cooling, was a little less than half the amount used by a conventional all-electric home under the same conditions. Total dollar savings from use of less energy and water had amounted to more than $1200 for the yr, an average of more than $100 a mo. The Technology Utilization House (called Tech House) was a contemporary-style home built at LaRC to test equipment available or to be shortly available. The family of Dr. Charles Swain, professor at Florida State Univ. in Tallahassee, had volunteered to live in the house for a year to test the technical systems under normal living conditions. Swain, his wife, daughter of 18, and son of 13 had moved into the house in August 1977 to live as normally as possible, while many of their actions were monitored, sensed, measured, and turned into computer printouts of data numbers. Early research results had indicated that all the systems incorporated in the Tech House had been put to use. Although some systems worked better than predicted, and others did not work as well, the technical information collected would be useful in redesigning or modifying some of the systems to make them more efficient. Analysis of the experiment data would tell engineers much more about how to customize systems to fit particular kinds of houses, to suit areas of the country with different geographical and climate conditions, or to meet special needs of individuals. One possible “sleeper” system incorporated in the Tech House—the water recycling equipment—might greatly benefit future homeowners if the U.S. continued to experience periodic water shortages. Preliminary performance data from some of the major systems indicated that thermal-design features such as improved insulation and double-door entries had accounted for about 60% of energy savings. Solar collectors on the roof and a solar-supplemented heat-pump system had supplied more than 50% of the energy required to heat the house, amounting to about $300 in energy-cost savings. The Tech House, funded by NASA’s Office of Technology Utilization, had been completed in June 1976 and opened to the public for a yr before the Swains moved in. (NASA Release 78-135)
NASA reported a delegation from the People’s Republic of China had been discussing with U.S. officials since Nov. 28 the possibility of U.S.-PRC cooperation in peaceful uses of space technology. The delegation also had visited several NASA centers and U.S. aerospace industrial establishments. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch headed the U.S. delegation; Dr. Jen Hsin-min, director of the PRC Academy of Space Technology, the Chinese delegation. Following up a visit to PRC in July by presidential science adviser Dr. Frank Press, the discussions had produced an informal agreement on developing a civilian communications system for PRC. China would purchase a U.S. satellite communications system, including ground receiving and distribution equipment; the U.S. would put the space portion of the system into geostationary orbit, and China would take over its operation. A similar informal agreement covered PRC purchase of a ground station capable of receiving earth-resources information from U.S. Landsat remote-sensing satellites including the Landsat D currently under development. The PRC delegation would remain in the U.S. until mid-Jan. for further technical discussions. Both sides expressed satisfaction with the discussions, and agreed on further talks to work out details of the informal agreements and to consider other forms of civilian space cooperation. (NASA Release 78-197)
AvWk reported that NASA had been struggling with institutional and funding arrangements for launching a Hughes-built corn-sat, Syncom-4, without giving Hughes the unfair advantage of a free Space Shuttle launch. The problem required prompt attention, because NASA had to make decisions within a few weeks if Syncom-4 was to fly on an early Shuttle mission. Hughes had designed and offered Syncom-4 specifically to fit the Space Shuttle payload-bay design, since NASA had wanted to deploy a test spacecraft on a Shuttle orbital mission. Under the Hughes proposal, the spacecraft would have no significant communications capability, and NASA would launch the unit free of charge; however, the satellite-user community (the state of California, Agency for International Development, and the Interior Dept.) had asked that the spacecraft include some communications capability instead of merely verifying a design. NASA had to decide who would pay for the added capability and whether Hughes would have an unfair advantage. Without a decision, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch said the whole exercise could revert to the original concept, with no significant communications channeled through the satellite. NASA might decide to run an open competition for systems to demonstrate Shuttle-launched communications spacecraft in the same manner as Syncom-4. However, Frosch was concerned that in an open competition Hughes could be “competed out of it in a way that is not quite proper,” since the Syncom-4 concept had been a Hughes innovation. “As it has developed,” Frosch explained to a House appropriations subcommittee hearing, “it is not completely clear that there is a proper solution to this dilemma.” (4v-Wk, Feb 20/78, 60)
Mechanical failures during tests of the Space Shuttle main engines had threatened to delay the whole program, although the first orbital launch had been scheduled for next year, AvWk and Nature reported. Turbine blades in the engine’s high-pressure fuel pump had failed in 3 separate tests: twice the blades fractured or cracked, the third time a fire that followed the malfunction destroyed the evidence. Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, said that the setbacks had not lessened agency confidence in the basic engine design and that the Space Shuttle program should proceed on schedule; however, he admitted that chances of launching the first manned orbital flight in Mar. 1979 were “considerably less than 50-50.” A committee from the Natl. Research Council had begun in Jan. to assess the nature of engine failures and related problems, and to advise NASA and the U.S. Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space on the engine-development program, according to the NRC News Report. The study centered on the safety and reliability of the engines and had included evaluation of engine design, materials, fabrication, and testing. The Senate subcommittee had requested a report of the study in time to use it in considering NASA’s authorization request for FY79. (Nature, Apr 6/78, 482; AvWk, Apr 3/78, 18; NRC News Report, Apr 78, 1)	'
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch and Dr. John Keys, assistant deputy minister of Canada’s Dept, of Energy, Mines, and Resources (EMR), had signed an agreement Sept. 19 in Ottawa to establish a Canadian ground station at Shoe Cave, Newfoundland, to receive SeaSat data and to study data use, NASA announced. Under the agreement, Canada would build and operate a ground station to collect from SeaSat’s five sensors the data needed to support their own surveillance satellite project (SURSAT) and to furnish SeaSat data and related surface-truth information to NASA at no cost. NASA would be responsible for SeaSat data transmission to the station and for necessary technical information. Data from SeaSat would support a number of Canadian experiments to assess the usefulness of its synthetic aperture radar and other sensors for oceanographic research and coastal management. (NASA Release 78-143)
MSFC reported it had successfully conducted a first major test firing of the three Space Shuttle main engines during a 15sec run at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories in Bay St. Louis. MSFC had already successfully fired one of the modified engines for 520sec at 100% thrust, more power than needed for the first Shuttle mission. Test results would aid in establishing countdown procedures. More than 300 contractor and NASA employees had worked on the test series, described by, program officials as the most complex large propulsion-system evaluation undertaken in the U.S. space program. Test budget for firings and facilities was $52 million. Main propulsion-test articles were the Martin Marietta external tank containing propellant for firing tests, just as it would during Shuttle missions; the Rockwell Inti, orbiter simulator; three Rocketdyne main engines; and the Rockwell Inti, shuttle avionics test set, replacing the Shuttle-orbiter computers during tests. Key Shuttle launch and flight parameters to be verified by propulsion-test data were the cryogenic boil-off rate of external-tank propellants on the launch pad; rate of external-tank self-pressurization; engine-prestart requirements, such as pressure and temperature milestones; starting, throttling, and cutting off the engine, using external-tank propellants with the engines operating in close proximity; engine gimbaling; control-system response; loads placed by the engines on the orbiter; and launch acoustic data. Flight-dynamics engineers had been especially interested in verifying control-system models with the main propulsion-test data. Test 1, scheduled for 2.35sec, had been terminated at lsec because of an instrument problem. Test 2, scheduled for 15sec with the engines at 70% thrust, would assess propellant-flow paths from the tank through the orbiter and into the engines under thrust conditions. Test 3, planned for 15sec at 90% thrust level, would reverify overall propellant-system operation, and effect of the engine plumes on the test stand’s flame deflector. Test 4, planned for 40sec at 90% thrust, would define propellant flow and flame-deflector hot spots. Firings 5 through 7, lasting 500 to 600sec, would duplicate Shuttle flight profiles; firings 8 through 10 would run for long durations with flight-rated 77:1 nozzles; and firings 9 through 13 would have the 35:1 nozzles reaffixed for engine throttling, to demonstrate the effect on flight profiles. Although the main engine had taken the blame for Shuttle launch-date slip, the external tank and solid-fuel rocket booster tests also had failed to support a March launch. (Marshall Star, May 24/78, 1, May 17/78, 1; JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 1; AvWk, May 22/78, 55; May 29/78, 49)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch in a briefing announced that NASA’s FY79 budget would propose an 8% increase, providing “buying power” at about the 1978 level. The space science request had gone up about 27%, largely because of the Space Telescope and the Galileo (Jupiter-orbiter) project. Applications and aeronautics were each up about 16%. The proposed FY79 budget was $4,371 billion; the FY78 budget was $4,064 billion. The FY79 budget requested money for only four Space Shuttle orbiters; Frosch explained that the four orbiters would use two launch sites (KSC and Vandenberg AFB) and that NASA and the Air Force would phase out the existing stable of expendable boosters. Omitted was OV-101, the Enterprise, which would be used for approach and landing tests or for spare parts, or could be reconfigured in an emergency to spaceflight status. The major new start NASA had included in the budget was the “Out of Ecliptic” (OOE) or Solar-Polar, a cooperative venture with ESA to fly two satellites to look at the structure of the sun’s surface and at sunspots and poles. Other new starts NASA had requested were the HALO (halogen-occultation) experiments to study upper-atmosphere pollution, and the earth radiation-budget satellite system to study incoming and outgoing radiation. Key application continuations would be Landsat C and D, the Nimbus-G environmental satellite, Tiros-N next-generation weather satellite, and Seasat-A. Space Transportation Systems would receive $1 827 700 000; Space Science $513 200 000; Space and Terrestrial Applications $283 400 000; Aeronautics and Space Technology $375 400 000; Tracking and Data Acquisition $305 400 000. Manpower would remain at the FY78 level, with 45 positions shifted from MSFC to JSC, KSC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA budget briefing, Jan 21/78; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1; W Star, Jan 23/78, A-8; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 13; Jan 30/78, 28)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan Lovelace, addressing members of LeRC’s launch directorate, had termed the launch-vehicle team “probably the best in the world. The record speaks for itself,” the Lewis News reported. Lovelace had visited LeRC to discuss the role of launch vehicles in NASA’s overall plans and to be briefed on other Lewis work.The expendable vehicles would make 13 launches through 1980, when the Space Transportation System (STS) would begin carrying payloads into space. Members of the STS team responsible for launching the Space Shuttle who would work with the LeRC launch-vehicle group “can learn team development, discipline, and mental rigor from the exemplary record of the Lewis team,” Lovelace said. (Lewis News, June 9/78, 1)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would be guest speaker Oct. 5 at a NASA-LaRC colloquium and a public lecture to commemorate NASA’s 20th anniversary. Slayton, one of the original seven astronauts selected in 1959 for Project Mercury and the only one still active in the space program, was orbital flight test manager for JSC’s Space Shuttle Project Office. He had been chief astronaut and director of flight crew operations before going into space in July 1975 with the ApolloSoyuz Test Project. Title of Slayton’s colloquium lecture would be “The Space Shuttle”; his public lecture, “Manned Space Flight: Past Triumphs, Future Challenges.” (LaRC Release 78-47; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 2)
President Carter at a press conference with editors and news directors was asked: “There was a big spread in the local (Cape Canaveral) newspapers yesterday that you were ordering cutbacks in the space program. And there are also rumors going around the Kennedy Space Center that as soon as the shuttle becomes operational, you will order even more cutbacks in an austerity program. So my question is this: What kind of space policy can we expect from your administration?” The President said: “I think a very aggressive space policy. Anyone who reads the documents that have been prepared very carefully, very thoroughly by the Defense Department, the CIA, NSC, all those who will use them, including Agriculture, Commerce, and finally approved by me, would say that it’s a very sound program based on scientific need and actually capitalizing now upon the great exploratory efforts that have been made in space. We look upon the Space Shuttle as a way to change dramatic, very costly initiatives into a sound, progressive, and innovative program to utilize the technology that we have available to us. “We’ll continue interplanetary space exploration. We’ll have a greatly expanded effort concerning astronomy assessments of the earth, weather, communications. We’ll expand our effort to bring into the space program now, both foreign countries and also private firms in our nation. And I think it is accurate to say that the Space Shuttle, which is approaching completion—we hope the first orbital flights will be less than a year from now—will open up a broad vista of new uses for our technology. “So, we’re not going to minimize or decrease our commitment to space at all. I think the spectacular efforts to send men to the moon and to make the first orbital flights, and so forth, have been just a precursor to now the more practical and consistent and effective use of our space technology. “So, it’s not a matter of playing down the importance of space; it’s a matter of using what we’ve already learned in the most effective way.” (Press Doc, Oct 20/78, 1976)
Defense/Space Business Daily reported that the United Nations had presented its Peace Medal to Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, at NASA Hq in recognition of NASA assistance to a recent conference on technical cooperation among developing countries in Buenos Aires, Argentina [see Aug. 30]. UN Undersecretary-General Bohdan Lewan-dowski presented the medal and a letter of appreciation from Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim for NASA’s offer of the Cts satellite to the UN for communications between UN Hq in NYC and the conference. (NASA photo 78-H-625; D/SBD, Oct 17/78, 200)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, and Professor S. Dhawan, secretary of the department of space and chairman of the Space Commission, Government of India, had signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) July 18 for launch in 1981 from the Space Shuttle of India’s first national satellite, INSAT-1. INSAT-1, a multipurpose spacecraft in geostationary orbit, would provide India with domestic public telecommunications and direct TV broadcasting and meteorology services. This was the first MOU NASA had signed with a foreign government setting forth terms and conditions under which NASA would furnish Space Transportation System launch services on a reimbursable basis. (NASA Release 78-109)
NASA announced two promotions: James Morrison to the position of European representative, and Louis Lushina to director of the information systems division, Office of Management Operations. For the past 3.5yr Morrison had managed the earth resources survey program in NASA’s Office of Applications; before that, he had served for 12yr in NASA’s Office of International Affairs. He had been an F-86 and F-100 pilot and served as a flight commander, operations officer, and squadron commander. As European representative, Morrison would be liaison between NASA and European space agencies. In his new position, Lushina would be responsible for managing agencywide information-systems efforts and ADP resources. He had come to NASA in 1968 from the Army Materiel Command and had served since then as deputy of financial management in the Office of the Comptroller. Previously he was deputy comptroller of the U.S. Army Communications Zone in Europe and of the U.S. Army Supply and Maintenance Command, and assistant comptroller of the U.S. Army Ordnance Corps. He held the NASA exceptional service medal and the Army’s meritorious civilian service medal. (NASA Release 78-23; NASA anno Feb 14/78, Feb 15/78)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, and Roy Gibson, ESA director general, had met in Paris Oct. 7 at ESA’s annual Spacelab program meeting, during which NASA and ESA had signed three memoranda of understanding on the use of data transmitted by Landsat 2 and 3, Nimbus G, and SeaSat. The memoranda covered acquisition, preprocessing, and dissemination to national Earthnet stations (the European ESA network) of data transmitted by the spacecraft. They also dealt with acquisition and transmission of oceanographic data from microwave systems onboard SeaSat by the SeaSat Users Research Group Europe, under auspices of the European Association of Remote Sensing Laboratories (Earsel), to study possible inclusion of microwave detectors on future European satellites. (NASA Release 78-158; ESA Release Oct 9/78)
Av Wk reported the Federal Aviation Administration prediction of an increase in the general aviation fleet from 186 600 active civilian aircraft in 1978 to 310 800 in 1990. Preliminary data indicated that hrs flown in general aviation aircraft reached 38.6 million in FY78, up 5.2% from 36.7 million ih FY77. The FAA also predicted that by 1990 general aviation aircraft would be flying 67.4 million hr, increasing 4.8% yearly to 74.6% over the 1978 total. The lower increase of annual hrs flown resulted from the current emphasis on conservation of resources, FAA said. Operating costs, expected to rise more rapidly than inflation, would affect private flying for pleasure. (AvWk, Dec 11/78, 70)
The Federal Aviation Administration would demonstrate in Europe and Africa in early 1978 a family of advanced all-weather landing systems, Administrator Langhorne Bond announced. The FAA would airlift three versions of the time-reference scanning-beam microwave landing system (TRSB/MLS) developed by the U.S. and Australia to four overseas sites in Jan. and Feb. to demonstrate the new approach-and-landing aid at various airport environments. TRSB/MLS versions designed for small community airports would be demonstrated Jan. 23 and 24 at Kristiansand’s Kjevik Airport in Norway, and in Feb. at Dakar’s Yoff Airport in Senegal; at the Nairobi, Kenya, airport; and at Gosselies Airport outside Brussels, Belgium. FAA would demonstrate an expanded TRSB/MLS system Feb. 1-3 at the Brussels airport. The U.S. and Australia had proposed TRSB/MLS to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) as the new worldwide standard allweather approach-and-landing guidance system. (FAA Release 3-78)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch announced that, upon signature by the President of the Inspector General Bill (or on October 1, 1978, whichever was later), NASA would establish an Office of Inspector General consisting of the present NASA management audit office and the NASA office of inspections and security. Pending nomination by the President and confirmation by the Senate of a NASA inspector general, Robert Allnutt would act in that position. (NASA anno Sept 29/78)	,
A viation Week and Space Technology magazine reported that President Carter would soon receive from Secretary of Defense Harold Brown a plan for a unified U.S. space policy covering all government and private-sector programs. The plan was the product of a policy-review committee headed by Brown and consisting of representatives from NASA, the Dept, of Agriculture, Joint Chiefs of Staff, CIA, DOD, the office of the President’s national security adviser, and the Office of Science and Technology Policy; the Interior Dept, and NOAA had participated in a steering committee under the main group. After evaluating the effect of the U.S. space program on foreign policy, national security, and overall economic benefit, the group had agreed that national security considerations were the main hindrances to formulating a national space policy. The group had considered space-arms control (maximum pacification of space, with limitatidns on killer satellites); availability of reconnaissance-satellite data (greater federal agency access); regulation of private-sector remote sensing (resolution limits); interagency management (a coordinating committee, to be chaired either by DOD and NASA, or by the President’s science adviser); broadcast satellite policy (no restrictions on signals crossing national borders); and certain intelligence, DOD, NASA, NOAA, and civilian programs. (AvWk, Jan 2/78, 14)
MSFC announced that the American Inst, of Astronautics and Aeronautics (AIAA) had installed Dr. William Lucas, MSFC director, as a fellow at the 14th AIAA annual meeting Feb. 8. AIAA had selected Dr. Lucas “in recognition of your many outstanding contributions and acknowledged leadership in the professional aerospace community,” according to a letter from AIAA president R. H. Miller. Others named AIAA fellows were former astronauts Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and David Scott, Dr. Donald Hearth of Langley Research Center, and Harvard Lomax of ARC. Elected an honorary fellow was former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. {Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
The House of Representatives, in a Committee of the Whole House, by a vote of 345 to 54 passed H.R. 11404, authorizing appropriations to NASA for research and development, construction of facilities, research and program management, and other purposes. Alterations in the bill resulted in a net increase of $43.7 million to the budget NASA had submitted. Included were a $4-million increase to maintain the option for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter; a $5-million decrease for expendable launch vehicles, slated to be phased out; a $3-million increase for space structures, power conversion, and microwave technology; a $3-million increase in energy-technology applications for solar-satellite power; a $ 10-million increase for applications research and technology development; a $ 1.5-million increase for industrial applications; a $4-million increase for technology applications (bioengineering); a $4-million increase for Spacelab systems implementation; and a $4-million increase for a Stereosat development program. In debate recorded in the Congressional Record, Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) of the House Committee on Science and Technology noted that NASA had scheduled 25 launches in 1978, 11 on Delta (launch vehicles) and 8 on Atlas Centaurs, with NASA personnel supporting 3 Atlas-F launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base: “Most of the launches in 1977	emphasized the use of space for the direct benefit of people on earth—such as communications, geodetic, environmental, navigation, meteorological, and earth resources. In 1978 plans call for missions virtually equally divided between emphasis on these applications and launches of spacecraft for primarily scientific and exploratory research. “Fifteen launches will be for paying customers other than NASA. They include the European Space Agency, ComSatCorp., the U.S. Navy, Japan, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the United Kingdom, and Canada. “The launch schedule for 1978 could not have been conceived of in 1958 when our space program began. In 1998 people will look back to 1978	and likely say the same thing. That will only occur if we support a strong continuing space program.” (CR, Apr 25/78, 3164-3166)
Mstislav Keldysh, Soviet scientist and mathematician who had been spokesman for the USSR’s space program as head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died June 24 at the age of 67, the Washington Post reported. Soviet news agency Tass described the death as sudden. Dr. Michael DeBakey had traveled to the Soviet Union 5yr ago to operate on Keldysh’s circulatory system. Recognized in a wide range of scientific and mathematical disciplines bearing on aviation and rocketry, Keldysh had proved his administrative ability by rising to the top of his country’s scientific establishment. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences from 1961 to 1975, Keldysh had been not only USSR science spokesman but also a key figure in organizing and developing scientific research throughout the Soviet Union. He had won the Stalin Prize in 1942 for “The Theory of Calculating and Developing Methods of Reducing Various Types of Vibrations in Aircraft,” and in 1946 for “The Front-Wheel Shimmy of the Tricycle (Aircraft) Landing Gear.” In 1943, Keldysh had become head of a top secret aircraft-development institute with increasing administrative responsibilities. As head of the Academy of Sciences, he announced in Oct. 1969, shortly after the U.S. had put men on the moon, that the USSR had abandoned plans to do likewise and would concentrate on putting manned space stations into orbit around the earth. He acknowledged that the Soviet Union had been debating space expenditures, and said, “My personal view is that, when a man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (WPost, June 27/78, B6; FBIS, Tass Inti Serv in Russian, June 26/78)	•
A House subcommittee on space science and applications would hold panel discussions later in June on opportunities for international cooperation in space, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology announced. Moderated by Dr. Jerry Grey of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the discussions would follow subcommittee hearings scheduled May 16, 17, and 18 on international space programs. Panelists reviewing the hearings would make recommendations on international cooperation for publication with the hearings. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla), subcommittee chairman, said he favored use of the space environment “not only for our own nation but for the benefit of all mankind. All reasonable efforts should be made in the international community to assure that worldwide understanding and mutual commitments are developed to provide sound basis for these future efforts.” (U.S. House Committee on Sci and Tech Release, June 7/78)
JSC officials were puzzled after a weekend surprise, the Houston Post reported: 240 000 or so people came out to see the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise. With interest in the space program supposedly flagging, the question was why so many—some of whom walked for miles to get to the Space Shuttle orbiter—showed up to see an airplane-like craft just sitting atop a large airplane. The newspaper quoted a highway patrol trooper with 9yr of traffic-patrol duty: “Never in my life have I seen people come like that.” Largest previous crowd had been the 135 000 who turned up at Ellington Air Force Base for a 2-day Blue Angels show. Charles Biggs, JSC exhibits manager, said JSC had made no effort other than the usual press releases to attract a crowd, “no bands, no celebrities, no giveaways, just the orbiter sitting there.” A tour guide commented: “What I thipk is that this is different than Apollo and going to the moon. I think the Shuttle is coming closer to the people. It is something they can relate to. They wanted to know when they can go on it.” (Houston Post, Mar 14/78,3A)
Av Wk reported that President Carter had signed a policy directive establishing a unified policy for all U.S. military and civilian space programs that would broaden the civilian role in both military and civilian areas. Civilian space programs had not previously benefited from military R&D because of security restrictions; the new policy would reduce restrictions on technology transfer from the military to the civilian sector. Civilian space projects and users of civilian space technology (such as the Dept, of Agriculture) that had not had access to data from military programs (such as imagery from U.S. photoreconnaissance spacecraft) would be able to use in the civilian sector data gathered by military spacecraft. Space programs on weather and climate, land use, and earth resources could now use military data where applicable. The directive had named presidential science adviser Frank Press to head a U.S. space program coordinating committee of users and suppliers of space data. The committee would oversee development and coordination of both military and civilian programs. The policy also attempted to identify and reduce stresses among the four major U.S. space programs: intelligence-community programs using spacecraft such as Lockheed’s “Big Bird” high-resolution reconnaissance satellite; DOD space programs using spacecraft such as the defense satellite communications system (Dscs) vehicles; civilian/government space programs using vehicles such as those flown by NASA and NOAA; and civilian/private-program spacecraft users such as commercial communications-satellite operators, and possibly future commercial remote-sensing companies. (AvWk, May 29/78, 23)
Aerospace Daily reported that John Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had addressed the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Nov. 28 on the importance of Congress’s role in an aggressive space program, contrasting the cautious approach of the Carter Administration. He cited the 1978 introduction of national space-policy bills by Sen. Adlai Stevenson (D-Ill.) and Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.). On the House side, Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.) had introduced, and the House overwhelmingly passed, a bill authorizing an unrequested $25 million to broaden and accelerate R&D for a solar power satellite system, including a hardware flight-demonstration phase that the administration had opposed as “premature.”	. The staff of the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications, chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), had been working on ways for Congress to facilitate “the space industrial revolution,” Yardley noted. He added that “if Congress does all these things, it will be in their tradition,” including taking the lead in developing the nation’s railroad system and passing the Homestead Act in the 19th century. “The same kind of action will be needed soon for the space industrial revolution,” he said; the industrial activity required will “be brought to bear if the climate is correct. It’s up to the government to provide the environment to stimulate growth.” Whether this occurred, he concluded, “may be the difference in the next 50 years as to whether the United States continues to be world leader not only in space but economically—or becomes a second-class power.” (A/D, Dec 1/78, 137)
Researcher William Bainbridge, who had polled registered voters in the Seattle area about attitudes on the space program, reported widespread enthusiasm for the knowledge and practical benefits derived from the space program, Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine said. Bainbridge had offered his poll sample a set of 49 statements as “not good,” “moderately good,” or “extremely good” reasons for continuing the space program: communications satellite benefits had received most positive responses; scientific knowledge attained through space exploration ranked second. The unconventional idea that ranked highest—communication with extraterrestrial intelligence—was approved by 53% of those polled. Bainbridge felt his results showed public appreciation of the practical and scientific results of the space program, and an anticipation of more benefits from new projects. (A&A, June 78, 60)
After 2 decades as key booster in NASA’s space program, the Atlas Centaur would remain “old reliable” for a variety of planetary, commercial, and military payloads launched in the 1980s, Lewis News reported. The Centaur project had begun in November 1958 when DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) awarded the first contract to General Dynamics after a study recommending a high-energy upper stage for the Atlas launch vehicle. Before the study, Pratt and Whitney had received a contract for a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Since Centaur would be the first space-launch vehicle to use a liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen combination, a whole new technology was needed for handling materials, behavior, fabrication, and testing of liquid hydrogen in a space environment, not only to make Centaur a success but also because this fuel was to be used for the upcoming Apollo program. In 1958 Centaur received its first mission assignment, definition of geosynchronous orbit, and in 1960 its first deep-space mission. The creation of NASA resulted in transfer of the Centaur program from ARPA to NASA in July 1959. LeRC, which had pioneered research in hydrogen technology and had fired an experimental liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine with 50001b thrust as early as 1953, received technical management of Centaur in 1962. The first successful flight of an Atlas Centaur in Nov. 1963 included the world’s, first inflight ignition of a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Centaur had proved its operational capability in 1965 by successfully injecting a dynamic model of the Surveyor spacecraft into a prescribed transfer trajectory, resulting in a simulated lunar-target impact. After successfully launching Surveyor (for the first soft landing on the moon) and Pioneer 11 (for a flyby of Jupiter), NASA in the mid-1960s had directed its efforts to integrating the Centaur with the USAF Titan booster. General Dynamics had built an improved Centaur adaptable to both the Atlas and the Titan boosters; Martin Marietta had conducted studies for NASA on integrating the Titan booster with an improved Centaur, and on modifications needed to the Titan launch facility at ETR. Atlas Centaur missions had included earth-orbiting spacecraft such as the applications technology satellite, orbiting astronomical observatories, Comstar, high-energy astronomical observatories, and FltSat-Com. Atlas Centaur, used for future missions with HEAO and FltSat-Com spacecraft, would remain one of NASA’s prime launch vehicles until the Space Shuttle became fully operational. (Lewis News, July 21/78, 1)
ESA reported results of an attempt to quantify economic returns from its expenditures on space research, by cataloging and quantifying the positive benefits to industrial firms participating in the European space program and by identifying economic spinoffs outside the space effort generated in European industry from ESA contracts. ESA wanted to know what benefits its payments had procured for European firms and what amounts they represented in financial terms. It had asked the Theoretical and Applied Economics Department of Louis Pasteur Univ., Strasbourg, France, to conduct the study. Information collected from ESA contractors had identified and quantified 171 specific cases of benefit: for example, sales of new products, increased sales, maintenance of a production team, reduction of production and R&D costs, and amortization of equipment. The study classified the benefits under four major headings: technology, commerce, organization and methods, and work force efficiency. Benefits obtained outside ESA-member states accounted for 28% of the total, and 68% of the total benefit related to nonspace activities. Analysis showed the benefit/contracts ratio for each country was fairly uniform: for example, Germany 3.2, United Kingdom 2.9, Italy 2.6, France 2.5, and other member states, 2.2.	' This study of secondary economic effects generated by ESA contracts confirmed the agency’s success in promoting European industry worldwide. Moreover, the showing of economic benefits to individual countries demonstrated that they exceeded the amounts governments had invested in space research. A second phase of the study would produce a more precise analysis of the benefits by including economic factors not previously taken into account. (ESA Release Nov 23/78)
The Natl. Academy of Sciences released a report of the ad hoc committee for review of the Space Shuttle main-engine development program. This review was requested by Senators Adlai E. Stevenson (D-Ill) and Harrison L. Schmitt (R-NM) in Dec. 1977 as an independent assessment by Natl. Research Council of the safety of the main engine during both orbital-flight and operational phases of the Shuttle program. The review was to be completed by the end of Feb. 1978 for consideration during FY 1979 NASA authorization hearings. The committee reported that it saw “no reason to suggest that a safe and reliable main engine cannot be developed ultimately for the manned orbital flight tests and the later operational flights,” but submitted a number of recommendations: first, since the flight schedule was not ready yet, the critical milestones should be reviewed later in 1978. Other recommendations included allowance of “adequate time to analyze root problems . . . rather than selecting technical ‘fixes’ to sure symptoms,” as well as a complete tear-down inspection of the main engine after the first and sixth flights (which had not been envisioned in the schedule). At a March 31 hearing before the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space, with Sen. Stevenson as chairman, Dr. Eugene E. Covert of the NRC described the ad hoc committee’s activities and the reasons for its recommendations, expressing appreciation for the cooperation of NASA and its contractors during the review. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, then summarized “the NASA reaction” to the report and its recommendations; Sen. Stevenson commended NASA’s prompt and positive response, but proceeded with further questions on schedule and funding. In addition to NASA staff (including associate administrator John Yardley, MSFC engine project manager J.R. Thompson, Shuttle program director Dr. Mike Malkin, and deputy director Roy Day, and comptroller William Lilly), the Rocketdyne engine project manager Dominic Sanchini was on hand to explain administrative and technical problems encountered with the main engine. The Senate committee report would contain all the testimony, the text of the ad hoc committee report, and further information on specific questions asked by Sen. Stevenson. (Text, hearing report 95-87, Sen Comm Cmte Mar 31/78; “Technical Status of the Space Shuttle Main Engine,” Natl Res Cncl, March 78)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan Lovelace announced the convening of a review board to determine the cause of the SeaSat failure [see Oct. 11]. Lovelace named Dr. Bruce Lundin, recently retired director of LeRC, to head the review board, with other members to be named shortly. In 1973, Dr. Lundin had chaired the board that had investigated failure of Skylab 7’s solar panels to deploy in orbit. (NASA Release 78-160)
NASA announced it had appointed Robert Allnutt associate deputy administrator. AUnutt, currently acting assistant general counsel for legislation at DOE, had been deputy assistant administrator for the Energy Research and Development Administration, responsible for program areas including procurement, personnel, labor relations, and construction. Following a career both inside and outside the executive branch, Allnutt in 1970 had been appointed associate general counsel to the congressionally-established Commission on Government Procurement to improve governmentwide policies, procedures, and legislation. In 1973 Allnutt had been appointed staff director and counsel of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, with jurisdiction over federal aerospace research and development activities including all NASA programs. NASA had named Isaac Gillam, IV, director of DFRC, where he had been acting director since the departure of David Scott in Nov. 1977; he had been deputy director there since Aug. 1977. Gillam, an associate fellow of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and a senior member of the American Astronautical Society, had joined NASA Hq in 1963 as a resource-management specialist and had gone to DFRC in 1976 as director of Space Shuttle operations. Before joining NASA, Gillam had served in the USAF. Lt. Gen. Duward Crow (USAF-ret.), assistant to the deputy administrator of NASA, had announced plans to leave NASA Sept. 1, 1978. Gen. Crow had begun NASA service in 1974 as assistant administrator for DOD and interagency affairs. In Oct. 1975 he had become associate deputy administrator of NASA, assuming his present duties following a reorganization in Nov. 1977. Crow had graduated in 1941 from the U.S. Military Academy and had served in the China-Burma-India theatre of operations. He had become comptroller of the USAF in 1969 and was assistant vice chief of staff from Oct. 1973 to July 1974 when he retired. He had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work on the NASA launch vehicles program. (NASA anno June 13/78)
Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, announced a reorganization at NASA Hq to significantly restructure organization elements such as Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space and Terrestrial Applications, External Relations, and Management Operations, with lesser changes in the Equal Opportunity, Procurement, and Audit organizations. Frosch’s Feb. 22 approval of the new organization structures had authorized office heads to proceed with final placement of people. In explaining the reorganization, Alan Lovelace, deputy administrator, said: “In keeping with the announced policy of President Carter, each Headquarters employee affected by the reorganization will be made a good-faith offer of a position and to the extent possible the offer will be made at the employee’s current grade level. As I announced previously, there will be no involuntary reduction in force at NASA Headquarters. . . . The classification survey of Headquarters positions has been completed. Based on tentative aggregate findings in the survey thus far, plus the potential impact of the reorganization, Dr. Frosch has asked the Civil Service Commission for authority to delay any demotions for people in the General Schedule resulting from survey results and the impact of the reorganization. NASA was granted such authority on Feb. 22. . . . As to future classification activity, it is important that we maintain a rigorous system for the accurate classification and grading of all Headquarters positions. ... I would like to assure you that we are taking all of the steps possible to provide appropriate job opportunities for all Headquarters employees and, to the extent we can, we shall do our best to avoid adverse impacts.” (NASA special anno Feb 27/78)
NASA announced it had named Dr. Adrienne Timothy assistant associate administrator for space science, effective June 18. Dr. Timothy would be chief scientist in the Office of Space Science, representing that office to the scientific community as the focal point for obtaining, evaluating, and using its expertise in planning NASA space science programs. She would succeed Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, who had been named chief scientist for NASA’s Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Timothy had begun her NASA career in 1974 as staff scientist for solar physics, Physics and Astronomy Programs, in the Office of Space Science. In 1975 she had become chief of the Solar Physics Branch, where she planned and directed U.S. space science research in the solar physics discipline; in 1977 she had become program manager for advanced programs and technology in NASA’s Solar Terrestrial Division of the Office of Space Science. Before joining NASA, Timothy had been leader for the Apollo telescope-mount reduction and analysis system at the American Science and Engineering Corp. (NASA Release 78-91)
NASA announced it would award Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) its Distinguished Public Service Medal Oct. 3 during a 20th anniversary observance. Chairman Teague, who headed the House Committee on Science and Technology, had announced he would retire from Congress after 2 decades of service. NASA had declared his unswerving support of the agency and the U.S. space program an inspiration to all NASA employees. (NASA anno Sept 28/78)
Former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal at a ceremony at NASA Hq on Jan. 30, 1978. Dr. Frank Press, President Carter’s science adviser, made the presentation in recognition of Dr. Fletcher’s “distinguished leadership . . . outstanding scientific and administrative abilities . . . and contribution to the nation’s significant achievements in the exploration of space and utilization of space to manage the earth’s resources.” Dr. Press noted, “His decision to proceed with the development of the Shuttle orbiter exemplified the perceptive leadership which foresaw space as a giant laboratory where men will work to improve the future of all mankind.” Dr. Fletcher, who was NASA administrator from April 27, 1971 until May 1, 1977, was a consulting engineer and vice president of the National Space Institute in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 78-18, Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 1)
NASA had formally designated as Project Galileo a 1982 mission to orbit a spacecraft around Jupiter for at least 20mo and send a probe into its atmosphere, NASA Administrator Robert Frosch announced. The designation had honored the 16th century Italian astronomer, first to observe Jupiter by telescope and discover its moons. Galileo would be the first planetary spacecraft carried by the Space Shuttle and the first planetary spacecraft named for a person, although NASA had christened the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 3 (0A03) “Copernicus” after it was launched. (NASA Release 78-11)
JPL Universe reported NASA Administrator Robert Frosch had characterized the Pioneer Venus mission as “a superb success” in a message congratulating personnel at NASA centers and in the industrial and scientific communities. Frosch had added: “The precise execution of the multiprobe encounters December 9 and the continuing excellent performance of the orbiter could have resulted only from a well planned and competently executed program . . .” The orbiter would continue its scientific measurements for 243da after Venus encounter; however, three small probes and a larger sounder had plunged into the Venusian atmosphere with destruction expected immediately upon impact. To the surprise of Pioneer Venus scientists, one probe had survived for 67min after impact, sending back information that would help confirm probe findings (particularly a wind experiment) before the 900° Venus temperatures silenced it. (JPL Universe, Dec 21/78, 1)
NASA announced that the Egyptian government had reserved four small self-contained payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. At the NASA Hq ceremony July 13, Dr. Mohamed Shakar, minister of the embassy of Egypt, and Dr. Farouk El-Baz, research director for the Smithsonian Institution’s Center for Earth and Planetary Studies, gave NASA officials a down payment to reserve Space Shuttle space. The payloads called “getaway specials,” each weighing no more than 90kg (2001b) and no larger than 0.5m3 (5ft3), would fly on a space-available basis. NASA had received payments for about 240 small payloads so far; purchasers had included private individuals, commercial firms, and foreign countries. The Egyptian purchase marked the first foreign educational use of a Shuttle payload, as Egyptian students would compete in proposing experiments for the Shuttle missions. Dr. El-Baz would direct evaluation of the proposals. (NASA Release 78-107)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch had announced establishment of a $250 000 Center Director’s Discretionary Fund to support innovative ideas in research and technology at NASA centers, the Marshall Star reported. Funds would be used exclusively for pursuit of research and technology tasks, not for facility, personnel, travel, or R&D project problems. Priority would be given to support of in-house activities as opposed to studies or research by contractors. Dr. William Lucas, director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he considered establishment of the fund a significant and favorable step, and he intended to be personally involved in all facets of the use of the fund and to retain direct control of all fund allocations. A small advisory panel of center personnel would assist the director in evaluating proposed fund uses and the progress of approved activities. (Marshall Star, Nov 1/78, 1)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel had recommended elimination of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster’s thrust-vector control (TVC) system and modification or replacement of the Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power unit (APU), Aerospace Daily reported. The panel said its proposals should make the Shuttle a safer system during its operational phase. With “emphasis shifting to the problems of reusable operation from those of technical breakthrough,” it said in a summary report, “. . . it is not too soon for NASA to review the Space Shuttle design from this point of view.” The report concluded that the recommendations were “not reservation on the panel’s part as to the readiness for SS-1,” but rather said the Shuttle “will fly well, and probably on the scheduled date.” Modifications could be expensive, and panel members noted that such work might absorb the expected “Shuttle dividend,” funds from declining Shuttle development costs that might be devoted to other programs. NASA Administrator Robert Frosch responded that NASA might apply the panel’s proposals in designing its next space transportation system, instead of modifying the present system. (A/D, Dec 5/78, 148)
Dr. Christopher Kraft, Jr., JSC director, had invited 31 former astronauts to take part in technical briefings and updates on the status of NASA programs at JSC Aug. 21-22, NASA announced. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch would address the group; John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, would review the Shuttle program. Others giving briefings would be Robert Thompson, manager of the Space Shuttle program; Aaron Cohen, manager of the Orbiter project; Glynn Lunney, manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program; Lt. Gen. Thomas Stafford, former astronaut now deputy chief of staff for research, development, and acquisition, on the USAF Shuttle program; John Young, chief of the astronaut office; and flight crews of the orbiter approach and landing tests (ALT). Those attending would take conducted tours of the crew systems area, remote manipulator system, full-scale orbiter mockup, and the orbiter aeroflight simulator/Shuttle mission simulator. Astronauts invited were Edwin Aldrin, Jr.; William Anders; Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; M. Scott Carpenter; Gerald Carr; Eugene Cernan; Michael Collins; Charles Conrad, Jr.; L. Gordon Cooper; Walter Cunningham; Charles Duke, Jr.; Donn Eisele; Anthony England; Ronald Evans; John Glenn; Richard Gordon, Jr.; James Irwin; James Lovell, Jr.; James McDivitt; Edgar Mitchell; William Pogue; Stuart Roosa; Walter Schirra, Jr.; Harrison Schmitt; Russell Schweickart; David Scott; Alan Shepard, Jr.; Thomas Stafford; John Swigert, Jr.; and Alfred Worden. (NASA Release 78-128; JSC Release 78-37)
LaRC reported NASA had appointed astronaut Donald Slayton to manage the orbital-flight test (OFT) program for Space Shuttle at JSC. One of the original 7 Mercury astronauts and a member of the U.S. crew of the Apollo-Soyuz test project, Slayton would be responsible in his new position for all mission-unique activities associated with the 6 Shuttle orbital-flight tests scheduled to begin in the spring of 1979. He would represent program manager Robert Thompson across the total program to ensure timely and appropriate resolution of all OFT mission-unique issues. (LaRC Release 78-12)
The Natl. Science Foundation reported that the 1979 federal budget presented in Jan. 1978 reflected greater austerity in R&D programs than during the previous 3yr, in which rate of R&D growth had exceeded the rate of inflation. R&D programs funded were those that met direct federal needs, general social and economic needs, or the need to accelerate private R&D efforts because of overriding national interest. The FY79 budget contained a rise for defense and space R&D programs of about 8% each, with only a 3% rise for all other R&D. This would reverse a 13-yr trend in which federal R&D support had shifted steadily toward civilian programs. The 1979 change had resulted not only from increases in defense/space support at rates at least equal to anticipated inflation, but also from expected real-dollar declines in support of civilian R&D areas of health, energy, and environment. Federal R&D obligations rose 6% to an estimated $28.0 billion in the FY79 budget, an all-time high in current dollars, but inflation would mean a drop from the 1978 total figure in constant dollars. Later congressional actions had raised the level approximately 9% above that of 1978, and action on supplemental requests might add another 2 or 3 percentage points. Defense and space programs had accounted for more than 80% of the current dollar rise in R&D support in 1979. Funding for each of these was expected to increase by about 8% in 1979, whereas all civilian functions taken together would increase by only 3%. The defense/space share of the federal total in 1979 would be an estimated 62%, more than the 1978 share but still considerably lower than the 77% share in 1969. (Analysis of Fed R&D Funding by Function, Dec 78, vii)
A Canadian Air Force transport searching for radioactive contamination from a Soviet satellite that disintegrated over northwest Canada had reported a “highly probable” radiation contact, the W. Star reported, first to be discovered since Jan. 24 when the crippled Cosmos 954 satellite powered by a nuclear reactor containing 1001b of highly radioactive uranium 235 had reentered earth’s atmosphere. The occurrence had sparked controversy over hazards of radioactive space debris; the U.S. space program had used radioisotope power systems, but had launched only one fission reactor, that on the Snap 10A test vehicle. Fission reactors such as that on Cosmos 954 would create strontium, cesium, and cerium byproducts potentially lethal if radiation dosages were high or prolonged. The USSR had launched at least 10 reactors on spacecraft like Cosmos 954, 16 with the same operating parameters having flown since Dec. 27, 1967; it had put all the reactor craft except Cosmos 954 in safe high orbit. The Soviet and U.S. governments had kept close contact during the incident. National Security Affairs Assistant Zbigniew Brzezinski, quoted by TASS, said, “I would like to point out two things: first that this incident which, to my mind, is nothing out of the ordinary in the space age, is fully controlled so we believe there is no danger. . . . Second, that the governments of the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other governments concerned cooperated intensively concerning this matter.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 25/78, Jan 28/78; W Star, Jan 26/78, A-l; AvWk, Jan 30/78, 33; Economist, Jan 28/78, 75)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan Lovelace announced appointment of John Boyd as deputy director of DFRC effective Jan. 1, 1979. Since 1970 Boyd had served as deputy director of aeronautics and flight systems at ARC, where he had worked since 1947. Author of many technical reports, Boyd had received several honors for his work, including NASA’s exceptional service award. (NASA Release 78-163; DFRC Release 20-78)
NASA reported its scientists and engineers were continuing attempts to revive SeaSat, the ocean-monitoring satellite that had suddenly gone mute before an orbital pass over the Santiago, Chile, tracking station [see Oct. 11]. Gene Giberson, SeaSat project manager at JPL, said that engineers there and at GSFC were assembling and analyzing tracking-station data from the spacecraft to determine possible cause of data interruption. NASA engineers would then work backward to reconstruct a “failure model” matching the data received just before and up to the instant the spacecraft ceased transmitting. If such a match could be made, the next step would be to find an alternate method of reestablishing contact with the spacecraft. The steps could take up to 2wk. SeaSat had not had full benefit of its solar panels because they had received full sun during only half the spacecraft’s orbits. In December, when the spacecraft would be in full sun during 100% of its earth orbits, its batteries might be charged enough to overcome a problem caused by insufficient electrical power. (NASA Release 78-159; JPL Universe, Oct 13/78, 1)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
NASA officials had unveiled the prototype of a parachute-cleaning machine strongly resembling a carwash operation, Today reported. If approved, the facility would become part of KSC’s system to refurbish Space Shuttle parachutes. Each of the Shuttle’s two solid-fuel rocket boosters jettisoned into the Atlantic Ocean shortly after launch would carry 4 nylon parachutes; both the boosters and the parachutes were designed for recovery and return to KSC for another launch. The carwash-type facility would rid the parachutes of salt water before washing and drying them in large machines. The current system had rinsed parachutes in the same water they were washed in; the new system would save some of the 20 OOOgal of water now used by the washing machine. In the carwash-type system, parachutes would move along an overhead rail, rinsed 3 times by water sent through high-pressure nozzles. The 3 main parachutes were 230ft long and 115ft in diameter, weighing 16001b dry and 20001b wet; the fourth parachute measured 145ft in length and 54ft in diameter, and would weigh 12001b dry and 14001b wet. On completion, the new system should require 2hr to wash and 2hr to dry each parachute. (Today, Mar 8/78, 8A)
Av Wk reported MSFC’s intent to demonstrate within 5yr the assembly of a large space structure in low-earth orbit, to exploit Space Shuttle capability. MSFC had proposed assembling a 10 x 30m (33 x 98ft) structure in space to demonstrate fabrication and assembly techniques, followed closely by a Space Shuttle mission to demonstrate deployment of a large antenna 50 to 200m (164 to 656ft) in diameter. The USAF Space and Missile System Organization (SAMSO) had also expressed interest in flying a Shuttle-based antenna-deployment test before 1985. Although most U.S. aerospace companies had been working on structures in space, Grumman Aerospace Corp. had been in the forefront in large space-structures work; MSFC had awarded Grumman four of six contracts for large space structures development, and JSC had awarded it at least one significant contract. MSFC’s approach had been to define tools and procedures needed, and to evaluate whether such operations would be possible and to what degree. Most building-block study for large space structures had assumed the use of open-truss aluminum beams joined by diagonal and cross braces, with beam sections lm (3.2ft) wide and length varying according to mission. Grumman had just begun to demonstrate a beam-building machine [see Apr. 12]. Both NASA and Grumman had been scheduled to evaluate the beams for deviations from specifications such as straightness or basic strength, and for individual subsystems such as the automatic welders used to affix the cross sections. In Sept. Grumman would transfer the beam-builder to MSFC for tests of beam manufacturing in a vacuum, to simulate space conditions. (A vWk, June 12/78, 49)
NASA announced that 8 women volunteers aged 45 to 55 had emerged in November hale and hearty after nearly a month of tests at ARC’S Human Research Center during which they were isolated from friends and family. Like 40 other men and women aged 25 to 55 who had volunteered for space program tests since 1973, the ARC group had participated in a study of the effects of weightlessness on the human body. Researchers from ARC’S biomedical research division were interested in the tolerances and responses of a body reentering earth’s gravity after experiencing zero gravity in space. The long-term NASA experiment, the Bed Rest Program, would extend over the next 12mo with 2 more groups—8 men, then 8 women, all aged 55 to 65—undergoing the same tests. Prolonged horizontal bed rest (a physiological approximation on earth of zero-gravity) would cause bodily changes within 24 to 48hr and would maintain them throughout the program. Having approximated the effects of zero gravity, researchers could study human responses to the introduction of both normal and abnormal Shuttle-reentry gravity forces. Other tests in cooperation with Johnson Space Center had evaluated the protection offered by antigravity suits against reentry stresses. Those volunteering for the program in response to newspaper advertisements had undergone a series of exacting physical and psychological tests. The 3-phase study began with the 8 subjects moving into the 12-bed ARC research facility. After a 9-day control period came lOda of total bed rest, followed by a 5-day recovery period. During the bed rest experiment, participants had to remain flat except to raise their heads slightly to eat. The subjects even showered in a horizontal position, being moved on a wheeled gurney to a specially designed shower. They had no visitors, but could have incoming and outgoing telephone calls. The routine did not deviate from three meals a day, lights off at 11pm, on at 7pm. At times the lower body underwent negative-pressure tests in a box. Researchers took daily blood samples and deep body temperatures. Electrocardiograms constantly recorded heart rates, and a “biobelt” around the waist constantly sent data to recorders. Before and during bed rest, the subjects took centrifuge rides designed to measure reflexes and coordination as the body made adjustments. The researchers tried to keep the subjects cheerful and to relieve natural boredom with books and games; each bed had stereo and color television. Medical attendants (doctors, nurses, and technicians) were on hand at all times. (NASA Release 78-185)
NASA announced the inception of Orbit 81, an RCA educational program to involve inner-city high school students in designing and developing a scientific experiment for launch on the Space Shuttle in 1981. The program had resulted from discussions among representatives of the Camden, N.J., public school system, NASA, and RCA. Other high schools were conducting similar programs, but NASA officials called the Camden project unique because it was the only “total involvement program covering all the disciplines, arts, and skills” taught in the curriculum. Students taking courses other than science and mathematics could be active participants in the project. Selection of an Orbit 81 experiment would take place when students had gained enough scientific insight to participate in the decision. The program would include enrichment courses in space science, summer sessions, and tours of NASA and RCA facilities. RCA had donated surplus laboratory equipment to the schools; NASA would provide literature, special programs, lectures, and demonstrations. Students of Camden and Woodrow Wilson High Schools had attended a space colloquium presented by NASA and RCA. RCA had made an initial payment to NASA as part of the $10 000 reservation fee to ensure that the Orbit 81 payload, which could weigh up to 90kg and occupy no more than 0.14m3, would have a place aboard the Space Shuttle when launch time arrived. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 11)
Wallops Flight Center announced the first flight Apr. 10 in compound-helicopter configuration of its rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA), a new research helicopter equipped with rotors, wings, and 2 jet engines. The compound configuration included the addition of 2 auxiliary-thrust engines and a 13.7m (45ft) wing. Powered by its 2 TF34 turbofan engines, the RSRA had used the combined lift of its wing and 5-blade S-61 rotor system to achieve an altitude of 610m (2000ft). By testing rotor systems to maneuver the craft at a wide range of altitudes and air speeds not possible in wind tunnels, RSRA would improve assessment of rotor performance by distinguishing inflight rotor characteristics from aircraft-system characteristics, which could not be done on the ground or in other aircraft. When fitted with fixed wings, the RSRA could test unproven rotor systems too small to lift it in normal flights. Sikorsky Aircraft had built 2 RSRA vehicles under a program, jointly funded and managed by NASA and the U.S. Army, to develop technology to increase rotor-aircraft speed, performance, reliability, and safety, and to reduce helicopter noise, vibration, and maintenance. Sikorsky, under contract to LaRC, would test both RSRA vehicles for approximately 80hr flight time before delivering them to NASA and the Army for flight research at NASA’s ARC. Sam White, NASA RSRA project manager, said, “The RSRA will help eliminate the costly practice of having to develop or extensively modify helicopter aircraft in order to conduct flight investigations for each promising new rotor concept. The RSRA is readily adaptable to accommodate new rotors and provide precise measurements of a variety of rotors under repeatable test conditions.” (NASA Release 78-59; LaRC Release 78-16)
Nature magazine reported that NASA planned to draw more academic scientists into its R&D activities. NASA Administrator Robert Frosch had issued a policy statement that, in the future, academic scientists would conduct “a substantial proportion” of basic research in all agency disciplines. Non-NASA scientists would take a greater part in all NASA basic research, from conception and planning through programming and execution to interpretation of data and publication of research results. The statement said NASA would increase peer evaluation of research projects in order to guarantee high quality. NASA critics had charged that agency research, particularly in areas such as space applications, traditionally proceeded in-house with little outside evaluation. The new policy, partly in response to President Carter’s directive on increased government support of basic science, had aimed at counteracting the criticisms. After NASA’s divisions had prepared a list of proposed activities, NASA would publish a 5-yr plan based on these proposals and conforming to the new policy. The Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications, for instance, whose programs at the outset had been essentially technical exercises to test and develop means of data acquisition, had realized its concern with science relatively late, so that scientists had had to do the best they could with the data available. Under the new system, NASA would ensure better working arrangements between scientists and instrument designers in deciding on the most useful data a satellite could collect, from both a scientific and a technical point of view. NASA stressed that greater use of academic scientists would improve quality control at the same time it would help to develop specific fields of scientific knowledge. (Nature, June 22/78, 586)
NASA had completed an ignition test Apr. 21 on 3 Space Shuttle main engines at the National Space and Technology Laboratory at Bay St. Louis, Miss., the JPL and KSC newsletters reported. The firing planned for 2.5sec had actually lasted only lsec, but NASA officials said the test had met most of the objectives. A low-temperature reading in the fuel-pressure pumps caused premature cutoff. NASA and Rockwell Inti, engineers would decide whether to repeat the test before moving to the next phase of the program. {JSC Roundup, Apr 28/78,1; Marshall Star, Apr 26/78, 2) During April: NASA reported it had increased emphasis on general-aviation research, addressing problems and concerns of the industry, which had used results from recent programs in designing new aircraft. Objectives of NASA’s general-aviation research had been to improve safety and efficiency, reduce environmental impact of general-aviation aircraft, and ensure a base of new technology adequate to support continued growth in the light-airplane utility. Aerodynamic research had emphasized airfoil development, resulting in significant improvements in performance in all speed ranges. Avionics research had aimed at reducing the complexity and cost of aircraft interaction with traffic-control systems improving navigation, guidance, stabilization, and systems management. In generating information needed to design low-cost advanced avionics systems applicable to general aviation in the 1980s and beyond, NASA had integrated results of its studies into specifications for final systems design, fabrication, and installation on a twin-engine general-aviation aircraft for flight evaluation in 1979 and 1980. NASA had also defined technical problems that had limited accuracy and efficiency in aerial application of agricultural materials. The NASA program also had emphasized safety measures, including an automatic pilot-advisory system (APSA), structural crashworthiness, stall/spin research, and investigation of alternative fuels such as automotive gasoline for aircraft. Reducing the environmental impact of noise and exhaust emissions generated by light aircraft had also been an objective of NASA’s aeronautical program, which would eventually assist industry and regulatory agencies in meeting future noise and pollution-reduction goals. (NASA Release 78-41)
