At a press conference on NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1980 (FY80), Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said the 1980 budget year would not “go down in history as my favorite.” The request NASA submitted to Congress was just over $4.7 billion, an increase of about $160 million over the FY79 budget, counting in the latter a $185 million supplemental NASA had asked for. The FY80 request would amount to slightly less than the rate of inflation, Dr. Frosch said; not counting the $185 million supplemental in the FY79 budget, the 1980 request would be “about equal to inflation.” Whereas funding sought for space science and applications was up about 20% and the total amount included support for all ongoing programs, it contained no money for “new flight project starts of any major kind” in space sciences or applications. The budget did contain “some increases in aeronautics, where it is more difficult to identity a major new start in any case.” “Current best estimate” for the first Space Shuttle flight was November 9, postponed from September 28, and NASA’s schedule had been adjusted accordingly. Money requested for space science had increased $100 million, about 20% over FY79; this covered major projects and research and development now under way, such as Space Telescope, Galileo (the Jupiter-orbiter probe), the high-energy astronomical observatory, Spacelab, the solar polar mission, infrared astronomy satellite, and solar maximum mission. Applications funding included money for joint multiagency research in crop monitoring and commodity projection by NASA, together with the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior and the Agency for International Development (AID). Funds for aeronautics would increase 14% to cover current research and technology and to continue the aircraft energy efficiency program, with research on reduction of noise and pollution. In manpower, NASA would lose 674 permanent Civil Service positions over FY79 and FY80, part of this the agency’s share of a government-wide 2 % cut in personnel. Frosch summarized the budget as one that “in key program areas continues momentum. . .while it’s tight, we think we can make a good transition to the Shuttle era and we can keep going on the science, the applications, and the aeronautics.. (Text; W Star, Jan 22/79, A-10)
At “encounter minus 4 days,” JPL issued a Voyager bulletin showing a nine-photo mosaic of Jupiter’s surface constructed from time-lapse photographs taken 7.8 million kilometers (4.7 million miles) from the planet. The bulletin also gave data on expected Sun and Earth occultations by Jupiter offering opportunities for “unique radio science and ultraviolet measurements” and on the close approaches to the five large Jovian satellites that would also occur March 5. (Mission status report 37) I ^ INlfcNHUNAU* preceding page blank not filmed The Voyager project manager, JPL’s Robert Parks, called it “spectacularly successful.” (NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02; mission status reports 38, 39)
Columbia, first Shuttle orbiter destined for launch into space, landed with its Boeing 747 carrier at 11:03 local time on & 15,000-foot runway built for this and future landings at KSC. Among the 3,000 persons awaiting the arrival were astronauts John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen, scheduled as crew on the maiden flight set for November 9. NASA officials said “a series of minor snafus” might delay the first launch until 1980. (W Star, Mar 25/79, A-3; W Post, Mar 25/79, A-6; NY Times, Mar 26/79)
Neil Armstrong, “America’s reluctant space hero,” said the United States should develop a permanent manned orbiting space station for long-duration exposure of people and equipment to the space environment. At an interview about the 10th anniversary of the moon landing, the University of Cincinnati engineering professor who in 1969 had been the first man to walk on the moon said that, if the United States had an ongoing manned space program, “we could have solved the problems” with Skylab. {Today, June 12/79, 16A)
The May 25 crash of a DC-10 aircraft killing 275 was predictable in view of previous problems with that plane, Rep. John L. Burton (D-Calif.), chairman, told a House subcommittee on transportation June 11. He asked Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Administrator Langhorne Bond why the FAA had twice previously grounded the DC-lOs for inspection and twice sent them into the air again. After the accident, the FAA waited for 13 days to ground the DC-lOs, “and then only because a federal judge.. .acting on a suit brought by the Airline Passengers Association ordered them to do it,” Washington Star columnist Mary McGrory noted. Engine-mounting pylons, which an FAA memo from California not seen by Bond had called a design fault, apparently caused some of the problems. Bond said that what McGrory called “the worst plane tragedy in U.S. history” was “a single, severe event” when “that pylon experienced an overload of that wing and those fasteners,” insisting that FAA’s actions were proper at the time. Rep. Burton said that since 1974 the FAA had had many pylon problem reports; Bond said they did not form a pattern, as they concerned “individual and random defects in an entire area. . .there was no trend.” In 1975, McDonnell Douglas had suggested some remedies for problems with the pylons; Bond told the subcommittee that manufacturers’ suggestions were not mandatory, and the FAA did not make the airlines follow them. (W Star June 12/79, A-2, A-4)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes. —Eldon D. Taylor, formerly of the NASA Headquarters Office of Space Science and Applications, most recently assistant director of administration for the NSF was approved by the president July 30 as NASA’s first inspector general. He had also been deputy assistant administrator for resource management at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) before going to NSF. (NASA anno Aug 3/79) —Dr. Lee R. Scherer, director of KSC since January 1975, would become associate administrator for external relations at NASA Headquarters September 2, succeeding Arnold W. Frutkin, who retired June 22. Scherer, who retired in 1964 from the Navy as a captain, was program manager for the lunar orbiter manned spacecraft while on assignment from the Navy in 1962 and was director of DFRC 1971-1975. (NASA Release 79-106; NASA anno Aug 8/79) —Succeeding Scherer as KSC director would be Richard G. Smith, the deputy director since 1974 of MSFC who had been on detail to Headquarters as deputy associate administrator for STS (the Shuttle program). Smith had been in charge of operations during the Skylab reentry. At MSFC, he had been program manager for the Saturn 5 rocket engine that made Apollo possible. (W Post, Aug 9/79, A-ll; NASA anno Aug 8/79) —Dr. Walter B. Olstad, chief of space systems division at LaRC since July 1975, would become deputy associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology at NASA Headquarters effective October 1, succeeding Dr. John M.	Klineberg, who became deputy director of LeRC July 1. Olstad had begun as a research engineer at the NACA Langley laboratory in 1954, working first with transonic tunnels, then in reentry physics. (NASA Release 79-110) —JSC announced that Clifford E. Charlesworth had become acting deputy director August 10, succeeding Sigurd A. Sjoberg, who retired May 18. Charlesworth for three years had been deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program office, responsible for coordinating JSC technical management and Shuttle users. He was deputy manager of the Skylab program 1970-1972, then manager of JSC’s Earth-resources program office. He joined JSC as a flight controller in 1962, working on Gemini and Apollo missions and was one of the flight directors during Apollo ITs 1969 Moon landing. (JSC Release 79-51)
NASA reported that 35 candidates for Space Shuttle astronaut had completed classroom instruction and moved into engineering assignments at JSC. The courses had begun in July 1978, and the successful candidates would become astronauts in July 1980. NASA had brought in personnel from other NASA centers and from universities to conduct courses on subjects such as space physics, ascent and reentry aerodynamics, spaceflight physiology, and tracking techniques; veteran astronauts had lectured on the budget process, people, and requirements in the space program and on being a CAPCOM (capsule communicator). Videotapes of the classes would be available to all employees at JSC. The first crews selected for Shuttle flights had begun lessons in the mission simulator, and the astronaut candidates would be observers. Lessons would include tests of every sort of emergency the crews might encounter during a mission, supervised by instructors who had spent six months learning how to harass the astronauts in their simulator exercises. The lesson plan, scheduled to take nine months “not counting. . .problems,” would prepare the crews for nearly any emergency, NASA said. (NASA Release 79-34; JSC Release 79-20)
MSFC reported that a delegation from the People’s Republic of China (PRC) visiting the United States since November would arrive at MSFC January 5 to investigate peaceful uses of space technology. Following up a visit to the PRC last July by Presidential Science Advisor Dr. Frank Press, the Chinese delegation, accompanied by NASA representatives, had visited several NASA centers and U.S. aerospace industry establishments. Among items of interest to the visitors at MSFC would be the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, currently undergoing tests. The PRC representatives were to be in the United States until mid-January and had concluded an informal agreement on developing a civilian communications system for the PRC and on buying equipment to receive Earth resources data from Landsat remote-sensing satellites. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch headed the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Jen Xin-min, director of the PRC’s Academy of Space Technology, headed the PRC delegation. (MSFC Release 79-2)
MSFC reported completion of flight-certification test firings of the Space Shuttle main engines June 27, with a simulated abort mission requiring the engine to fire 823 seconds. To detect potential weaknesses in systems or hardware, engineers would remove selected components and inspect them for wear and tear; after inspection and analysis of test data, the same test series would be repeated on the same engine to simulate typical mission profiles. J.R. Thompson, MSFC’s main-engine project manager, said that engine performance and operation during the test series was very satisfactory. Rockwell conducted the tests at NSTL. (MSFC Release 79-69)
MSFC announced that it had issued requests for proposals to design a 25-kilowatt power system to provide supplemental solar power for long-duration Shuttle missions or support free-flying payloads. In early spring of 1980 NASA would award two or more parallel contracts at $1 million each for studies to be completed within 12 months. Development would begin in 1982; the system would fly its first mission in 1984-1985 attached to a Shuttle orbiter carrying a Spacelab, to provide additional power and attitude and heat control. The power system on this mission would carry an experiments pallet and would be left in space (after the orbiter completed its mission) to power the long-duration experiments riding on the pallet. Luther E. Powell, MSFC project manager, said the power system would be forerunner of future large systems in space, such as service platforms and other unmanned large space structures. (MSFC Release 79-103)
NASA announced that Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart had resigned to take a position with a State of California commission on energy resources that plans and regulates the state energy system. Schweikart flew the first lunar module on Apollo 9 in 1969 and was commander of the backup crew for the first Skylab mission. In May 1974 he became director of user affairs in the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters; in September 1976, he was named assistant for payload operations in Planning and Program Integration and was detailed in September 1977 to the State of California as assistant to the governor for science and technology. (NASA anno July 30/79)
Astronauts interviewed in Las Vegas, Nev., on the eve of an Apollo 11 10th anniversary commemoration noted the lack of funding and support for the space program on the part of the U.S. government. James McDivitt, who commanded Apollo 9, said that he foresaw nothing like the Apollo program coming along. Ron Evans, command-module pilot for Apollo 17, said that spectacular space events were not in the cards for the next 20 years. Charles Duke, 10th man to walk on the Moon; Al Worden, Apollo 15 command-module pilot; and Dick Gordon, Apollo 12 command-module pilot, said the Shuttle system was not as safe as craft used in previous manned programs, as “Congress isn’t ready to give NASA the money it needs.” (Today, July 15/79, 20A; W Post, July 15/79, A-4; P Inq, July 17/79, 11)
The New York Times said President Carter planned to meet with NASA officials to review Shuttle management and funding. The report said NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch would ask for more money to prevent further serious delays in Shuttle production and testing. Estimated Shuttle spending for FY81 would be $1 billion. NASA’s original estimate of Shuttle cost was $5.15 billion in 1971 dollars, to include delivery of two of four of the planned spacecraft; current estimate was $6.1 billion in 1971 dollars, a 20% increase. Rockwell International had delivered only one flight vehicle, now at KSC for preflight checks and installation of insulating tiles. (NY Times, Nov 5/79, A-l)
NASA announced that a special staff of consultants appointed in May 1979 to assess Shuttle management had submitted its report to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. The report contained eight major conclusions (and comments). 1) When the Shuttle program began, NASA managers took an economical approach to space transportation. Subsequent budgets challenged managers to bring in a difficult technical program with limited funds. —(NASA originally envisioned a S5.15 billion program, predicting first manned orbital flight in 1978.) 2)	Shuttle management had achieved “a commendable level of accomplishment. . .considering fiscal constraints placed upon the program since its inception.” (Though this report necessarily focused on deficiencies, it noted that Shuttle-program personnel had individually and collectively achieved a great deal in a large and very complex program,) 3)	Shuttle management, in an effort to proceed toward completion even under funding limitations, had set up work schedules demanding more performance than could be delivered. (This approach had resulted in deferment of some of the planned work each year, as funds required exceeded those available. When critical new work became necessary within a fiscal year, as technical problems came up, even more scheduled work had to be deferred. This resulted in continual planning adjustments that precluded establishment of a stable baseline and led to program inefficiency. (Example: subcontractor work increased or decreased repeatedly as funding changed in critical areas such as tile manufacturing. Program changes and associated up-and-down expenditure rates had led to termination of experienced contractor and subcontractor personnel, who became unavailable later because of aerospace industry demand. The subsequent employment of inexperienced personnel reduced overall efficiency. The report called this a major cause for concern, especially in the production phase of the program, also, costs due to delays in solving technical problems had increased.) 4)	Long-range planning and status reporting were lacking: emphasis was on the current fiscal year with only secondary attention to work remaining to be done. Near-term planning took so much attention that long-term impact of deferred work was not integrated into the budgets. (Effective long-range planning requires clear understanding of what has been accomplished, plus accurate prediction of remaining work. Shuttle management faced budgets showing unrealistic costs of its goals, with no effective status-reporting system. Most program planning consisted of constant near-term replanning to count up expenditures in a timely manner, although measuring the work achieved through these expenditures and estimating work still needed were weak. Management tools lacking in some major Shuttle contracts, such as cost reporting integrated with work measurement, were useful but did not provide an automatic solution. (The only available means of assessing even the partial funding requirements of the Shuttle was an agencywide budget plan called POP [program operating plan] inadequate for program control: it appeared only twice a year and contained little pertinent data between July and March. NASA needed a reliable way—lending itself to independent evaluation—to know program baseline and status, with realistic cost and schedule projections. Management must overcome the cumulative impact of previous constraints and pressures, while making allowance for the need to rely on contractor input.) 5)	The Shuttle organization functioned well from a technical standpoint but not in the areas of schedule and budget. Organization needed strengthening, and two-way communications needed improvement. (The original concept of Shuttle organization was a Level 1 program director at NASA Headquarters, a Level 2 [integration] program manager at JSC, and Level 3 separate program offices at the various centers: JSC for the orbiter; MSFC for the main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster; and KSC for checkout and launch. Prime contractor support to project offices would be Level 4. Time had altered the concept: the Headquarters Level 1 associate administrator had become the de facto program director, who required the directors of JSC, MSFC, and KSC to take more part in activities reporting to them; responsibility for funding shifted from Level 2 to Level 1. This seemed a feasible arrangement, but the report said “none of the management levels in Rockwell and NASA had a good grasp” of undone work and other items needing completion before shipping Columbia to KSC. Investigators said Level 1 “broad and detailed involvement” with technicalities meant less time for cost and schedule. NASA needed cost awareness “independent of contractor input” and sensitivity to “lower-level cost trends.”) 6)	Schedule changes were no longer a valid way to cope with reduced program or funds; fixed delivery schedules and milestones in the initial operating program not yet achieved required a new management approach. (Work schedules and budgets must allow for modifications required after the first few Shuttle flights. Users must recognize that initial operations would include development; NASA should make Shuttle users aware of realistic performance and schedule commitments, with priority to successful completion of development.) 7)	Transition to the operational phase remained to be worked out; management should ensure that current organization alignments for Shuttle operations are appropriate. The NASA/DOD interface needed clarification. (NASA Headquarters managed program operations, with operations offices at JSC, MSFC, and KSC; cooperation between the operations and program offices was evident, but transition from development to operations would need work. Since needs and plans of the DOD user community would affect NASA planning and budget, management to forestall problems should maintain “high-level near-term understanding” of DOD plans.) 8)	The potential was high for unexpected technical problems, schedule slips, and cost growth. All program planning should include appropriate reserves. (Although the report noted that some parts of a total management-control and information system were in place and functioning well, significant potential for problems would remain until deficiencies cited in the report were corrected.) (Shuttle Program Management Assessment rept, Sept 12/79 [issued to press Oct 18/79], HistOfc fls; NASA note to editors NE79-20; JSC Roundup, Sept 21/79, 1)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
The House Committee on Science and Technology announced that it would hold a joint hearing July 19-20 with the House Select Committee on Aging on space technology applications for the elderly and handicapped, to mark the 10th anniversary of the first Moon walk. Committee chairman Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) said that the hearings would emphasize the importance of space program spinoffs in solving problems here on Earth. NASA would release a report “Technologies for the Handicapped and Aged” on innovations such as a lunar-gravity simulator to speed rehabilitation therapy; a voice-controlled vehicle for paraplegics that could pick up packages, open doors, and handle eating utensils; a human-tissue stimulator to reduce chronic pain; healthmonitoring systems; and fabrics to prevent bedsores. (H Rept Release 96-60)
The Washington Post reported that India's “problem-plagued space program” had suffered another setback August 10 when a seven-story-tall launcher, product of 11 years of work, crashed 5 minutes 15 seconds after liftoff and dropped its payload into the Bay of Bengal 300 miles from the takeoff point. The failure was a real disappointment, following USSR launches of two India satellites, both of which developed serious problems: the first, orbited in April 1975, lost power after a few days. A much more complex satellite launched in June 1979 from a Soviet site would have mapped India’s surface using television cameras to record mineral deposits, water reservoirs, forests, and Himalayan snowcover; the cameras failed to switch on, and scientists got only the data from lesser experiments on oceans. This launch was India’s first attempt to orbit its own spacecraft on its own launcher from its own site (the small island of Sriharikota north of Madras, whose residents were moved to the mainland as a precaution). Though reporters were not allowed to attend, government cameramen were present. All publicity on India’s space program discussed mineral location and other social uses, but the Washington Post noted the military element: India was trying to join the “club” that included the United States, France, the Soviet Union, China, and Japan; India had lost a border war with China in 1962 and had been at war with Pakistan three times in the past 30 years. A rocket able to orbit a spacecraft could give India intermediate-range ballistic-missile capability; a satellite transmitting television images of mineral resources could also monitor troop movements. The lost booster was a four-stage rocket with solid-propellant motors designed to orbit an 88-pound satellite. The launch had been successful until first-stage burnout; the anomaly had occurred in second-stage flight. (W Post, Aug 11/79, A-13)
Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle orbiter built, began its last trek across the United States from KSC to DFRC, where “its flight log books will be closed,” said the Marshall Star. DFRC said the craft, which served as prototype in all Shuttle tests to date, would be trucked to Rockwell’s Palmdale facility, where parts would be removed for additional testing and possibly used in constructing future orbiters. Enterprise had made eight captive and five free-flight approach-and-landing tests at DFRC in 1977; it then was ferried to MSFC for ground vibration tests, then to KSC in April this year to check out facilities for handling Columbia, first Shuttle scheduled for launch. JSC Roundup later reported that 750,000 people had crowded airports during the return to California and that Enterprise was a two-day front-page story in area papers at each of the six stopovers and a lead story on television and radio. Donald “Deke” Slayton, now program manager for Shuttle flight-test operations, piloted the T-38 chase plane flying with Enterprise and was spokesman for the Shuttle program during press briefings. (DFRC Release 29-79; Marshall Star Aug 8/79, 1; JSC Roundup, Aug 24/79, 1)
NASA said that it had turned off Applications Technology Satellite 6 (ATS 6) and would boost it to a higher orbit August 6. ATS 6 had lost three of its four thrusters and would be a hazard to other spacecraft if it failed on station. Launched in May 1974, it had exceeded its design lifetime by three years; transmitting directly to small ground receivers, it had relayed educational, scientific, and health programs to stations worldwide. “Firsts” included the first educational courses by satellite, first two-way teleconference and “telemedicine,” and first successful satellite-to-satellite communications. (NASA Release 79-81) During June: NASA announced that Arnold W. Frutkin, associate administrator for external relations since November 1978, would retire June 27. For 18 years before his present appointment, he had headed NASA’s Office of International Affairs and was credited with “an extraordinarily successful series” of international space endeavors and policy initiatives including ATS 6 broadcasts, U.S.-USSR arrangements for Apollo-Soyuz, ESA Spacelab agreement, and multinational work on NASA science and applications missions. He had come to NASA from the National Academy of Sciences, where he was deputy director of the U.S. committee for the International Geophysical Year (IGY). (NASA anno June 1/79; NASA Release 79-85) JSC announced the appointment of Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, veteran NASA manager for manned spaceflight projects, to direct JSC operations at KSC, completing installation of the thermal protection tiles and internal vehicle systems on the orbiter Columbia. Kleinknecht, who had joined NACA in 1942, would report to KSC from permanent assignment in Paris as deputy associate administrator for STS (European operations). (JSC Release 79-39) WFC announced that its associate director, Abraham Spinak, would be on special assignment as executive assistant to a special NASA senior-staff group evaluating management of the STS. The group would study Shuttle funding problems, uncertainties of program predictions, and information flow and control. (WFC Release 79-12)
NASA’s Pioneer 11 had encountered Saturn’s bow shock (where the solar wind—a stream of electrified particles from the Sun—bent around Saturn’s magnetic field), project manager Charles Hall reported from ARC, adding that solar storms during the past few days had played havoc with Pioneer’s radio signals. Pioneer was not designed in 1967 to fly to Saturn; that mission arose only after a successful Jupiter flyby in 1974, calling at first for Pioneer to fly through Saturn’s rings on what the Washington Post called a “kamikaze mission.” The most dangerous moment of the 6.5-year 2-million-mile journey would be crossing September 1 through belts of unknown material beyond the ring systems around Saturn that had been visible from Earth, during which Pioneer would risk a potentially fatal collision. Because of intense radiation (solar-particle interference was degrading the quality of Pioneer images), mission controllers at ARC had reduced the data transmission rate by half. Solar storms had occurred late in July and in midAugust, and high-energy particles from the second storm had reached Saturn at the same time as slower particles from the first storm. Reducing the transmission rate would diminish effects of interference and also the quality of the images. Pioneer would enter the dangerous area outside the visible ring system at 10:44 a.m. EDT, but scientists would not know for 86 minutes whether it had survived (the time the signals needed to reach Earth). No one knew the composition of the 2 minute-wide third ring; if it consisted of boulders, Pioneer could probably get past it safely, but a ring of dust particles could riddle the fast-moving craft and end its career. Project scientist Dr. John Wolfe said chances for survival were half and half; pictures already transmitted by Pioneer were better than any yet taken from Earth telescopes. The Washington Post reported September 1 that solar storms had increased the noise level in space to 10 times normal. In early afternoon, Pioneer had flown into a detectable magnetosphere, showing that Saturn was surrounded by a strong and sizable magnetic field estimated at 700 to 1,000 times the size of Earth’s but roughly equivalent in strength. The New York Times reported September 2 that, as of 12:31 p.m. EDT September 1, Pioneer 11 had survived a hail of fine particles to get within 13,000 miles of Saturn for a 4-hour first encounter. During the approach, scientists were keeping watch on the plane of the visible rings through which Pioneer was descending: Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa was first to note Pioneer’s approach to “dangerous ring debris” in its path. However, the 10:30 a.m. crossing at a speed of 48,000 mph had taken only a second, though ARC had to wait until 2:02 p.m. to learn what had happened; when the radio signals continued past that moment without interruption, “a cheer went up.” LaRC’s Donald H. Humes said that Pioneer 11 might have had a close call, as the micrometeoroid detector had registered two impacts during the crossing: this was the limit of the instrument’s counting ability, and more impacts might actually have occurred. The impacts apparently caused no damage. The sharp rise in radiation encountered by Pioneer before it flew under the rings had fallen as abruptly as it rose, and by the time Pioneer was under the rings (closer to the planet) the radiation reading had disappeared completely. Dr. John Simpson of the University of Chicago said the rings were big enough to “scour out” nearly all the radiation trapped by the planet’s magnetic field. (The New York Times quoted Dr. Van Allen as saying that the radiation count while Pioneer flew under the rings was even lower than while the spacecraft was sitting on its launching pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla., 6.5 years ago. Saturn’s radiation, although it would be lethal to an unprotected human, posed no hazard to spacecraft, Van Allen added.) After its close approach, Pioneer swung behind the planet, out of radio contact for 78 minutes, during which its on-board instruments recorded data for later transmission. Upon reemerging, the spacecraft had to cross the ring plane again on its outward journey; the outbound crossing came at 2:32 p.m., and controllers again had to wait for indication that the spacecraft was safe. At 3:55 p.m. the signals affirmed that Pioneer 11 had survived another crossing. This was the last predicted hazard for the spacecraft, which would continue past Saturn to the outer edge of Earth’s solar system and enter interstellar space in 1993, by which time its radio would no longer be audible. The safe passage meant that Pioneer could spend September 2 and 3 photographing Titan and measuring Saturn’s rings from the dark side of the planet; also, that the two Voyager spacecraft following Pioneer could approach without fear of damage. In its two-hour passage, besides recording impacts, Pioneer had photographed a new ring previously undetected by Earth telescopes, called the F ring: scientists already knew of four rings called A through D (in order of discovery, not location), three of them bright enough to be seen from Earth telescopes, and a fifth (or E) ring had been suspected close to the A ring although Pioneer did not report it. Pioneer had also tracked what might be a new Saturn moon orbiting about 70,000 miles out; some thought it might be a known moon, Janus, but it was in a position indicating that it was an entirely new satellite that would bring Saturn’s count to 11, one short of Jupiter’s 12. Pioneer 11 photos of Saturn showed dark blue and green stripes across it just below the north pole; the colors, not so vivid from Earth, probably came from sunlight scattering in upper-atmosphere clouds. Jet streams like those seen on Jupiter appeared to whirl around Saturn at speeds of 300 mph. Pioneer images could give a better idea of the dimensions and composition of the rings when compared with Earth-based photographs. In the six years it had taken to reach Saturn, Pioneer 11 had reported a space-particle strike only once every two months or so, LaRC’s Humes recalled. Once past Saturn, Pioneer was to photograph Titan from about 221,000 miles, record its temperature and atmospheric methane, and try to detect “life chemicals”; as no life was evident on Venus or Mars, this might be the last chance to find extraterrestrial biology in the Earth’s solar system. First images of Titan had shown a fuzzy ball of light indicating a stratospheric layer of orange smog with blue streaks that might denote an atmosphere beneath the smog and clouds. The closest approach at 2:04 p.m. September 2 was 220,000 miles, and Pioneer had taken the first pictures at 260,000 miles. The pictures would be enhanced by computer before scientists could make detailed analysis. On September 3, Pioneer was already more than a million miles from Saturn, relaying no ill effects from the planet’s rings or radiation belts. Early on the morning of September 2, NASA reported loss of about two hours of Titan data from Pioneer transmissions to the Madrid station; ARC controllers did not know whether the loss occurred between spacecraft and station or between Spain and the control center about 40 miles south of San Francisco. A loss between spacecraft and station would be irretrievable: Pioneer had only the one opportunity for Titan observations after its close approach. It was not sending images at the time, but about 15 minutes of a CalTech infrared sensor’s readings on Titan temperature were lost. The cause might have been electrical storms in space or on Earth, or passage of the signals close to the surface of the Sun on their way to the Earth, any of which would make it difficult or impossible for the Madrid station to lock on to the signals. A dramatic difference in day-night Titan temperatures would suggest a thin atmosphere; a thicker, warmer atmosphere might be more hospitable to life forms. Project manager Charles Hall reported September 4 that the Titan data loss previously attributed to radiation disturbances was now thought to result from radiofrequency interference by a Soviet satellite. Both Pioneer 11 and three USSR satellites had been operating on a frequency reserved for scientific use. The Soviet Union had twice agreed to shut down during Saturn encounter, and Hall said NASA had “no doubt the Soviets would have acted” if they had been asked; “we did not request them to turn off their satellite on Monday,” U.S. scientists did not realize at first that signals from a recently launched Soviet satellite might interfere with reception of Pioneer data, being “between 100 and 1,000 times stronger than the signals we were receiving from our spacecraft.” Aerospace Daily said September 6 that the three Soviet satellites that had stopped transmitting September 1-2 for the benefit of Pioneer’s Saturn flyby were early-warning satellites designed to detect U.S. ballistic missile attacks on the Soviet Union. Cosmos 1024, 1109, and 1124 had suspended transmissions September 1 and 2 at NASA’s request; however, no request was made regarding September 3, and Cosmos 1124 had operated as usual. Western analysts questioned, Aerospace Daily noted, “whether the U.S. would suspend communications with any of is early-warning satellites if the Soviets made such a request” during a planetary mission. Pioneer project officials told a September 6 news briefing that the loss of Titan data was not the fault of the Soviet satellite, which was broadcasting before but not during the lost transmission. Poor data had resulted from the combination of solar storm and poor transmission from Madrid. Some data had in fact reached ARC, but was so “noisy” as to be useless. Scientists said the moon discovered by Pioneer was inside the orbit of Janus, previously the innermost known satellite of Saturn; the new ring (labeled G) was between the orbits of Rhea and Titan, beyond the rings visible to Earth telescopes. (NY Times, Sept 2/79, 1; Sept 3/79, A-l; Sept 4/79, C-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; W Post, Sept 1/79, A-3; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 5/79, A-10; W Star Sept 1/79, A-4; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; A/D, Sept 6/79, 17; Today, Sept 1/79, 4A; Sept 2/79, 1A)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, on March 29 signed a memorandum of understanding in Washington, D.C., on a joint international solar-polar mission to be launched in 1983. NASA and ESA would each provide a spacecraft, and ESA would supply software and personnel to support ESA’s flight operations in the United States. NASA would be responsible for mission control, launch operations, and tracking and data acquisition, and for several experiments. JPL would manage the NASA scientific effort and development of a NASA spacecraft; JSC would manage the Shuttle launch portion of the mission; ESTEC would manage the European effort. The objectives of the mission would be to study the structure and emissions of the Sun as a function of latitude from the solar equator to the solar poles and to study the interplanetary medium Earth-to-Jupiter and the Jovian magnetosphere. Launched from a Shuttle, the two craft, each propelled by an upper-stage booster, would take a path in the ecliptic plane (that containing all the planets in Earth’s system) toward Jupiter, using its gravity to propel them out of the ecliptic toward the Sun on trajectories to pass one over the north and one over the south solar poles, retrace the ecliptic track, pass over the opposite poles, and fly back toward Jupiter. Mission lifetime would be about five years. (NASA Release 79-37; ESA anno Mar 30/79) During March: FBIS carried regular reports on the progress of the Soyuz 32 cosmonauts aboard the Salyut 6 orbiting space station. Upon arrival February 26, the crew had begun reactivating the thermal regulators, water regeneration system, and ventilation. On March 1, they had begun checkout of individual consoles and scientific instruments, tested the manual attitude control system, and corrected the flight path of Salyut 6 using Soyuz 32 propulsion. The following day the crew did baseline medical checkups using Polynom apparatus; the flight engineer was tested in the morning, and the commander was tested in the afternoon. In an interview March 4, the crew’s doctor reported that Lyakhov had needed 1.5 days to adapt to weightlessness but was now feeling well. The crew had asked to begin their exercise program on trainer machines and cycles several days ahead of schedule. Lyakhov’s regime emphasized his “vestibular system”; Ryumin’s, the cardiovascular. On March 5, Tass, the Soviet news agency, said that the doctors were keeping close watch on Commander Lyakhov, “a thick-set man...on his first flight in outer space.” The commentator said “unhasty adaptation” was important during the first few days on the space station, which imposed three peak loads at one time: adaptation to weightlessness, complicated docking and transfer procedures, and emotional strain. More time had been allowed on this flight than usual for the crew to check all the station systems, both those governing flight and those controlling living conditions (the “boost week,” a term used by cosmonaut Vladimir Kovalenok, one of the communications team keeping in touch with the Soyuz 32 crew). A March 6 broadcast interview with a “scientific employee at the Flight Center” on repair and servicing of the Salyut said that the intensive activity “did not mean that anything is broken or needs mending.” On Salyut 6, unlike its predecessors, individual items of equipment for the first time could be exchanged when their resources were exhausted. The station had been in orbit for 18 months and carried almost 1,000 different instruments, the reporter said. Important systems, such as life support, had been designed to be practically failure proof by using interchangeable units within easy reach, facilitating periodic exchange of equipment. Introduction of the Progress automated cargo ships meant that new instruments, equipment, and tools were available upon crew request. Progress 2 had brought the Soyuz 29 crew a globe indicator for the control panel to show the station’s location in relation to Earth; it had also brought new computer units for the Delta automated navigation system. The first job in reactivating the Salyut 6 station had been to check out the docking unit on the transfer module, with its opening into outer space; the Soyuz 26 crew had done this last year. Lyakhov and Ryumin would have to test each on-board system and plug in reserve circuits or replace units. The reporter pointed out that, notwithstanding the long use of the station, “not one reserve circuit in any system has so far been switched on.” The current crew would replace ventilators in the thermal system, light bulbs, cables in the television and communications systems, components of the exercise equipment, and filters and regenerators in the life-support systems. On March 12, Progress 5 was launched with a load of fuel for the Salyut 6 propulsion unit and materials for its on-board systems. A commentator said that portable cables and other mobile elements of radiocommunication “wear out heavily” on long flights; the crew had replaced headsets, cables, and switches. They had also set up and operated an on-board videotape recorder and a video monitoring device. An interview March 13 with cosmonaut Vladimir Aksenov said that the Salyut represented a new stage of technology, not only because it could be supplied but also because it could be overhauled in space with components and assemblies flown there by freight and crew transport vessels. Aksenov noted that the crew had used an ordinary soldering iron, said to be an enormous departure for repairs in a closed weightless space. Also, he said, basic scientific apparatus had heretofore been assembled in a ground workshop and checked out in a ground station; for the first time, the installation and test of new apparatus would take place on an operating space station in orbit. This was made possible by a wide selection of tools designed especially for use in space: pliers, screwdrivers, clamps, and special instruments to handle special nuts and bolts. Upon the arrival March 14 of the Progress 5, bringing fuel, equipment, experiment materials, and mail, the crew’s doctor said in an interview that previous flights had indicated that weightlessness had some tricky aspects and that the consequences of exposure to it could be very serious. The current crew were apparently beginning to feel at home in the new surroundings, however. After unloading the ferry, the crew had the job of dismantling the Kristall electric furnace used for more than 40 experiments in space processing of materials and installing new apparatus better designed to operate in weightlessness; they had also plugged in a new chemical battery to reinvigorate the power system. By March 21, the unloading of the supply ship was completed, and the crew was ahead of schedule using the new equipment, especially a color television camera to show the interior of the station with equipment replacements including new sensors installed in the work area to detect minimal air pollution in the station’s atmosphere. On March 24, the crew communicated by television with the flight control center “in the direction from earth to the spaceship.. .for the first time in the history of space flight.” The control center could now transmit drawings, plans, and working documents from the ground to the Salyut; “in principle,” said the report, “any central TV transmission can be sent to the spaceship.” By month’s end, Tass said that the crew had adapted to weightlessness and were proceeding with scheduled tasks. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 1-28/79)
The Washington Post said NASA’s inspector general and the DOD were investigating charges that Rockwell International’s Space System Group beginning in 1977 had hidden cost overruns by charging expenses to the wrong projects. Work on the USAF’s Navstar satellite was charged to NASA’s Space Shuttle contract, employees alleged, and current costs of Shuttle development were charged to future operations, in violation of government budget rules. Present and former Rockwell employees had provided company documents to back up their statements. Ray Sena, an employee who had complained to higher management and to NASA officials, was formally suspended by Rockwell. Company officials admitted an investigation was in progress but refused comment. Although NASA learned of the situation in 1977, it only recently admitted that the Shuttle was at least $500 million over budget. (W Post, Nov 5/79, A-2)
NASA announced a short-term research program using the human-powered Gossamer Albatross 2, sister ship of the craft that flew over the English Channel this summer, powered by a pilot pedaling a bicycle-like system to drive the propeller. The study, funded jointly by DFRC and LaRC, would fly a lightweight data system on the aircraft to measure its stability, control, and performance characteristics in human-powered flight; under tow (in propeller-off flight); and under electric-motor in steady-state conditions. NASA would use results of the study in future low-speed lightweight aircraft flying at extreme altitudes. (NASA Release 79-141) During October: NASA reported personnel actions. —Dr. Lee R. Scherer, associate administrator for external relations at NASA Headquarters and former director of KSC, received for a second time the agency’s highest honor, the distinguished service medal, from Dr. Robert A. Frosch in a Headquarters ceremony October 4. Scherer previously received NASA’s exceptional service medal and exceptional scientific achievement medal. (KSC Release 169-79) —L. Michael Weeks, formerly with General Electric, would be deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems Acquisition under John Yardley at Headquarters effective November 5. (NASA Release 79-138; NASA anno Oct 29/79) —The AP reported the death October 22 of Dr. Hans Gruene, 69, KSC director of launch vehicles from 1964 to his retirement in 1973. Born in Germany, he entered the United States in 1945 with a group headed by Wernher von Braun assigned to launch V-2 rockets captured from the German army. He had come to Cape Canaveral in 1952 to set up a joint long-range proving ground that became the ETR. He had concluded his career with the four Skylab launches in 1973. (WStar, Oct 25/79, B-5; Spaceport News, Oct 26/79, 1)
In a move “necessary and proper to achieve the objective of national technical superiority through joint action with U.S. domestic concerns,” NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced that the agency would offer industry “equity partnership ventures” in use of the Space Shuttle, NASA technical advice, data, equipment, and facilities for commercial purposes. NASA had set up guidelines to ease U.S. industry entry into an area that, because of high technology and high economic risk, had traditionally been left to the federal government. Such a government-industry relationship would combine industry’s risk capital and experience with NASA’s resources to ensure U.S. leadership in space processing of materials. Areas of potential commercial interest included semiconductors, infrared and nuclear detectors, metallurgy, microwave devices, and medicine. (NASA Release 79-119)
NASA reported delivery of a second experimental turbofan engine produced by AVCO Corporation for a program called QCGAT (quiet clean general-aviation turbofan) to LeRC for testing. The program aimed at decreasing noise and exhaust emissions while maintaining or reducing fuel consumption, compared with present general-aviation turbofans. The first engine in the program arrived at LeRC last winter from its designer/builder Garrett AiResearch; results of tests on that engine showed noise reduction of about 10 decibels and emission reduction of 54% for carbon monoxide and 76% for unburned hydrocarbons. Preliminary AVCO results showed noise-level reduction of at least 14 decibels compared to the quietest business jet now in service, and emission levels even lower than those of the first engine. Noise reduction in the AVCO engine resulted from improved design of internal engine parts (using soundabsorbing materials to muffle noise from fan, compressor, and turbine) and reduced engine-exhaust velocity. LeRC project manager G. Kenneth Sievers said test results from both engines showed “noise need not be a major constraint” on use of turbofan-powered aircraft for general aviation. (NASA Release 79-137)
NASA set June 30, 1980, as the date of the first Shuttle launch, depending on several milestones: Columbia rollout from the orbiter-processing facility to the vertical-assembly building in late March 1980; rollout of the complete Shuttle stack (orbiter, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank) from the VAB to launch pad 39A in mid-April; and a flight-readiness (20-seeond) firing of the Shuttle’s main engine on the launch pad in mid-May. Also needed to make this schedule was certification of the Shuttle main engine by June 30, 1980. Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch said that “some time in August or September” would be a much more likely date as unforeseen problems could delay the launch. NASA planned nine unmanned launches in 1980, eight of them reimbursable by other organizations. (NASA Release 79-162) During November: NASA announced appointment effective immediately of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of JSC’s Shuttle payload and integration development program, as acting associate administrator for STS operations at Headquarters. Lunney would set up the new office that resulted from NASA’s decision to separate STS acquisition from operations, reporting to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. Lunney had been with NASA since 1959, serving at LeRC and LaRC and going to Houston when the MSFC was created. There, he was technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz test project 1972-1975 and was deputy associate administrator for space flight at Headquarters before taking the position at JSC in August 1977. (NASA Release 79-156; NASA anno Nov 16/79) —NASA announced’appointment of A. Thomas Young as director of GSFC, succeeding Dr. Robert Cooper, who left government service in June. Young, deputy director of ARC since February 1979, had been with NASA since 1961 and had worked at LaRC as mission director for the Viking mission to Mars and mission-definition manager for the lunar orbiter project. Before assignment to ARC, he had headed the Headquarters Office of Space Sciences planetary program. (NASA Release 79-164; NASA anno Nov 30/79) —NASA announced that John W. Boyd, on detail as deputy director of DFRC since January 1, would return January 1, 1980, to his post as associate director of ARC. He had begun working at ARC in 1949 as an aeronautical engineer, becoming research assistant to the director of ARC in 1966 and deputy director for aeronautics and flight systems in 1970, serving in that position until his detail to DFRC. He was named associate director of ARC in July 1979.	(NASA anno Nov 19/79) —DFRC announced that Robert R Johannes would become deputy director of DFRC, effective December 1, replacing John W. Boyd. Formerly with the U.S. Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Johannes joined NASA in 1979 and had been director of engineering at DFRC. (DFRC Release 79-40)
