Newspapers said Voyager Vs Saturn approach had discovered two new moons, a 13th and 14th, and confirmed existence of three previously shown in Earthbound observations. Until the recent discoveries, the giant planet was thought to have only nine satellites. Closing on Saturn at 45,000 mph, Voyager 1 should come within 77,000 miles of the surface on or about November 12 and obtain high-resolution photographs of the planet and its satellites. It was already returning pictures with resolution far higher than those taken in 1979 by the less sophisticated Pioneer 11. Images relayed over the past 10 days showed dozens of divisions never seen before between Saturn’s rings, meaning that the six known rings would have to be recounted. “Almost everything we’re seeing at Saturn right now is brand new,” said Dr. Bradford Smith, head of the Voyager imaging team. JPL’s Ray L.	Heacock, project manager, said that 9 of Voyager’s 10 instruments were working, 1 having failed after encounter with Jupiter, and the spacecraft was in good shape after traveling 1.3 bilion miles through space. (NY Times, Oct 29/80, A-20; W Post, Oct 29/80, A-2; IV Star, Oct 29/80, D-18)
NASA noted the 20th anniversary of the first research of the X-15 rocket plane that opened up the realm of hypersonic flight and contributed significantly to the U.S. space program. The X-15 made 199 flights in a joint NASA-U.S. Air Force-Navy research program between 1960 and 1968, during which it set the standing records for altitude and speed of winged aircraft: altitude of 1,796 kilometers (354,200 feet, more than 67 miles), and on another flight 7,274 kilometers per hour (4,520 miles per hour), or 6.7 times the speed of sound. X-15 pilots included Scott Crossfield, the first; astronaut Joe Engle; and Neil Armstrong, first man on the Moon. In 1954, at the beginning of the X-15 program, hypersonic flight had many unknowns: effects of weightlessness, high heat rates, steep reentry angles, attitude control in space—questions that only actual flight could answer. The program would also explore capabilities and limitations of a human pilot in an aerospace vehicle; analysis of the first 44 flights showed that 13 would have failed without a human pilot. Positive result of the program was the finding that human capabilities of sensing, judging, coping with the unexpected, and using a variety of acquired skills remained undiminished in all key problems of aerospace flight. A significant X-15 contribution to the space program was to demonstrate that simulators could be used for crew training: no X-15s had two seats, so the pilots had to train in simulators. Success of this method led to all-out use of simulators for the space program. Total cost of the program, including construction of three X-15 aircraft, was about $300 million. (NASA Release 80-37; NASA Actv, May 80, 8)
NASA reported that Voyager 1 would approach closest to Saturn November 12, third episode in a 10-year multibillion-mile trip to the outer planets. A briefing on the encounter would take place October 28 at Headquarters with Andrew Stofan, associate administrator; Angelo Guastaferro, director of planetary programs; Dr. Edward Stone of CalTech, project scientist; Ray Heacock of JPL, project manager; and Dr. Bradford Smith, University of Arizona, of the imaging team. (NASA Release Oct 20/80; LaRC Release 80-77)
LaRC said that it would close the Environmenul-Quality Projects Office (EQPO) set up in 1972 to lead NASA’s programs in that area and would turn over future work to the Office of Space and Terreslrial Applications at NASA Headquarters. LaRC was chosen for its experience in remote-sensing research and in developing advanced instrumentation. Other centers worked on particular problems: JSC, Earth-resources study; GSFC, meteorological research; and ARC, aircraft flight problems. EQPO head John Mugler said LaRC’s leadership had helped that center build a growing atmosphere and water-quality program. (LaRC Release 80-28)
OMB told Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, that President Carter concurred with NASA’s request for a 1986 mission to make a detailed examination of the surface of Venus. Previously, both U.S. and Soviet probes had penetrated the planet’s cloud cover to send data over a few minutes to several hours; Pioneer Venus returned data on the atmosphere, but none had given an idea of the surface. The President would request the necessary funds in his FY82 budget. The Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) spacecraft, managed by JPL, weighing about 5,000 kilograms (11,000 pounds) at launch, and costing $500 to $600 million, would carry a synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) and other scientific instruments. Lanched from the Space Shuttle in May or August of 1986, it would arrive at Venus in December 1986 and circle it for seven months in a 300-kilometer (180-mile) near-polar orbit, taking radar pictures and measuring atmosphere as well as surface. VOIR images should disclose the presence of continents, ocean basins, mountain chains, rift valleys, fault belts, or volcanoes, as well as nature and timing of plate-tectonic activity (continental drift) or the size and frequency of occurrence of impact craters. (NASA Release 80-166)
A partnership of the American Institute of Architects, Pacific Gas & Electric, and NASA’s ARC announced selection of the architect for a space-age advanced technology house to be built at ARC and opened to the public late in 1982 [see February 12]. The house, about 2,500 square feet, with additional facilities to accommodate visitors, would incorporate experimental’techniques, new materials, and systems originating in the U.S. space program. Advanced technology that let astronauts live in the hostile environment of space under a controlled life-support system would be used in the house, as would self-contained water and sewage systems, recycling all its water and disposing of wastes by incineration; heat from the incineration would serve as an energy source. Energy-saving and water-saving design features would make the house 80% self-sufficient. (AIA/PG&E/ARC anno, Sept 17/80)
U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Lew Allen, Jr., said in an interview that a current chill in U.S.-USSR relations would accelerate the development of weapons designed to wage war in outer space or knock down USSR satellites for spying, navigation, and communications. Allen said that, although he still hoped for an agreement on continued noninterference with satellites maintained in space by both the United States and the Soviet Union, the U.S. Air Force was experiencing pressure to move quickly on antisatellite weapons. He indicated that extra money would go for weapons already in the works such as the “flying tomato can” (operating by collision with a target) rather than more distant possibilities such as lasers. (W Post, Jan 11/80, A-l) This was the first time the Chinese press had mentioned training of space crews. FBIS said that the new publication would contain an article on space food and that the simulations of space life had already been made into a documentary film. The Wen Hui article did not say when or if China would send someone into space; however, during U.S. Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s visit, a deputy chief of staff for PRC armed forces said a manned space program was not one of China’s top priorities. FBIS also reported publication in a Shanghai paper of pictures of a dog that had returned from space; an editorial in that paper called China the third nation to master the technology of satellite retrieval. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua, Jan 12/80; Hong Kong Wen Wei Po, Jan 14/80; W Post, Jan 13/80, 16)
A panel of the NRC said that the FAA had lost the engineering expertise to say whether airplanes were safe and waited until accidents occurred before seeking regulations that might have prevented them. Both the Washington Post and the Washington Star reported a briefing by panel chairman George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and former deputy administrator of NASA. “The FAA engineering staff today is considerably less competent than the engineering they regulate,” Low told the press. The latest of a series of studies of the crash of an American Airlines DC-10 in Chicago May 25, 1979, that killed 273 people, the panel study was sought by Transportation Secretary Neil Goldschmidt, who said he had ordered an immediate analysis of the panel’s findings “with the intent of putting into effect promptly any recommendations that will improve our procedures.” The Chicago accident was blamed on improper maintenance procedures by American Airlines, but a contributing cause was found to be the plane’s design. The panel said that the FAA relied too much on manufacturers and was performing “only a cursory review” of industry tests; FAA officials charged with supervising manufacturers and airlines had “gotten too close to their industry counterparts, weakening their independence and objectivity.” The panel recommended reassignment of officials on a periodic basis to work with different manufacturers and airlines. It also recommended new licensing and training certification rules for airline and airplane mechanics “more like those for aircraft flight crews;” FAA should require aircraft to be designed to continue flying after any structural failure unless the failure would prevent flight, such as loss of a wing. In the Chicago crash, an engine mount had ripped from the plane, destroying vital controls in the cockpit; the mount, certified as safe, would not have, failed except for maintenance-induced damage. Asked if the DC-10 would have survived if the proposed rule had been in effect, Low replied “Yes.” (W Post, June 27/80, 1A; W Star, June 26/80, A-l)
Forthright criticism of Carter-administration space policy came from Rocco A. Petrone, former director of MSFC, and Dr. Thomas A. Paine, who was NASA administrator during the early manned lunar landing years, the Huntsville Times reported. The two testified July 23 before the House Committee on Science and Technology’s subcommittee on space science and applications. Committee chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and ranking minority member Larry Winn (R-Kans.) both expressed support of the NASA veterans; Winn remarked that it was :“like old timers’ day up here.” Under Carter, Paine said, the U.S. had “lost both our senses of direction and our resolution.. .Ringing rhetoric proclaiming U.S. leadership in space is no substitute for plans and programs. In my view it is self-delusive to give lip service to leadership while avoiding initiative and commitment.” Petrone said the usual pause for evaluation after a large program like the lunar mission “is now becoming dangerously close to a condition of stall and possible loss of minimum momentum needed” for complex space programs. He expressed concern over “technological timidity in a nation that has been built over the years on technological strength.” (Htsvl Tms, July 24/80, 6) July 25:A rescue training exercise at KSC was about to begin: a mock-up of the Space Shuttle was set down in a pond, and the rescue team was ready to practice its procedures in case the Shuttle overshot the runway upon its return to launch site and landed in the drink. Then, Fat Albert rose from the pond and lumbered up to Sun himself about 10 feet from the mock-up. The test was halted until wildlife officers arrived on the scene. Fat Albert, a local alligator, used to share lunches with KSC employees until (so it is said) he ate an employee’s tennis shoe right off his foot. The wildlife officers who lassoed and carried away the alligator weighed him (1,00 pounds) and measured him (13 feet, 9 inches). With Fat Albert gone, the maneuver continued: the rescue team dropped from a helicopter into the pond and rescued two dummy astronauts from the mock-up. (JSC Roundup, July 25/80, 1) July 28.-NASA reported on a solar-flare “first” resulting from coordination of data from the Solar Max spacecraft and from a network of sophisticated ground observatories participating in the International Solar Maximum Year. On the basis of worldwide predictions, instruments on the Solar Max and at observatories in 18 nations had focused on an active region of the Sun June 24. On June 28-29, that region produced two major flares, captured by all seven spacecraft instruments (first all-instrument simultaneous measurement of the same flare since the spacecraft was launched in February). The observation was also the first in which scientists traced material ejected from a flare into the solar atmosphere. (NASA Release 80-120)
The Washington Star reported lliat llie Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had declared llie basic design and certification process of llie McDonnell Douglas DC-10 satisfactory, but had fined llie manufacturer $300,000 for poor control of quality during the manufacture of DC-10 enginemounting pylons. The National Transportation Safety Board blamed American Airlines maintenance procedures for allegedly cracking one such pylon on a DC-10 that failed over Chicago May 25, 1979, causing a crash in which 273 persons died. McDonnell Douglas agreed to pay the fine, denied any wrongdoing, and said it was accepting the fine “to avoid further expense and the disruption of business.” After the Chicago crash, Transportation Secretary Neil Goldschmidt asked the National Academy of Sciences to investigate procedures used by the FAA to certify planes [see December 12, 1979], The academy named a committee of its National Research Council (NRC) to handle the investigation. Jack D. Howell of the Airline Pilots Association (APA) told investigators that a “protective relationship” between the FAA and the manufacturers had allowed the companies to “use their own employees as ‘FAA-designated representatives’” to oversee plane design and production. In discussing the FAA report, FAA Administrator Langhome Bond defended the procedure for certifying planes. (W Star, Jan 24/80, A-7)
NASA reported that it would negotiate with the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) to run the student involvement project, a nationwide yearly competition among secondary-school students for scientific and engineering experiments to fly on the Shuttle on a space-available basis. The NSTA would manage the competition to the point of selecting 10 finalists from 20 semifinalists in each of 10 regions; NASA would decide whether to fly a particular experiment. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, noting “The vitality of NASA depends heavily on an infusion of fresh ideas,” said the student connection would be important to the agency program. NASA held a similar competition before the Skylab mission in 1973; it was also considering a program to involve college students. (NASA Release 80-65)
The Washington Star said that prospects of mining on the Moon brought senators, scientists, and lawyers together to discuss profits that would not be earned for years, if ever. Witnesses at a Senate commerce subcommittee hearing said that some companies thought private investment would be hindered by any treaty that called for dividing lunar products among Earth’s nations. A proposed Moon treaty approval last year by the United Nations said that lunar resources were “the common heritage of mankind,” a phrase that might threaten profits of the few nations or companies that could mount successful moon-mining expeditions. NASA’s Dr. Robert Frosch said the treaty was not a problem, noting that years of development would have to precede any actual “issues of investment or returns in extraterrestrial resources.” Former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) asked if the treaty might have a chilling effect on investment; Frosch replied, “Only if you want to be chilled.” (Washington Star, July 30/80, G-7) July Ji.Following an intensive review of the Space Shuttle program over the past few weeks, NASA confirmed a decision made earlier in 1980 to schedule the first Shuttle launch in March 1981. NASA administrator. Dr. Robert Frosch said the decision was made in spite of a potential setback when fire damaged a Shuttle engine cluster during a test [see July 14]. A study of the engine fire and its possible impact had already begun but would not impede the effort to maintain the launch schedule. The decision to commit to a March launch came after a series of meetings in which NASA and contractor personnel examined the status of hardware and software required for the first flight. On the 15-week work schedule from rollout to launch, Frosch said that experience of previous “first launches of new vehicles” showed that original schedules were seldom carried out in the time planned, but “the best chance of the earliest successful first flight comes in working to a tight but achievable work schedule.” (NASA Release 80-122; MSFC Release 80-102) During July: ESA’s monthly newsletter said that the launch failure of its Ariane L02 launch vehicle [see May 23, June 17] did not call into question the continuation of the program. When the cause: of the engine failure was known, program officials would conduct the other two qualification firings. The six Arianes now being manufactured would launch Marecs B, Sino 2, Intelsat V, Exosat, ECS, and Telecom 1A, the organization said. (ESA newsletter, July 80)
Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, appeared before the House Committee on Science and Technology to present the agency’s budget request for 1981. After reviewing events of last year, Frosch said NASA would need by July 1 the extra $300 million requested as a supplement to stay within Shuttle cost estimates and maintain development and production schedules. Problem areas had been the Shuttle engines and the thermal protection system (TPS); recent tests had given NASA “increased confidence” in the main engines, but Frosch said that he was “not completely satisfied” with the tiles and their attachment to the Shuttle surface. He said the tiles might not be installed and fully tested before the end of summer, so that the first launch might not come until the end of 1980. The original date of launch was March 1979, and the last previous prediction was June of 1980. Frosch said he expected the first flight “between November and the end of March 1981. A year from now might be a more realistic date.” (Text, Jan 29/80; NY Times, Jan 30/80, A-17)
Aviation Week & Space Technology said that cuts in NASA’s FY81 budget would delay the international solar polar mission to 1985, although $135 million in contracts had already been awarded in the United States and Europe. Delay would force “major restructuring of the contracts’—$80 million to TRW for the U.S. spacecraft and $55.8 million to Dornier as prime contractor for the European spacecraft—and would give ESA additional problems with its budget, although NASA expressed hope last week that ESA would remain a part of the project. A split mission with the U.S. and European spacecraft on separate launches would increase costs substantially. Aviation Week & Space Technology said that NASA was “unable to discuss this situation before Congress last week” because of an administration embargo on new budget projections. Although NASA could testify on the Space Shuttle need for a $300 million FY80 supplemental appropriation, the embargo had forced the House appropriations subcommittee to cancel two days of NASA hearings on FY81 space science and applications. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch said that, unless the supplement was passed, contractors would lay off up to 20,000 skilled workers, and the overall cost of the Shuttle program could increase by $600 to $900 million. The combined impact on NASA and DOD could go as high as $1.1 billion, according to subcommittee members. {AvWk, Mar 31/80, 27)
The Washington Post quoted a White House source as saying that “We’re running out of patience on the Space Shuttle.. .There’s a feeling here that we can’t tolerate any more delays in the Shuttle program.” Noting the six postponements that had done “serious harm to the space agency’s credibility,” the Washington Post said that “in fairness.. .the delays caused by engine and tile troubles are not all its fault.” When Pratt & Whitney lost the engine contract to Rocketdyne, it sued NASA, delaying engine tests for a year; lack of money also caused delay. JSC Director Christopher Kraft pointed out that money cutbacks in 1978 meant that “we delayed building the tiles, and that naturally delayed our test procedures, which naturally delayed us from getting at the answers we now have.” The custom-built tiles, each shaped to fit a specific place on the fuselage, took 25 hours apiece to install. After many were attached, NASA found that half had lost their strength in the bonding process; technicians had to remove and coat the tiles before replacing them. When NASA shipped the Shuttle orbiter piggyback on its Boeing carrier from Palmdale, Calif., to Cape Canaveral in 1979, only 10% of its 30,922 tiles were in place, and some of those fell off during the trip. NASA enlisted a force of 1,200 workers to install the tiles, working two 10-hour shifts six days a week at the Cape. When the coating problem developed, the crews were attaching 750 tiles a week but removing 100. About 5,000 cavities on the frame remained to be filled, and NASA forecast August as the finishing date for the task. The other technological challenge was the Shuttle’s engine cluster, three liquid-hydrogen engines, each 10 times as powerful as the largest jet engine and burning 1,000 degrees hotter than any engine before it. These were the first liquid-fuel rockets designed for reuse; said Shuttle program manager Robert Thompson: “We had to expect that in heating it and stressing it with repeated use we were going to run into problems.” During tests, engines had caught fire and even blown up; 6 of the last 12 tests of the three engines firing together had to be stopped because of overheating. By summer’s end the tests would have cost $1 billion more than the $500 million NASA estimated. NASA’s costs by the time the first Shuttle flew would be $264 million for solid-fuel rocket engines; $381 million for tiles; $442 million for the external fuel tank; $1.5 billion for development of the main liquid-rocket engine, amounting to an overrun of almost $1.6 billion. Money was a lesser concern, however, than the slips in schedule. The Shuttle was the first civilian vehicle designed to carry surveillance satellites for the DOD; those due to fly in 1983 were the biggest and most sophisticated ever built, weighing up to 25 tons each, too big to be carried by any other rocket including DOD’s Titan. Former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.), ranking Republican on the Senate subcommittee on space, said that DOD would have to alter its craft to fit on the Titan if they could not fly on the Shuttle in 1983. (W Post, June 3/80, A-2)
Newspapers reported the launch at 8:04 a.m. local time of the 771-pound.Rohini 1 by India’s space research organization (ISRO), making India the sixth country in the world to build and launch its own satellite. Rohini 1 was launched from Sriharikota Island near Madras on a four-stage SLV-3 solid-fuel rocket into an orbit with a 919-kilometer apogee, 306-kilometer perigee, 44;7° inclination, and 97-minute period. “This is a great day for India,” said Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, who estimated the cost of the launch vehicle at $25.2 million.	. The Washington Post said that the launch was remarkable “for a country that still used bullock carts as a prime mode of transportation.” Despite its poverty, India had the world’s third largest pool of technically trained personnel; Dr. Satish Dhawan, head of ISRO, said that the successful launch would pave the way. for liquid-fuel rockets carrying larger payloads up to 1,300 pounds. India’s 17-year-old space program had had setbacks, including a failure in August 1979, when its rocket dropped into the Bay of Bengal about 5 seconds after liftoff because the second stage failed to ignite. Launch of Rohini “underscored India’s place as the most powerful nation of the South Asian subcontinent,” said the Washington Post. (WPost, July 19/80, A-13; W Star, July 19/80, 4; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 21/80)
LaRC announced that four of its top managers left NASA February 29. They were deputy director Oran W. Nicks; associate director Dr. John E. Duberg; Richard R. Heldenfels, director for structures; and James E. Stitt, director for electronics. The latter three, who began their federal service in the 1940s with NACA (Dr. Duberg in 1943, Heldenfels and Stitt in 1947), would retire. Nicks, who since 1970 had been deputy director at LaRC, began at NASA Headquarters 1960 working on unmanned programs; he would become executive director of the research foundation at Texas A&M University. (LaRC Release 80-14)
JPL engineers had sent a command August 7 to Viking orbiter 1, switching off its transmitter and ending its four year mission. Viking project manager Kermit Watkins said that its attitude-control gas would have been depleted before it completed another orbit: by commanding it to turn off, instead of allowing it to occur automatically, “we will be sure that the radio transmitter has been shut off.” Confirmation of the switchoff was received at 4:16 EDT August 7. The Viking lander would continue to transmit meteorological and engineering data weekly on command until about December 1994. (NASA Release 80-129; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Aug 11/80; W Star, Aug 5/80, A-2)
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, NASA’s deputy administrator, submitted his resignation effective this date, but agreed to be appointed agency associate administrator and general manager. Named deputy administrator by President Ford in June 1976, Lovelace had been associate administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) since September 1974. In his new post he would continue the basic management he did as deputy administrator and be acting administrator during the absence of departing administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch from January 20 until appointment of a new administrator and confirmation by the Senate. This arrangement, agreed to by both President Carter’s and President-elect Reagan’s staffs, would give NASA maximum continuity of management. (NASA Release 80-200)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch conducted a press briefing on the FY81 budget, assisted by Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, deputy administrator; C. Thomas Newman, deputy comptroller; and Dr. Anthony J. Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications. Warning the reporters that the information was “embargoed” until President Carter formally gave his budget address to Congress January 28, Robert J. Shafer, NASA deputy director of public affairs, cited the releases on Frosch’s recent trip to China as “not embargoed.” Frosch said that, although NASA’s budget was increasing at a slower rate (9.8% for research and development [R&D] and 11.5% for space science), he considered it a “good start” for the decade, compared to last year when extra costs of the Space Shuttle had precluded new space science program starts. The figures included an extra $300 million requested as a 1980 supplement for Shuttle development expenses, which Frosch said were increased by delays last summer that threatened mission schedules. NASA’s 1981 request included new-start money for the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), to be funded jointly with DOD and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as well as a gamma-ray observatory to explore the most energetic form of radiation known, exploiting the discoveries of the small astronomy satellite Sas 2, ESA’s Cos B, and the first high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1. Frosch replied to a question that NOSS would be the first scientific satellite shared with DOD and said its cost would be split among DOD ($13.9 million) and NOAA and NASA, which would pay about $6.4 million and $5.8 million, respectively. NASA’s total budget request was $5,736 billion, including $4,569.5 billion for R&D, $120 million for facilities construction, and $1,047 billion for program management. (Briefing text, Jan 26/80; NASA Releases 80-7, 80-11, 80-13; W Star, Jan 28/80, A-7, B-2; Nature, Jan 31/80, 416)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, DOE’s deputy assistant secretary for industrial and utility applications and operations, as associate administrator for space transportation operations, effective July 7. He would be responsible for STS functions including Shuttle, Spacelab, and expendable launch vehicles during transition to the Shuttle. (NASA anno July 2/80) —NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin, deputy director of KSC, as acting associate administrator for external relations at Headquarters effective July 7. He would have responsibility for policy-level management, direction, and coordination of NASA’s Offices of Public Affairs, International Affairs, DOD Affairs, Government/Industry Affairs, and University Affairs, reporting to the NASA administrator. His KSC responsibilities would be given temporarily to senior managers at that center. (NASA Release 80-104; NASA anno July 3/80)
Press reports said that the three cosmonauts launched November 27 in Soyuz 73 on a repair mission to the three-year-old space station Salyut 6 had returned safely from their 13-day flight December 10 at 12:26 p.m. Moscow time. Landing was in Kazakhstan in Soviet central Asia. Leonid Kizim, Oleg Makarov, and Gennady Strekalov were in perfect condition, Tass said. This was the sixth manned mission by the Soviet Union this year and the first three-person crew orbited since 1971, when three cosmonauts died during reentry after a valve blew on Soyuz 77. A new guidance system on Soyuz T3 took over after liftoff and guided it to smooth docking with Salyut 6. The spacecraft, third of an improved version of the Soyuz (mainstay of the Soviet space program since 1967), carried solar batteries, an. on-board computer, improved maneuvering rockets, and improvements in cabin comfort for the cosmonauts. The crew had performed repairs and maintenance oh Salyut 6 telemetry, refueling systems, and temperature controls. (W Post, Dec 10/80, A-2; Dec 11/80, A-13; NY Times, Dec 11/80, A-23)
Press reports said NASA faced a $760 million (14%) cut in its FY81 funding as President Carter announced a $20 billion cut in the entire federal budget. The Washington Post said Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, had protested the size of the cut to the Office of Management and Budget. The White House had originally asked NASA to suggest reductions of $630 million. Defense/Space Business Daily said the cuts would eliminate two new NASA starts in FY81, the gamma-ray observatory and the national oceanic satellite system, as well as the Galileo mission to Jupiter. On March 5 the House subcommittee on space science and applications had unanimously passed NASA’s $300 million FY80 supplemental request for Shuttle-development funds; subcommittee chairman Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) said NASA should share the FY81 cuts, but 18% was too high. (D/SBD, Mar 6/80, 25; W Post, Mar 7/80, A-2)
The Washington Star reported a warning from the Center for Defense Information (“an unofficial defense study group”) that technological progress in U.S. and Soviet space programs could spark an arms race in space. The United States had a 12xl3-inch device—the miniature homing interceptor vehicle—that could home in on infrared radiation “to destroy a target satellite by high-speed impact,” the group said; if the device were actually tested in space, “it could destroy more than the target satellite: it could destroy U.S. and Soviet negotiations aimed at limiting antisatellite warfare as well.” The group said that the Pentagon believed that the Soviet Union had an operational but limited antisatellite weapon that had been tested about 17 times; 7 of the tests were failures, but 10 were “possible successes” in that the interceptor passed less than a mile from the targets. No target was destroyed, suggesting that the Soviet Union might be working on inspection of foreign satellites. PRC reconnaissance satellites traveled in orbits like those of the Soviet test targets, and an interception program might be aimed mainly at the Chinese, the group said. Rear Adm. Gene LaRocque (USN-ret.), head of the center, said wars might begin in space “but they’re going to end right here on earth. It won’t be a Star Wars show with a lot of robots. . .vaporizing each other in the remote regions of space.. . . Once those nuclear missiles start to fly, the science-fiction drama will be over.” (W Star, Oct 21/80, D-10)
NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
NASA reported that the National Archives had formally accepted its records of the 1967 Apollo 204 spacecraft fire, to be retained permanently for use by scholars studying the space program in general and the failure and subsequent redesign of the spacecraft. (NASA Actv Rpt May 12/80)
DFRC reported that on December 16 Dr. Robert A. Frosch visited it for the first time as NASA administrator, holding an all-hands meeting in the auditorium for an overview of NASA status and a farewell speech. Center director Isaac T. Gillam IV gave Frosch a montage of photographs of DFRC research aircraft. After the meeting, Frosch briefed local reporters on Shuttle status. (FRC X-Press, Dec 19/80, 4)
NASA announced that Dr. John E. Naugle, its former chief scientist, would return December 1 on a temporary basis as acting chief scientist, principal scientific adviser to the NASA administrator, and continuing member of the Advisory Council responsible for planning long-range solar system exploration and other long-range goals for the agency. Naugle had joined GSFC in 1959 as head of its nuclear emulsion section and retired from the agency in June 1979. During those 20 years, he had been chief, physics and astronomy programs, at Headquarters Office of Space Sciences in 1961; director of physics and astronomy programs, Office of Space Science and Applications, from June 1962 to May 1966; associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974. He became acting associate administrator in April 1975 and associate administrator in November 1975. He was appointed chief scientist in the 1977 reorganization. (NASA Release 80-175; Hq anno Nov 21/80)
Since Mt. St. Helens erupted May 18, NASA reported what it called the most complete observations to date of volcanic aerosols in the stratosphere. Large volcanic eruptions had previously changed Earth’s weather (short-term) and climate (long-term). ARC had collected Mt. St. Helen’s data for its aerosol climate effects (ACE) program, using the U-2 aircraft in sampling missions on May 19, 22, and 27, and June 14 and 17. A preliminary analysis of the volcanic plumes showed solid ash and sulfuric acid, the proportions varying in different samples. The acid in the stratosphere was several hundred times greater than before the eruptions. The first flight found ash particles as large as 30 microns, of composition similar to ash on the ground near the volcano. (Largest particles found on later flights were about 3 microns.) Gaseous sulfur dioxide also increased: levels on the first flight were 10 to 1,000 times ambient levels, and on the second flight were 100 times normal. The second flight found water vapor in the plume to be 10 times the normal amount, showing that volcanic water was injected into the stratosphere. A July 1979 ACE flight over Alaska gave baseline levels for comparison with conditions after the eruption. On the day of the eruption, one of NASA’s SAGE teams in Wyoming launched instruments on a balloon to enter and measure the dust plume; it detected dust concentrations 400 to 1,600 times normal in the stratosphere. The SAGE satellite launched in 1979 tracked the Mt. St. Helens’ clouds as it had those of two previous eruptions. WFC sent an Orion P-3 a plane on an “underflight” as the cloud went over North Carolina and the Atlantic Ocean, along with a Super Loki rocket; these flights gave scientists simultaneous data readings from above and below the atmosphere. By late June, LaRC scientists decided that, although Mt. St. Helens could have boosted stratospheric aerosols by 50%, there was as yet no sign of adverse climate change. (ARC Release 80-62; NASA Release 80-107) July 22.NASA unveiled the first scientific and applications payload for the STS (Shuttle) at GSFC’s clean room, where instruments were installed in the package planned as an alternate payload on orbital test flight 4, scheduled for April 1982. (Prime payload for this flight belonged to DOD.) Called OSS-1 for NASA’s Office of Space Science, the entire payload was designed, built, tested, and integrated by a team of GSFC engineers and scientists headed by Ken Kissin, OSS-1 mission manager, and Jon Busse, project manager for Shuttle payload integration and rocket experiment. Project scientists were Drs. Siegfried Bauer and Werner Neupert. The seven principal OSS-1 experiments were in the disciplines of space plasma physics, solar physics, astronomy, and life sciences, each represented by one or more instruments. (NASA Release 80-114, 80-117)
KSC reported final preparations under way for moving the orbiter Columbia from VAB to pad A, Launch Complex 39, within the week. Mating Columbia in the VAB to its external propellant tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters November 24 was followed by tests of ground-support connections for checkout, fueling, and launch, and of the entire flight system. December 23 should see completion of the installation and checkout of ordnance (any explosive devices for parting components like the boosters and external tank from the vehicle in flight). Gap-filler work needed before rollout would be complete by December 27; the crawler-transporter would take its place under the mobile launch platform December 28. Senior NASA managers would review the VAB tests and pad A status before rollout to make sure no constraints existed. (KSC Release 275-80)
July 7NASA said that it had agreed with ESA to let two European scientists enter the mission-specialist training program for Shuttle astronauts at JSC [see May 30]. The Europeans, Claude Nicollier of Switzerland and Wqbbo Ockels of the Netherlands, were both ESA employees and, as Spacelab 1 payload-specialist candidates, had undergone a screening and selection process like that of U.S. candidates. NASA agreed to train them in view of Spacelab delay and in recognition of ESA’s contribution to the STS in funding Spacelab development; ESA would reimburse NASA for the cost of training the two. (NASA Release 89-106; ESA Info 19) July S.WFC observed the 35th anniversary of the launch on July 4, 1945, of its first research rocket, a 17-foot Tiamat. Since it became a rocket range, Wallops Island had seen the launch of about 12,000 research vehicles of from 1 to 7 stages, sent as high as 19,000 miles above the Atlantic at speeds over 38,000	mph, and the launch of 19 satellites. From Wallops, rhesus monkeys Sam and Miss Sam rode into space on a Little Joe booster in 1959-60 to test the Mercury spacecraft before Alan Shepard took it into space; first test of the Echo balloon also occurred here. Early research at Wallops collected aerodynamic data at transonic and low supersonic speeds as part of the push to break the sound barrier; today, the launches gathered data on space, aeronautics, and characteristics of aerospace flight and tested ideas and devices for future spaceflight. NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), put its Pilotless Aircraft Research Station on Wallops Island under the direction of LaRC; its mission was aeronautical research to supplement wind-tunnel and laboratory work at LaRC. When NASA came into being in 1958 and took over LaRC and other field centers and research facilities, it put the Wallops station directly under NASA Headquarters and renamed it Wallops Flight Center in 1974. (WFC Release 80-8)
In the last of a series on “Life Aboard the Space Shuttle,” KSC’s Spaceport News described the unisex space suits provided for the pilot and the ranking mission specialist on each flight. No longer tailor-made for an astronaut, the Shuttle space suit would come in small, medium, and large sizes to be worn by men or women. It consisted of an upper and a lower section snapping together with sealing rings, with a life-support system in the upper half. In an emergency, each of the other crew members would use a “personal rescue enclosure,” a 34-inch-diameter ball fitted with life-support and communications gear for one person. Nonsuited crew would climb into the enclosures, and the suited astronauts would transfer them from a disabled vessel to a rescue ship by carrying them, by attaching them to the remote-manipulator arm used for deploying payloads, or by using a pulley line between the two spacecraft. (Spaceport News, Aug 29/80, 4) During August: NASA distributed its Program Plan, Fiscal Years 1981 through 1985, containing “initial guidance for NASA’s activities over the short-term and, to some extent, the long-term future.” The introduction noted the current drive to curb inflation and resulting cuts in the federal budget—‘including NASA’s”—but called for a perception of the work the agency was technologically ready to undertake “and should undertake in the interest of the Nation.” Citing problems raised by “absence of major new initiatives,” the introduction called for “sound, logical, technological progression toward achievement” of U.S. goals in aeronautics and space. Major goals to be met by the plan’s 46 “major initiatives” were: —to fill the transportation and orbital operations needs of science and applications space missions and most transportation needs of national security space missions; —to apply space technology in remote sensing, communications, materials processing, and technology transfer that “hold promise for immediate or potential benefits to humanity”; —to continue developing aeronautical technology; —to improve “by a factor of 10 to 100” NASA’s ability to acquire, transmit, and process data; —to advance knowledge of how energy is transported from the Sun and through the interplanetary medium and how that energy effects Earth; —to ensure good health and performance of humans in space and to study the effects of gravity on living systems; —to understand the origin and distribution of life in the universe and the relationship between life and its habitat. Major initiatives in the field of aeronautics numbered 6; in space science, 8; in space and terrestrial applications, 20; and in space transportation systems, 12, for a total of 46. Half the initiatives listed in a similar program plan (for FY80-FY84) had been postponed: Of the 23 missions, 11 were previously scheduled for 1981; 7 for 1982; 4 for 1983; and 1 for 1984. Of the 11 previously scheduled for 1981, 9 were now postponed to 1982; and 1 each, to 1983 and 1984. Of the 7 missions previously scheduled for 1982, 5 were postponed to 1983; 1, to 1984; and 1, to a time “to be determined.” Of the 4 missions previously scheduled for 1983, 1 was scheduled for 1984; and 3, for 1985. The sole mission previously scheduled for 1984 had been postponed to 1985. International programs in which NASA would tie concerned during the next fiscal years would include cooperative activities (Space Shuttle and Spacelab; space applications such as remote sensing, geodynamics, materials processing, and communications; space science such as astrophysics, planetary research, solar-terrestrial relationships, and solar energy; exchanges of experiments with the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union); reimbursable launches; and foreign competition in remote sensing, communications, spacecraft launching, and aircraft development. The volume included probable schedules for NASA missions and tables of funding and development needed to carry out the program. Space transportation funding, for instance, showed increases in FY81 and FY82, then leveled off. Funding for applications showed rapid increase; that for aeronautics, space technology, and space science would also increase but at a slower rate. The 235-page program plan contained detailed lists of activities in each program area, with graphs and tables showing schedules and funding for that area. The book concluded with an index and a list of the abbreviations and acronyms used in NASAs programs. (Text, NASA Hq Mgmt Sppt Ofc, distributed Aug 80)
NASA held a press briefing on the solar maximum mission slated for launch February 14. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said that exploration of Earth’s nearest star was significant both scientifically and technologically. Dr. Harold Glaser of NASA’s solar terrestrial division noted that the Sun, dominant energy source for the Earth, was a variable star in that its energy output varied in periods running from 10 minutes to ll years (the so-called solar cycle) as well as over periods of centuries. The solar variations causes variations on Earth; for instance, the solar flares known to have a periodicity of 11 years. In short time periods, a flare is the most energetic manifestation of solar changes, with significant effects: Earth suffers communications problems along with atmospheric heating and other phenomena, and the trillion kilotons spewed into the solar system would affect almost all the planets. The focus of the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) would be to understand more about solar flares in order to predict their occurrence. The magnetic field of the Sun had also been found to vary with a 22-year periodicity, strongly correlated with drought in the U.S. western plains. During the 17th century, solar activity apparently ceased for about 80 years, a period called the Maunder Minimum which featured a “mini-ice Age” documented in northern Europe. This seems to have happened more frequentBLANK NOT FILMED ly than previously realized. Space research during the last 20 years had produced these data, Glaser said, including evidence that the Sun might be changing sides, with a corresponding increase of luminosity or incident radiation. Also, the Sun appeared to oscillate rather like a fluid, probably because of interior activity whose nature was as yet unknown. Joseph Purcell of GSFC, standing in for project manager Peter Burr who was ill, described the spacecraft and its planned retrieval by the Space Shuttle, and the modular design that would allow it to be serviced in orbit if necessary. The SMM would be the first NASA satellite designed for retrieval and first to include the tracking and data-relay satellite capability; at 5,000 pounds, it would also be the heaviest payload launched by a Delta. Purcell explained the 24-hour computer watch on the SMM, calling it an operation with “very intense man-machine relationships.” Kenneth J. Frost, also of GSFC as SMM project scientist, described the payload as essentially one experiment to determine the nature of solar flares, using seven instruments and a “very detailed scientific game plan.” Investigators needed a 24-hour watch to evaluate the plan’s progress and to react to targets of opportunity on the Sun. For instance:, a flare on the Sun’s west limb would be observed on Earth and by a series of spacecraft in orbit around the Earth, so that the quality and completeness of the observations would “far outstrip anything we’ve ever had before.” The SMM spacecraft would have a productive lifetime of about two years, Frost said, and the scientific group at GSFC would consist of investigators prepared to spend that much time away from their home institutions. In response to a question, he pointed out that the broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum to be investigated by SMM could not penetrate Earth’s atmosphere. (Text, Feb 8/80; NASA Release
Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, told President Carter that he would leave January 20 to become the first president of the American Association of Engineering Societies, a federation created in January of 39 major engineering societies of the United States representing more than a million engineers. In a memorandum headed “Dear Colleagues,” Frosch said that he could “no longer ignore the competitive opportunities available to me and to my family in private life. . .1 continue to be devoted to our common interests in aeronautics and space.” Frosch was sworn in as NASA administrator June 21, 1977. He had been associate director for applied oceanography at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution since 1975. He had attended Columbia University, where he received a bachelor’s degree in 1947, a master’s in 1949, and a doctorate in theoretical physics in 1952. He had been assistant secretary of the Navy for R&D, assistant executive director of the U.N. environment program, and deputy director of DOD’s DARPA. (NASA Release 80-151)
