DFRC said that its newly refurbished Canberra bomber would be the test airplane for an atmospheric-turbulence measurement program to gather data on sudden wind changes creating abrupt and uneven pressures on different areas of an aircraft. Engineers would use the information to improve aircraft design and operation, with special attention to approach and takeoff during strong winds and unstable atmospheric conditions. Project engineers chose the B-57B because of its ability to withstand high g forces; its wings were extremely rigid and strong enough to recover from upsets during severe turbulence. Its cockpit held two crewmen, so that a meteorologist could fly as observer during the tests. Wen Painter, project manager for the program, said that scientists do not fully understand wind-shear phenomena and expect the flight tests to produce valuable data. The B-57B would fly at Edwards Air Force Base, Denver, Oklahoma City, Huntsville, Cape Canaveral, and Wallops Island, all of which exhibited distinctive types of turbulence. Other NASA centers participating in the study would be ARC, LaRC, and MSFC. (DFRC Release 81-21)
Shuttle orbiter Columbia on its 747 carrier landed at the Shuttle landing facility runway at KSC at 11:24 a.m. EDT. Demating began in preparation for moving it into the processing facility for 72 hours of troubleshooting. CBS-TV News said hundreds of employees and their families were on hand for the arrival; reporter Bruce Hall said that, although the orbiter’s condition was “excellent,” a number of NASA officials did not expect the next launch to take place before 1982. Jules Bergman of ABC-TV said that work on the orbiter would include installing a miniature remote-control arm to deploy satellites and retrieve them on future missions. The second flight, STS-2, would test the arm only. NASA’s current target date was said to be mid-October, though much work remained to be done on the reusable boosters and the launch pad. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 29/81; DOD RadioTv Rpts, Apr 29/81)
NASA reported that Dr. Jack L. Kerrebrock, former head of MIT’s department of aeronautics and astronautics, had become associate administrator at NASA Headquarters for aeronautics and astronautics, effective July 1, replacing Dr. James J. Kramer, who retired in October 1979. Before accepting the NASA Headquarters position, Kerrebrock had been a member of the U.S. Air Force scientific advisory board, the National Research Council’s aeronautics and space engineering board, and the NASA Advisory Committee. He had directed MIT’s gas-turbine laboratory from 1968 to 1978. He received his Ph.D. from CalTech in 1956; from 1951 to 1953 he was a researcher in aeronautics at the Lewis laboratory of NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). (NASA Release 81-91)
Insulation that separated from the Space Shuttle’s huge external fuel tank would delay the long-awaited launch to a time “no earlier than the week of April 5,” NASA announced. Columbia’s maiden flight was already more than two years behind its original schedule because of technical probable causing a series of postponents. The new difficulty was discovered in preflight tests at Cape Canaveral in which over a half-million gallons of supercold liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen were pumped into the fuel tank for the first time. The new delay was “the first substantial” problem encountered since July 1980 and was not related to earlier problems with the Shuttle’s ceramic-tile insulation. During tanking tests, two areas on the external tank—one about 7x8 feet, the other about 4x4 feet—became debonded. The loose insulation would have to be rebonded before launch. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Jan 28/81; NASA Releases 81-15, 81-25; W Post, Feb 3/81, A-7; W Star, Feb 3/81, A-8)
NASA announced that it had postponed to August 31 Columbia’s move to KSC’s launch complex 39A, scheduled for August 26, but did not say what effect the delay would have on the September 30 launch date. A nine-day preflight test series that began August 17 would culminate in simulated liftoffs and descent from orbit to landing. MSFC later reported that the launch date for STS-2 would be reset to October 9 because of “a number of small problems” and a need to prevent crew fatigue. A loss of five days in the VAB was caused by delays in interface tests and misalignment of Shuttle and external-tank connections. The thunderstorm season would also account for some lost time. (NASA Releases 81-123, 81-135; MSFC Release 81-107) The 1,800-pound Voyager 2, having arrived within Saturn’s magnetic field early August 25 after a four-year 1.2 billion-mile journey, was sending back data and pictures “as perplexing as they are dazzling,” the New York Times said. The craft photographed four of Saturn’s moons in greater detail than before, sent data on the thousands of strands in Saturn’s rings, and dived behind the planet for a close approach and a gravity-assisted push toward arrival at Uranus in 4 Vi years. So far, it had found no new moons of Saturn, which had been one of its aims. When Voyager 2 reappeared, JPL engineers reported that its camera platform was stuck, affecting three scientific sensors as well as the two television cameras. Chief project scientist Dr. Edward C. Stone said Voyager 2 “basically completed” all of its observations before the malfunction: “We were fortunate that the troubles didn’t happen a few hours earlier,” he told a news conference. Signals needed 1 hour and 27 minutes to travel to Earth. Controllers picked up the signals again at 3 a.m. EDT after Voyager had been out of touch with Earth for 2 hours and 20 minutes; the cameras were showing black space, indicating that the platform was pointing away from Saturn. The platform could be rotated in two dimensions, and controllers countermanded the original program so that the swivel could operate in high torque and expel or destroy whatever foreign object was making the platform stick. A similar problem with Voyager 1 in 1978 was solved by manipulation of the swivel, after records showed a tiny piece of plastic had been left in a gearbox during construction. Further reports Thursday, August 27, said that the platform (which had been jammed for 17 hours) was working again but not perfectly. Project Director Esker K. Davis said that it was moving sluggishly in low gear; the plan was to keep moving it, but it took three hours just to send a command and get back a signal that the spacecraft responded. Stone said that his main objective was to recover use of the platform for the voyage to Uranus. Project scientists had turned the cameras off when the platform stuck and would not turn them on again until the problem was solved. Loss of about 600 pictures of Saturn’s rings and darkside, as well as infrared and ultraviolet measurements of clouds and atmosphere, did not mean that the mission had failed, Stone said, calling it “a 200 percent success.” Thousands of photos stored on Voyager’s tape recorders were still pouring back to Earth, showing sights never seen before. Dr. Arthur L. Lane’s telescope aimed at a distant star to catch it blinking on and off as Voyager 2 passed through Saturn’s rings was so successful that he said it would take years to map the rings, 45,000	miles of which were shown by his telescope. Early on Friday, August 28, flight directors restarted one of the five blacked-out cameras to photograph “a rapidly receding Saturn” from Voyager 2’s location already 2 million miles beyond the planet. The platform had responsed by rotating 40° on command in exactly the proper time. NASA would photograph Saturn’s outermost moon Phoebe next week when Voyager crossed its orbit: Phoebe, rotating in a direction opposite to that of the other 16 moons, might be a burned-out comet nucleus captured by Saturn.(NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, July 16/81, WSJ, Aug 24/81, 15; NY Times, Aug 14/81, A-13; Aug 26/81, A-l; Aug 27/81, A-l; Aug 28/81, B-5; Aug 29/81, A-9; Aug 30/81, F—1; Aug 31/81, B-6; W Post, Aug 25/81, A-2; Aug 26/81, A-3; Aug 27/81, A-l; Aug 28/81, A-l, Aug 29/81, A-3; Aug 30/81, A-5; Aug 31/81, A-5; Science, Sept 11/81, 1236; Dscvr, Sept 81, 79)
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting adminsitrator, left the agency July 11 to become corporate vice president for science and engineering at General Dynamics Corporation, St. Louis, Mo., in charge of research, engineering, advanced product and program development, and development and implementation of corporate engineering and research policy. NASA’s new chief, James M.	Beggs, who began his new job July 9, had been executive vice president for aerospace at General Dynamics. Lovelace had been acting administrator of NASA since the departure of Dr. Robert A. Frosch in January 1981; he had actually retired as deputy administrator in December 1980 but at Frosch’s request had agreed to remain through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of a new administrator. Lovelace had entered federal service in 1954 with the U.S. Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, and became director there in 1967. He went to Andrews Air Force Base in 1972 as director of science and technology for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command and in 1973 became acting deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development. He came to NASA in 1974 as associate administrator, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) and was appointed deputy administrator of NASA in June 1976 by President Ford. Lovelace recently received the Presidential Citizens Medal for his work on developing the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, July 2/81; NASA Release 81-88; NYTimes, July 6/81, D-6)
Press reports said that a Texas-based firm called the Percheron project was preparing to launch the first U.S. privately owned space rocket into a 50-mile suborbital flight from Matagorda Island northeast of Corpus Christi. Backers of the project, named for a breed of large French draft horses, hoped to launch their rocket powered by kerosene and liquid oxygen at the end of July, but had run into trouble with the FAA, which said they must seek waiver of air-traffic rules preventing “nonconventional” use of U.S. air space above 12,500 feet. An FAA spokesman said that an application for waiver could take more than two weeks to resolve and could end by restricting Percheron to a flight no higher than 14,500 feet and no further out to sea than the three-mile limit over which FAA had jurisdiction. A flight would also call for extensive coordination with the Coast Guard to protect shipping and oil rigs in the area. Percheron was the idea of Gary C. Hudson, a “self-taught engineer” seeking to head a company pioneering corporate space ventures. In 1979 he met a fellow enthusiast, Houston developer David Hannah, described as “a disciple of Dr. Gerard K. O’Neill,” the Princeton physics professor famous for his ideas about the commercial and social possibilities of space colonies. Hannah, a supporter of the U.S. space program, had developed a slide show on commercial uses of a cheap, privately owned space vehicle; to launch Percheron, he raised $1.2 million from a number of investors including an oilman and rancher who owned part of Matagorda Island. Hudson rounded up a crew of engineers, scientists, and technicians, some from NASA’s JPL, others from private aerospace firms. So much information and so many plans were available that production of Percheron took only six months from final design. The 55-foot single-engine rocket used in clusters might one day orbit a 5,000-pound geosynchronous payload with a conical module able to withstand reentry heat and return reusable components to Earth. (W Star, July 23/81, A-l; July 28/81, A-7; W Post, July 29/81, A-l)
ESA announced that Drs. Claude Nicollier and Wubbo Ockels, two ESA payload specialists in astronaut training at JSC since July 1980, had completed training and were now officially European mission specialists. Ockels would rejoin the crew readying the first Spacelab mission in Europe, at MSFC and at JSC; Nicollier would stay at JSC to continue training as mission specialist for future missions carrying European payloads. The third ESA representative, Dr. Ulf Merbold, had been working with the European experiments selected for first Spacelab flight and would remain as European payload specialist. The two U.S. candidates for the Spacelab crew, Drs. Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg, had been in a hiatus from training because of delays in the launch date. One each of the U.S. and ESA candidates would be chosen to fly; the others would provide ground support. (MSFC Release 81-119; FSA Info 20) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Mg.INTIMDQNALLE ffcANtav
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Headquarters effective November 9 “to assure proper delegation of authority to all line managers, set forth a clear distinction between line and staff, and a simplification of field centers’ reporting lines.” The change would combine the Office of Space Science and Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications into an Office of Space Science and Applications. It would set up an Office of Management to handle some functions now under the NASA comptroller and some now under the Office of Management Operations and to support program offices in managing research and development and institutional resources. Associate administrators in the program offices would be NASA’s major line officers through whom center directors would report to Headquarters. JPL and GSFC would report to the associate administrator for Space Science and Applications. ARC, LaRC, and LeRC would report to associate administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; JSC, KSC, MSFC, and the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), to the associate administrator for STS. Remaining program offices would be Space Transportation Operations and Space Tracking and Data Systems. The administrator’s staff would include chief engineer, comptroller, procurement, equal opportunity, external relations, general counsel, inspector general, legislative affairs, associate deputy administrator, and assistants to the administrator. A reorganization working group led by NASA’s general counsel S. Neil Hosenball would work out functional and personnel changes; a reorganization steering committee led by Dr. Hans Mark, deputy administrator, would review the plans and recommend a complete reorganization package to the administrator. (NASA Release 81-156)
Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, marked the fourth anniversary of orbital laboratory Salyut 6 with a report of planned space activity. A “lull” was being used for an overhaul of the ground-control center in the Crimea. Employees were on long-awaited vacations, and a skeleton staff was monitoring Salyut 6, orbiting without a crew since May 26. After orbiting for nearly two months of unspecified tests, a Cosmos craft launched April 25 had linked with the Salyut in June to form a 34-ton complex. A flight-test manager said that the complex would help in designing future space stations and was being monitored to see how such a heavy system behaved in space. Since docking with the Salyut the Cosmos had used its engines twice to raise the orbit of the complex. (NY Times Oct 7/81, B—11) During September: William F. Lilly, named NASA comptroller in 1973 and the only person so far to hold that position, announced that he would retire in October after 37 years of service to the federal government, the last 21 with NASA. (NASA Release 81-148; Sp anno Sept 22/81) —Isaac T. Gillam IV, director of DFRC since June 1978, would become special assistant to the NASA administrator October 1, detailed to the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy to participate in a space-policy review. (NASA Release 81-151; DFRC Release 81-30; NASA anno Sept 15/81) —Abraham D. Spinak, acting director of Wallops Flight Facility, would leave government service in December after nearly 33 years with NASA and NACA, its predecessor, which he joined in 1948. He had actually retired September 1, 1980, but stayed on to help in the consolidation with GSFC. (WFC Release 81-14) —Edwin C. Kilgore, associate administrator for management operations at Headquarters, would retire in October after 37 years of service with NASA and NACA. After graduation from Virginia Polytechnic Institute in 1944, he went to work at Langley, joined Headquarters in 1970, and was named deputy associate administrator for center operationas in 1974. As head of management operations, he had been in charge of agencywide institutional management. (NASA Release 81-139; LaRC Release 81-67) —Ann P. Bradley, deputy associate administrator for management operations, who had been acting associate administrator and acting executive officer at NASA Headquarters pending the retirement of E.C. Kilgore, would return to her duties in management operations with the appointment of A.B. Virkler Legate to the office of the administrator as NASA's executive officer. Legate had been associate deputy undersecretary for intergovernmental relations at the Department of Labor since February 1971: he had previously been a congressional special assistant and executive secretary of DOT from 1969 to 1977. He had also been a congressional administrative assistant. (NASA Spl anno, Aug 28/81, Sept 21/81)
LaRC said that it was conducting, under contract with McDonnell Douglas Corporation, a test program on widebody commercial DC-10 aircraft to measure the effect on fuel efficiency of winglets, small structures attached to the tips of airplane wings perpendicular to the wing surfaces. Winglets would reduce fuel-consuming drag by lessening the effect of vortices, turbulent air swirls forming during flight at tips of all aircraft wings. Developed by aeronautical designer Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, recently retired from LaRC, the concept had been tested on several types of small aircraft but not on a plane as large as the DC-10. Winglets were already in use on the Gates Learjet 55 and Grumman’s Gulfstream III. Wind-tunnel tests showed a drop of about 3% in fuel use, which would mean an annual saving per plane of about 250,000 gallons of fuel, now priced at more than Si a gallon. LaRC said that it was also working on the prevention of stall and spin in light aircraft by using the canard, a miniature wing sprouting from an aircraft’s nose area, first used by the Wright brothers at the turn of the century but neglected since then because of patent and flight-handling considerations. LaRC found that home-built airplane kits that used the canard to increase fuel efficiency also had impressive records of stall-spin safety. Tests of a model in LaRC’s spin tunnel showed that with proper loading the plane was “virtually impossible to spin.” Current tests would document the plane’s aerodynamic efficiency without trying to improve it. Although the canard did reduce a pilot’s area of vision in takeoff and landing, the tunnel data should show whether it could be relocated without sacrificing its safety features. NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program was seeking ways to reduce fuel consumption and improve safety. Four NASA centers were focused on aeronautical research: LaRC, LeRC, ARC, and DFRC. (NASA Releases 81-145, 81-155; LaRC Releases 81-68, 81-75)
The Soviet Union’s space program must develop a low-cost transport vehicle like the U.S. Space shuttle, according to Konstantin P. Feoktistov, one of the three cosmonauts who orbited the Earth six times in Vostok 1 in 1964. Feoktistov, now a professor of technical sciences doing research for the Soviet space program, did not specifically mention the successful flight of Columbia in April but called for solution of technological problems in space travel such as cheap lightweight batteries. The New York Times quoted from Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, the first official acknowledgment by the Soviet Union that it would like to have a shuttle-like vehicle for manned space flights. Tass said June 19 that Cosmos 1267 had docked with the empty Salyut 6 with the mission of testing systems “of the design of future spacecraft and for training in the methods of assembly of orbital complexes of a big size and weight.” The Washington Post said that the linkup was “the precursor of a very large space complex that U.S. sources expect to have military uses.” (NYTimes, June 11 81, A-18; W Post, June 20/81, A-9; FBIS, Tass in English, June 91/81)
Johnson Space Center’s (JSC) Space News Roundup said that a conference sponsored by NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), attended by representatives of major U.S. industries, heard briefings on systems developed for the space program that were applicable to Earth-based activities. Representatives of Dow Chemical, Exxon, ITT, Johnson & Johnson, Teledyne, 3M, Xerox, and numerous other corporations learned about pharmaceutical production in Earth-orbiting laboratories, life-support systems designed for space suits, and an electromechanical alternative to conventional hydraulic actuators. Bryan Erb of JSC’s Earth-resources division described the use of satellite observations to predict crop growth or locate mineral deposits or oil sources. From 1974 to 1978 JSC had managed the Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE), showing how sensors on an orbiting platform could read and relay to Earth the characteristic signatures of Earth features used by scientists and engineers to make mathematical models on a worldwide basis. The AgRISTARS (agricultural resources inventory survey through aerospace remote sensing) project was carrying the measurements further, reading out thermal conditions, predicting soil moisture, and analyzing crops in the visual (as compared to infrared) spectrum. Erb said a worldwide remote-sensing system should be available within the next 20 years for managing Earth resources. Another innovation would be to work in space with living cells and proteins to develop products for fighting disease. Products like beta cells, enzymes, and immunoglobulins produced by kidney cells were already available in hospitals, but at astronomical cost. JSC’s Dennis Morrison said that on the ground this kind of work was limited to a microbiological level; working in space with larger amounts would mean a 20 to 50% improvement. Pituitary, kidney, and pancreas cells would be among candidates for spaceflight, even though weight limitations would delay early commercial processing. (JSC Space News Roundup, Jan 30/81, 4) During January: NASA reported Orbiting Astronomical Observatory Oao 3 (Copernicus), the heaviest and most complex observatory ever launched by the agency and instrumental in discovery of the first black hole (Cyg X-l), had finished its career at the end of 1980 after 8.5 years of operation. Launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) August 21, 1972, with a life expectancy of 1 year, its performance was “astonishing,” said GSFC engineers and scientists. Orbiting at an altitude of 740 kilometers (460 miles), Oao 3 used its supersensitive ultraviolet telescope, largest ever put into orbit, to view the heavens “with a precision and clarity never before possible,” producing spectral readings invisible to ground-based observatories because of the obscuring effects of Earth’s atmosphere. The telescope was capable of pointing accuracy equivalent to seeing a volleyball from a distance of 400 miles. During its lifetime, Oao 3 served more than 160 investigators from the United States and 13 foreign countries in observing more than 450 unique objects. Formal scientific investigations using Oao 3 ended December 31, 1980, but a series of engineering tests would continue into mid-February, when NASA would terminate contact with the spacecraft. GSFC engineers were not sure whether it would orient itself permanently toward the Sun, begin a permanent orbital tumble, or combine the two. (NASA Release 81-10; Goddard News, Jan 5/81, 1)
President Reagan announced the nomination of business executive James Montgomery Beggs as administrator and Dr. Hans Mark as deputy administrator of NASA. If confirmed, Beggs (who was executive vice president and a director of General Dynamics Corporation, which he had joined in January 1974), would be the sixth person to head the civilian space agency, succeeding Dr. Robert A. Frosch. Beggs had been associate administrator in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology (OART) at NASA in 1968-69, leaving to become undersecretary at the Department of Transportation (DOT). Mark, who became secretary of the Air Force in July 1979 the being undersecretary since 1977, was formerly director of NASA’s ARC. (NASA Release 81-51; MSFC Release 81-50; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A-12; W Post, Apr 25/81 A-4)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
NASA officials said that the Space Shuttle Columbia was “in excellent condition” after its flight and should be able to make at least 100 round trips into orbit. Technicians were hooking up ground power links and monitoring systems, photographing the tiles, and preparing to purge the fuel tanks and to install a shroud over the tail section for the flight back to Florida. Postflight servicing was running about 12 hours behind schedule. (WStar, Apr 16/81, A-l)
Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, told of a special “bake job” done for NASA by Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., in its Civil Engineering Squadron’s fabrication-branch shop. Ovens there, normally used to harden, soften, or anneal metals, were large enough to treat 75 to 80 thermal tiles from Shuttle orbiter Columbia damaged by a nitrogen tetroxide spill. The heat treatment at 1,100—1,400°F took about 16 hours to burn off contaminant and bonding material. Checking for toxic vapors caused by the heat disclosed none. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 27/81, 8) During November: Administrator James M. Beggs appointed Philip E. Culbertson associate deputy administrator with revised duties, serving as senior staff adviser and directing formulation of NASA policy, strategy, and planning of a facility to constitute permanent U.S. presence in space. Culbertson had served for two years as assistant for space transportation systems. —Robert F. Allnutt, associate deputy administrator since mid-1978, would assume new duties as deputy general counsel for policy review, studying the long-term development of NASA and its relationship to other federal agencies as well as contractual arrangements with future users of the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, Nov 18/81; NASA Release 81-178, 81-179) —NASA named C. Thomas Newman comptroller to succeed Wiliam E. Lilly, who retired in October. Thomas F. Campbell would replace Newman as deputy comptroller. (NASA anno Nov 25/81) —Frank J. Malina, cofounder of JPL and of the Aerojet General Corporation, died November 9 at his home in Paris. He had moved there to work with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) after retiring in 1947 as an officer of Aeroject and JPL. He had worked for Theodore von Karmann as a researcher for Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, CalTech, leading to creation of the CalTech rocket-research project in 1936 that later became JPL, which made the first successful U.S. satellites in the 1950s. —William Pickering, who followed Malina as JPL director from 1954 to 1976, said that inventions'that made present-day rockets possible went back to work done at JPL under Malina. A leader in developing jet-assisted takeoff (JATO) rockets used in World War II and co-developer of the WAC Corporal, first U.S. successul stratosphere rocket, Malina had in 1942 joined von Karmann to form Aerojet General, first U.S. manufacturer of rocket engines. He left UNESCO in 1953 to start a studio as a graphic artist, working in a form he invented called “kinetic art.” (LA Times, Nov 11/81; LA Star News, Nov 11/81)
NASA launched Dynamics Explorer A and B from the WSMC at 2:56 a.m. PDT (5:56 a.m. EDT) on a Delta into polar orbits with 24,945-kilometer(15,500-mile) and 1300-kilometer(808-mile) apogees, 675 kilometer(420-mile) and 306-kilometer(190-mile) perigees, 90° inclination, and 409 and 97.5-minute periods. The orbits, lower than predicted, were still suitable for the full scientific mission. Launch had been delayed three successive days by command-system discrepanies, high winds at the launch site, and problems with a tracking aircraft. Called DE-1 and DE-2 in orbit, the satellites would study the interaction of solar energy with near-Earth space, simultaneously acquiring data on auroras (northern lights) produced by solar energy entering Earth’s magnetic field and their effect on radio transmission and basic weather patterns. (NASA Releases 81-95, 81-114; NASA MOR S-850-81-03 [prelaunch] July 28/81, [postlaunch] Aug 7/81; W Star, Aug 4/81, D-5)
NASA launched FltSatCom-E for the Naval Electronic Systems Command at 4:16 a.m. EDT from KSC on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,790-kilometer apogee, 166.7-kilometer perigee, and 26.6° inclination, and turned the craft after it separated from the Centaur over the U.S Air Force Space Division. Designated FltSatCom 5 in orbit, the TRW-built DOD communications satellite with a five-year design life would join four similar craft now in geostationary orbit 22,300 miles over the equator at different locations around the Earth, forming a worldwise system to provide two-way communications between naval aircraft, ships, submarines, ground stations, Strategic Air Command elements, and presidential command networks. FltSatCom 5 would serve over the eastern Pacific. DOD would reimburse NASA for Atlas Centaur and launch services. LeRC had management responsibility for development and operation of the Atlas Centaur; KSC was responsible for checkout and launch. (NASA Releases 81-32, 81-93; NASA MOR 0-491-202-81-05 [prelaunch] Aug 4/81; D/SD, Aug 7/81, 211)
The Shuttle orbiter Columbia came to a “flawless” landing on a dry lake bed in the Mojave desert at Edwards Air Force Base, California, at 1:21 p.m. EST before a crowd that included NASA employees, 20,000 VIPs, and about 250,000 spectators who had camped out all night to watch Columbia’s return. Millions of people around the world also watched the return on television. The astronauts got a wakeup call from mission control about 4 a.m. on their 30th orbit, with a special message for Robert Crippen: “You’ve waited 12 years for this. If you don’t wake up, you’ll miss the whole thing.” Before eating breakfast, the crew took time to check flight systems, guidance and navigation instruments, and the 44 reaction-control thrusters used during reentry. On 36th orbit, the crew received “final go” for deorbit firing. Columbia’s payload-bay doors were closed four hours before the scheduled landing time, and the astronauts put on their pressurized space suits in case of emergency. Over the Indian Ocean at 12:22 p.m., an hour before landing and while out of contact with any tracking stations, Commander John Young turned Columbia tail-first and fired two on-board maneuvering rockets to brake the spacecraft; then, turned it nose-first again, tilting it slightly to permit full exposure of underside insulation. Reentry into the atmosphere at more than 17,000	mph took place at 12:48 p.m., 400,000 feet over the Pacific at Wake Island. The few tiles missing from tail areas after liftoff did not affect reentry at heats up to 2750°F. The 80-ton 122-foot long vehicle landed at 215 mph, twice the usual jet speed. As Columbia’s wheels touched down, flight-control chief Don Puddy at Houston told his jubilant team to “Prepare for exhilaration,” allowing them about 15 seconds of celebration before resuming their jobs. For the first time, a splashdown or landing did not immediately end a manned spaceflight. “Welcome home, Columbia,” Houston greeted the craft landing on the center line of the California runway. “Do you want us to take it up to the hangar, Joe?” Young radioed, and mission control responded “We’re going to dust it off first.” A NASA official said that Columbia would probably begin its return flight to Cape Canaveral in seven or eight days, riding piggyback on its Boeing 747 carrier. An “optimistic” estimate was that the orbiter would fly again under its own power in less than six months, on a four-day flight from which it might be able to “turn around” and be ready to fly again in four months. (NYTimes, Apr 15/81, 1, 21; W Post, Apr 15/81, A-l; W Star, Apr 15/81, A-l; WSJ, Apr 15/81, 2)
NASA Headquarters released an official report on the investigation of the March 19, 1981, accident at KSC that killed two employees of Rockwell International, who went into the Shuttle’s aft compartment while it was filled with gaseous nitrogen. It had been determined that an all-clear signal was given too soon. Primary findings by an investigative board headed by Charles D. Gay, KSC director of expendable-vehicle operations, were that test procedures lacked adequate steps to clear a vehicle or pad for hazardous operations, or to partially or completely reopen the vehicle or pad for resumption of normal work; also, that a breakdown occurred in the operational command/coordination process. The report of more than 400 pages included 19 pages of findings, observations, and recommendations to prevent similar accidents in future. (NASA Release 81-85; W Post, June 20/81, A-5)
The Washington Post said that a USSR satellite that fell into the sea off the coast of China August 23 might have “lost its way to the Moon.” The Soviet foreign ministry said that Cosmos 434 was not nuclear-powered and posed no danger of nuclear contamination: the Washington Post said that the Soviet Union seemed eager to allay any fears of radioactive debris like that Cosmos 954 strewed over Canada’s “sparsely inhabited” Northwest Territories in January 1978. The Soviets said that the reentered craft was an “experimental lunar cabin.” This description tallied with a long-held belief that Cosmos 434 was relic of an unsuccessful manned lunar mission planned in the 1960s by the Soviet Union to rival the U.S. Apollo program, which had put 12 men on the Moon by the time it ended in 1972. Between November 1970 and August 1971, the Soviet Union had launched four unmanned satellites that performed complex maneuvers in Earth orbit simulating those of a lunar-landing mission. A two-volume book on the Soviet space program published in 1979 by the American Astronautical Society said that the satellites (Cosmos 379, Cosmos 382, Cosmos 398, and Cosmos 434) seemed to be practicing acceleration toward the Moon, braking into lunar orbit, landing on the Moon, and returning to Earth. The Soviet Union never disclosed the purpose of the satellites, but U.S. analysts believed them to be flight tests of a propulsion unit for manned lunar spacecraft. As the 50th anniversary of the 1917 Bolshevik revolution neared, observers thought it likely that the Soviet Union would mark 1967 by putting a man on the Moon; in 1968; the year before the first U.S. moon landing, Soviet cosmonauts were saying that, when the Americans reached the Moon, Russians would be there to greet them. The Soviet program apparently had a series of setbacks that “cooled the leadership’s enthusiasm,” the Washington Post said. In June 1969 the first attempt to launch the G rocket (a giant new booster like the U.S. Saturn 5) was said to have ended in a mammoth explosion demolishing the launch complex. It also apparently exploded in the early stages of flight during two other tests, in the summer of 1971 and on November 24, 1972. (W Post, Aug 30/81, A-25)
NASA Headquarters held a press briefing on scientific results of Voyager 7’s Saturn encounter in 1980. On hand were project scientists Dr. Edward C. Stone, California Institute of Technology (CalTech); imaging-team leader Dr. Bradford Smith, University of Arizona; and project manager E.K. Davis, JPL. Initial results included discovery of a ring system vastly more complex than imagined and a thick nitrogen atmosphere around Titan, Saturn’s major moon. Voyager 1 took 17,500 photographs of Saturn and its satellites between August 22 and December 15, 1980. The closest approach was November 12—126,000 kilometers (78,000 miles) from Saturn’s cloud tops. From the spacecraft, as from Earth, the atmosphere of Saturn looked grossly similar to Jupiter’s, with alternating light and dark zones, circulating storm regions, and other distinguishable cloud markings. Unlike Jupiter, however, Saturn’s markings were blurred by thick haze above the visible cloud tops; the haze layer at Jupiter was not as optically dense as Saturn’s. Wind speeds were substantially higher than on Jupiter and did not appear closely tied to belt-zone boundaries. Highest winds, blowing eastward at the equator, were four times stronger than on Jupiter; velocity decreased to near-zero at about 40° latitude north and south. Saturn’s atmosphere consisted mostly of hydrogen, helium accounting for only 11% of atmospheric mass above the clouds compared to 19% at Jupiter. The difference was consistent with separation by gravity of helium and hydrogen in Saturn’s interior and could explain the excess energy radiated by Saturn over that received from the Sun. Voyager 1 found that the A, B, and C rings visible from Earth consisted of hundreds of small ringlets, a few of them elliptical; the classical gaps also contained ringlets. Intertwining (“braiding”) of the rings was not explainable, although it might stem from electrostatic charging of their dust-sized particles. Voyager 1 discovered three new satellites, photographed the D and E rings, and confirmed the existence (2.8 Saturn radii from planet center) of a new ring postulated on the basis of Pioneer 11 findings. The flyby observed all of Saturn’s known satellites except Phoebe; Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, Dione, and Rhea, all appeared roughly spherical and composed mainly of water ice. Titan was the most interesting from an Earth viewpoint because of its atmosphere, similar to what would have evolved on Earth had it formed at Titan’s distance from the Sun. Previously considered the largest satellite in the solar system, Titan was found to be slightly smaller than the largest satellite of Jupiter (Ganymede). Both are larger than the planet Mercury. Titan’s atmosphere consisted mostly of nitrogen, the main constituent of Earth’s atmosphere; pressure near the surface was 60% greater than Earth’s. The surface was not visible in photographs from Voyager 1 because of the haze layer, though the southern hemisphere was slightly brighter than the northern, possibly a seasonal effect. Titan’s density seemed about twice that of water ice, indicating that it, like Ganymede, was made of equal amounts of rock and ice. Voyager 1 was now headed out of the solar system, and its platform instruments were turned off December 19. Most fields-and-particles instruments on Voyager 1 were still monitoring the solar wind and its changes with distance and time; exact location of the heliopause (outer edge of the solar wind) was unknown, but might be reached around 1990, Voyager 2 would reach Saturn in August 1981 and proceed on a trajectory to Uranus. (NASA Releases 81-41, 81-44)
NASA announced the establishment of two new divisions within the Office of Space Transportation Systems and the disestablishment of the Expendable Equipment Division. L.M. Weeks, NASA Headquarters deputy associate administrator for space transportation systems, said the change would direct increased attention and impetus to the widebody Centaur program recently approved by NASA. A new Upper Stage Division would manage the widebody Centaur, the inertial Upper stage (IUS), the spinning solid upper stage (SSUS), and the solar-electric propulsion system (SEPS) proposed for use on the Galileo and solar-polar missions. Frank van Rensselaer, director of the former Expendable Equipment Division, would direct the new upper Stage Division. Jerry Fitts would direct a new Solid Rocket Booster and External Tank (SRB/ET) Division. (NASA anno May 26/81)
The Senate confirmed the appointment as NASA deputy administrator of Dr. Hans Mark, former secretary of the Air Force and former director of NASA’s ARC. Mark, a physicist and nuclear engineer, became diretor of ARC in February 1969 and undersecretary of the Air Force in 1977. He had been secretary of the Air Force from July 1979 until 1981. Mark had taught at Boston University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the University of California, and Stanford University. He was chairman of the nuclear engineering department at Berkeley from 1964 to 1969, administering its research reactor. (NASA spl anno, July 9/81; NASA Release 81-51)
NASA officials began a “tanking exercise” of the Shuttle on its KSC launch pad to see if newly installed water-pressure systems would prevent recurrence of shockwaves produced by booster exhaust during the April 12 liftoff. The New York Times quoted officials as saying that shockwave reduction was “mandatory” before Columbia could head for space again. Columbia, already erected on the pad for its second mission, contained a payload of five experiments and a 50-foot mechanical arm put aboard in June when the cargo bay was “closed out,” the New York Times said. NASA might remove a package of scientific experiments rather than risk damaging it during liftoff. (NY Times, Sept 15/81, C-2) —MSFC said September 8 that the Shuttle’s external tank was “successfully filled with liquid propellants” in a cryo-loading test at KSC designed to check out ground and vehicle systems. The success was “a major milestone” toward the second Shuttle flight, now scheduled for October 9. (MSFC Release
John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Columbia’s maiden flight, told of their experience at at 75-minute JSC press conference carried on closed-circuit television to NASA Headquarters and other centers. They said that the orbiter was an incomparable flying machine, surprisingly easy to control, and that the mission was “what NASA calls nominal, although I think you’re going to have to call it phenomenal,” Young reported. Neither crewman expressed concern over the loss of tiles from the aft end of the vehicle, detected shortly after launch. Young said that he was impressed by the fact that the metal under the tiles did not heat up during reentry as much as expected: he said “a lot” of the thermal tiles on the topside could probably be eliminated in future missions, lowering spacecraft weight and increasing the limit on payload weight, now set at 65,000 pounds. Young said that he went immediately upon landing to look at the underside of the orbiter, which had encountered the most heat. “People had been telling us it was impossible that some of these tiles wouldn’t fall off. Well, none of them fell off, and those tiles went through some of the roughest ascent and reentry you can imagine.” “Nothing failed. Statistically, I didn’t think that was possible,” Crippen added. “We’ve been working 3 years to learn how to handle catastrophes, and all we did the whole time was sit back and enjoy it.” The cruise was not perfect, the astronauts agreed: the craft was cold to the point of discomfort some of the time, and the toilet shut down near the end of the flight. The crew kept getting tangled in communications lines, and Columbia “landed long” instead of at its prescribed touchdown spot. Young said the chill could be avoided by putting interior temperature sensors nearer to the crew than to heat-emitting electronic gear. Cordless microphones would solve the problem of tangled cords, and engineers were already working on the toilet program. Young said that he had landed Columbia farther down the 7-mile long runway than he was asked in order to test the Shuttle’s wings and tail for lift; he said that the lift he got at landing was “remarkable.” “We hardly used our brakes. I tell you that was quite a performance, taking 99 tons out of orbit and getting it back down all in one piece.” A reporter asked Crippen if his pulse rate of 130 at liftoff, compared to Young’s 90, meant that he was more excited. “You betchum I was excited,” he replied. “What you don’t understand is, I was excited too,” Young added. “I just can’t make it go any faster.” (Young is 50, seven years older than Crippen.) The mission was so successful that Columbia might fly again as early as September 23, with a third test in December and a final test in April 1982. With that schedule, NASA might begin operational flights carrying cargo into space as early as September 1982. Young said they had been given 135 flight objectives and had completed all 135. “You really should be proud of this vehicle,” he told the JSC audience. (NASA Text, postflight brfg, Apr 23/81; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A—12; WPost, Apr 24/81, A-6; W Star, Apr 24/81, A—12; B Sun, Apr 24/81, A-6)
