India declared its first commercial satellite, INSAT 1, “dead” because its fuel supply had run out and it failed to respond to ground commands 150 days after an April 10 launch. Built by Ford Aerospace to Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) specifications and launched from Cape Canaveral, INSAT was the first operational spacecraft equipped for telecommunications, direct-broadcast television, and weather. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi’s government had planned to use INSAT to broadcast the Asian Games scheduled for New Delhi. ISRO was reported “caught off guard” by the amount of fuel it had used to correct early malfunctions. Soon after reaching orbit, INSAT’s C-band antenna jammed. Fuel was wasted trying to free it, as well as to deploy the malfunctioning solar sail designed to collect energy from the Sun’s rays. Failure of the sail would have reduced INSAT’s life from 7 to 2 1/2 years. Fuel-supply checks might have been inaccurate. Because INSAT was built to ISRO specifications, blame would probably fall on Satish Dhawan, head of India’s space program, who had argued for a multifunction satellite to bring radio and television to thousands of remote villages and give India international telecommunications links. He considered mass communications the best hope for progress in a country with a 36% literacy rate. India’s press hinted that the system had tried for too many functions. A second India communications satellite had been planned for shuttle launch next July as a backup for INSAT, and the government would have to decide how to proceed. Leasing two transponders on INTELSAT’s Indian Ocean satellite as a cost of $16 million per year to partly cover the loss of INSAT would not offer India the prestige of using its own satellite during the games. {W Post, Sept 8/82, A-21; Nature, Sept 23/82, 293)
NASA launched Intelsat 5E F-5 at 7:08 p.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,962-kilometer apogee, 165.7-kilometer perigee, and 24.4° inclination. This craft would carry for the first time a maritime communications package for ship and shore use by INMARSAT. ’An apogee kick motor fired October 1 would start it to geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 82-136; NASA MOR M-491-203-82-05 [prelaunch] Sept 22/82, [postlaunch] Oct 26/82) During September: NASA Headquarters announced the reorganization of its Office of Space Transportation Systems and Office of Space Transportation Operations into a new Office of Space Flight. L. Michael Weeks was named acting deputy associate administrator, with assistant associate administrators for policy, space transportation, and institutions. The new arrangement would stress integrated Shuttle operations planning and direction; STS orientation to customers; a manageable span of control for the associate administrator; maximum delegation of authority to subordinate officials and field organizations; and minimum disruption to existing lines of communication with centers and outside NASA. (SP anno, Sept 1/82) —John J. Quann was appointed deputy director of GSFC, effective September 8. He had been director of GSFC’s mission and data operations directorate since October 1980 and had worked at Goddard since 1963. (NASA anno Sept 1/82; NASA Release 82-131) —NASA named Dr. Frank B. McDonald, chief of GSFC’s laboratory for high-energy physics since 1970, as NASA chief scientist, effective September 20.	In this position he would be the principal adviser to the administrator and other senior officials on scientific aspects of NASA activities. Beginning at GSFC in 1959, McDonald had been project scientist on nine NASA satellite programs and principal investigator for many space experiments. He previously taught physics at the Iowa State University of Science and Technology. (NASA anno, Sept 9/82; NASA Release 82-133) —NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, not slated for flight, was still working for the U.S. space program, helping DFRF engineers to predict and avert structural trouble spots resulting from wear and tear. All preShuttle spacecraft had been one-shot items, so that space fatigue was a new problem. As each Shuttle was meant to fly up to 100 missions, NASA needed a reliable way to foresee difficulties before they developed into problems and to detect potential weakness without damaging the structure. A method called modal analysis measuring structural response to shaker acceleration could track changes from baseline data. Piecemeal testing of parts would not give results valid for the entire structure: Enterprise, built to the same dimensions as the four actual orbiters, was “uniquely qualified for the job,” researchers said. (NASA Release 82-139; DFRF Release 82-13) —MSFC said that Lockheed’s contractor facility had successfully extended and retracted an experimental solar-array wing as tall as a 10-story building, scheduled for flight on the Space Shuttle in 1984. Unlike rigid metal structures used on current long-life spacecraft, the accordion-like array consisting of lightweight flexible plastic contained contact solar cells welded directly to the array like a printed circuit. The wing, measuring 105 feet by 13.5 feet, could fold into a package less than four inches thick and expand in orbit to its full length on a coilable extension mast. It could provide 66 watts per kilogram compared to 20 watts in present systems. (MSFC Release 82-84)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Air Force would have to build a $40 million windscreen around its Space Shuttle launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to protect the orbiter while the external tank was being attached. The Air Force was building a second launch complex in California to put the Shuttle into north-south or polar orbit that, combined with Earth’s rotation, would carry it over the entire surface of the Earth. This would not be possible at Cape Canaveral for reasons of safety; from Vandenberg, however, the orbiter’s route would be over the Pacific ocean. Hans Mark, deputy NASA administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the windscreen would be a huge three-sided sheet of metal around the launch pad to protect the orbiter from gusts while attaching the fuel tank. Winds off the Pacific at that location averaged 9 mph year-round and up to 47 mph from January through March, more than enough to break connections between Shuttle and tank. At the Cape, mating took place inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB); Vandenberg had no such building. (W Post, Feb 10/82, A-5)
Larry Walters of Los Angeles went for a 3-mile-high ride in an aluminum lawn chair borne aloft by 45 weather balloons and ballasted with jugs of water, ending with his unusual craft wrapped around power lines in Long Beach about 20 miles from his starting place in San Pedro. During his 45-minute flight he reached an altitude of 16,000 feet, got so cold he became numb, and had to shoot some of the balloons with a BB gun to make his flying chair descend. He was also sighted by pilots of Delta Air Lines and Trans World Airlines jets. A safety inspector for the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) said that Walters had broken “some part of the Federal Aviation Act, and as soon as we decide which part it is some type of charge will be filed.” Walters later said, “you couldn’t pay me a million dollars to do it again.” (NY Times, July 4/82, 22)
MSFC reported Heao 2, second in a series of three high-energy astronomy observatories launched in the late 1970s and the last to reenter, fell from orbit at 1:27 a.m. CST and burned up in the atmosphere. John Stone, project manager a MSFC, said that tracking stations indicated that it broke up over the South Pacific east of Australia. Heao 1 had reentered in 1979; Heao 3, in December 1981. Heao 2 had not been operational for almost a year, as it had expended its control-gas supply in April 1981, so that it could not maintain attitude and had to be powered down. Launched in September 1979 and nicknamed Einstein, Heao 2 had operated for nearly 2 1/2 years, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built. It had made detailed imaging and spectroscopic observations of about 300 known X-ray sources and discovered thousands of faint new ones. It also made the first X-ray photographs of supernova remnants, pulsars, galactic X-ray sources, and diffuse emissions from galactic clusters. Scientists said it would take three years longer to analyze the data from the Heaos. (MSFC Release 82-31) During March: NASA said that Dr. John F. McCarthy, director of Lewis Research Center (LeRC) would return July 1 to MIT as professor of aeronautics and astronautics. Before becoming director at LeRC in October 1978, McCarthy directed MIT’s center for space research. From 1962 to 1971 he was with North American Rockwell. (NASA anno, Mar 2/82; NASA Release 82-35) —Daniel J. Fink, senior vice president at General Electric Company, was named chairman of the NASA advisory council by James M. Beggs, administrator. He assumed the chair March 11. As general manager of General Electric’s space division, Fink had received the Collier Trophy for his contributions to the Landsat program. (NASA Release 82-39) —Administrator Beggs changed the titles of officials in charge of three programs at NASA Headquarters: Harriett G. Jenkins would be assistant administrator for equal opportunity; Stuart J. Evans, assistant administrator for procurement; John F. Murphy, assistant administrator for legislative affairs. (NASA anno Mar 2/82) —A Thomas Young, director of GSFC, would leave NASA March 20 to become vice president of research and engineering at Martin Marietta Aerospace. He had joined the Langley laboratory in 1961 and in 1975 become Viking mission director. He was deputy director of ARC from February 1979 until taking over at GSFC in February 1980. Acting director at GSFC until the appointment of a successor would be Dr. Leslie H. Meredith, who had been director of applications there since 1976. (NASA annos Mar 1/82, Mar 23/82; NASA Releases 82-31, 82-48) —Andrew J. Stofan, who was acting associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters until Dr. Burton Edelson took over last month, would become director of LeRC, succeeding Dr. John McCarthy as of July 1. Before assignment to Headquarters in 1978 as deputy associate administrator for space science, Stofan was director of launch vehicles at LeRC, where he had begun as a research engineer in 1985. (NASA Release 82-47; LeRC Release 82-14)
The Shuttle imaging radar (SIR) flown on STS-2 in November 1981 had revealed previously unknown river channels, geologic structures, and possible Stone Age occupation sites in the eastern Sahara desert. JPL’s Dr. Charles Flachi, principal investigator for SIR, reported that the radar signal could penetrate the virtually featureless desert surface to show subsurface features nearly as broad as the Nile Valley and up to 50-million years old. Drainage networks detected by radar and confirmed by ground studies would explain the location of present oases in the desert. This new tool could serve in the search for ground water in such arid regions. Dr. Alexander Goetz of JPL said that the multispectral infrared radiometer flown on the same Shuttle mission had made the first detection from orbit of clay and carbonite-bearing minerals, an important step in the use of remote sensing for geological mapping. The device used an area in Egypt of known mineral content as a baseline for analysis; its narrow spectral resolution made it able to map mineral content in the area, using specific substances as a guide for exploration and development, previously possible only through laboratory sampling techniques. Dr. Henry C. Reiche, Jr., of LaRC was the principal investigator for the MAPS (measurement of atmospheric pollution from satellites) experiment flown on STS-2, which proved accurate when compared to ground studies. A gas-filter radiometer, part of the first scientific Shuttle payload, measured carbon monoxide ratios in the lower, upper, and middle troposphere, data to be used in 1984 for seasonal variation studies. Besides the desert features revealed by the Shuttle radar, Flachi reported readings over densely forested areas such as the U.S. Appalachians, the mountains covered by rain forests in western Guyana and Venezuela, and other remote locations not covered by ground survey. Geologic features shown in the radar images would help identify causes of change: erosion, fault lines, or previously unknown fractures of the Earth’s crust. The devices recorded their findings because the Shuttle lacked communications capacity. (NASA Releases 82-174, 82-175, 82-176, 82-177; W Post, Nov 26/82, A-l)
NASA launched Canada’s Telesat-G, called Anik D-1 in orbit, from ESMC on a Delta at 7:10 p.m. EDT. Transfer-orbit parameters were 36,358-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, and 24.5° inclination. Firing of a booster motor at 5:29 p.m. EDT Augusl 29 put Anik D into synchronous orbit, and it was maneuvered to a station 104°W above the equator. Anik D, weighing 2,370 pounds at liftoff, was the heaviest payload launched into transfer orbit by a Delta from that site. Initial on-station weight was 1,454 pounds. This was a 30th consecutive success for the Delta, a new record. The 24-channel communications satellite would provide Canada with television, data, and voice communications. Anik D was Canada’s tenth satellite and fifth in a series of domestic commercial communications satellites owned and operated by Telesat Canada. It would be a backup in orbit for three aging Anik A satellites (launched 1972, 1973, and 1975) and Anik B (1978). (NASA MOR M-492-201-82-05 [prelaunch] Aug 24/82, [postlaunch] Jan 17/83; NASA Release 82-126; Spacewam SPX-346, Aug 31/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 1/82; SSR, Sept 2/82; A/D, Aug 31/82, 343; AvWk, Sept 6/82, 53) During August: Dr. Christopher C. Kraft announced his resignation as director of JSC. He had retired from federal service in March 1980 but had stayed on at the request of the NASA administrator to see the Shuttle program through the flight-test phase that ended July 4. Kraft had begun working for NASA’s predecessor organization, NACA, in 1945 and was appointed director at JSC in 1972. He would be succeeded by Gerald D. Griffin. (NASA Release —Pravda announced the death of Nikolai Pilyugin, 74, a key figure in development of the Soviet space program. An obituary signed by President Leonid Brezhnev said that Pilyugin, who had headed a large research institute for 20 years, was an outstanding designer in the field of space-rocket engineering. He was credited with designing the control system for Soviet launch vehicles, space ships, and interplanetary stations. (FBIS, Pravda in Russian, Aug 3/82)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs established a space station task force, directed by John D. Hodge, to be responsible for developing program aspects, including mission analysis, definition of requirements, an program management. Hodge would report to Philip E. Culbertson, associate deputy administrator, and would draw on space-station activities at each program office and field center. (NASA anno, May 20/82)
Crowds estimated at half a million watched Columbia’s fourth return to Earth, the first to use a concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. Among about 30,000 guests invited by NASA to the occasion were President and Mrs. Reagan. His comment at the touchdown was “Happy Fourth of July, and you know this has got to beat firecrackers.” The fourth flight, STS-4, was classified as the last of four test flights but carried more than 22,000 pounds of cargo, including a secret military payload. Although security considerations kept it from being photographed for viewers, the 50-foot mechanical arm designed to move objects in and out of the cargo bay and capture objects in space had been in use on this flight to move an 800-pound contamination monitor around the cargo bay. The runway, about 300 feet wide and 15,000 feet long, was about the size of the one at KSC made for routine Shuttle use after the seventh flight. The fifth (and first operational) flight scheduled for November would carry two commercial communications satellites, one for Canada and one for Satellite Business Systems; each .customer would pay NASA $21 million if the spacecraft reached orbit safely. Shuttle Program Manager Glynn S. Lunney said that NASA would do well to achieve one launch per month by the late 1980s and, ultimately, 24 to 30 per year. (NASA MOR M-989-82-04, July 19/82; NY Times, July 5/82, A-l, 8; WPost, July 4/82, A-l, A-ll; July 5/82, A-l; July 6/82, A-9)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced a revised policy on Shuttle-mission opportunities for payload specialists, heretofore available only to those buying half or more of a Shuttle mission of flying a unique experiment needing the presence of a particular scientist or engineer. Starting in 1984, NASA would no longer require a minimum payload. Flights for payload specialists would be available on a reimbursable basis to all classes of customer: foreign and domestic commercial firms, international cooperative partners, the scientific and applications community, and DOD. The payload specialists would usually be scientists with special skills who would undergo a brief training for spaceflight. The expanded policy reflected a Shuttle-program goal of sending more people into space on a routine basis. (NASA Release 82-158; MSFC Release 82-97)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles. Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
NASA’s Solar Max satellite had detected an 18-month decrease in solar-energy output that might have caused an unusually harsh winter in 1981 and 1982, said JPL. In the first direct observation of cause-and-effect between solar output and changes in Earth’s climate, a solar telescope—Solar Max’s active-cavity radiometer irradiance monitor—recorded a steady decrease from February 1980 to August 1981 of a tenth of 1% in total solar energy reaching Earth. Systematic increases or decreases as small as 0.5% over a century had produced vast changes in Earth’s climate: the “Maunder minimum” in the 17th century, when sunspot activity almost vanished, had coincided with a period known as Europe’s little ice age. A 1% decrease could lower mean global temperature by more than 1,000 (2°F), and less than 10% decrease could freeze Earth’s entire surface. Earth lifeforms existed in the bioshell, an area 10 kilometers (6.2 miles) on either side of mean sea level, with temperatures fed by solar-energy input and interaction between atmosphere, ocean, and land masses. The time needed to cool down the atmosphere and ocean would allay short-term changes in solar input. JPL’s Dr. Richard C. Willson noted that “if you turned off the sun tomorrow, you wouldn’t see its full effects on earth for three years.” Solar activity peaked about every 11 years. The current cycle peaked about the time Solar Max was launched early in 1980; the decrease might represent the general decline since then but might also indicate a longer term lowering of solar input. (Telescope at the High-Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colo., had recorded images of what seemed to be a shrinking sun that might have grown as much as a tenth of 1% smaller every 100 years for the last four centuries.) Solar Max had lost pointing capability in December 1980, and only three of its seven instruments were still returning data. It had been designed for retrieval by the Shuttle, and NASA was seeking authorization for a Solar Max repair mission. (NASA Release 82-57; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-6) During April: Dr. Noel W. Hinners, director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, would become director of GSFC June 14, succeeding A. Thomas Young. Dr. Hinners was associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters from June 1974 to April 1979, when he took over at the museum; he had also been director of lunar programs in NASA’s Office of Space Sciences. He had joined NASA in 1972 as deputy director and chief scientist of Apollo lunar exploration. (NASA anno Apr 1/82; NASA Release —Col. Joe H. Engle, commander of STS-2 in November 1981, was temporarily assigned to the STS office at NASA Headquarters in conjunction with recent organization changes. As deputy associate administrator for manned space flight under Gen. James A. Abrahamson, his special experience would help simplify the integration process for Shuttle users and ensure maximum use of its manned capabilities. He would retain astronaut status and return to JSC to train for his next flight. (NASA Release 82-71)
NASA launched STS-4, fourth test flight of space shuttle Columbia, from KSC at 11 a.m. carrying Ken Mattingly as commander and Henry Hartsfield as pilot. This was the first time that the Shuttle had lifted off on schedule, but the chase planes televising separation did not show the opening of parachutes on the two reusable solid-fuel booster rockets, and there was no sign on the ocean surface of any of the six main chutes or either of the boosters, which cost $24 million each. Boosters from earlier launches were towed to KSC for refit. After disassembly and cleaning, the first six motor-igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned to Thiokol’s Utah plant for rebuilding at $7 million each; this procedure had saved NASA $36 million per flight for the first three flights. The launch was imperiled the night before by a one-hour hailstorm with pellets “the size of golf balls” denting about 400 of the black protective tiles on the Shuttle’s undersides. Workmen on hastily erected scaffolds had applied a hardener to strengthen the tiles. Enough water soaked the tiles to make the crew need to bake the underside of the Shuttle in the sunlight for 10 hours to dry it out, so that low temperatures on the night side of the Earth would not freeze and further damage the tiles. Mattingly and Hartsfield had begun to power up the 2,000-pound cargo put in the payload bay by the Air Force as well as four experiments managed by MSFC, including the first use of the Shuttle by a commercial firm. Press reports called it “an open secret” that the U.S. Air Force instruments included an extremely sensitive infrared telescope, an ultraviolet telescope, and a new space sextant designed to navigate spy satellites without ground command. Hartsfield, on his spaceflight, suffered nausea but was later able to eat dinner. Instead of televising a view of the payload bay as other crews had done, or using the camera on the end of the 60-foot robot arm to show the Earth as they saw it from space, the crew merely described the view, expressing surprise at the amount of detail discernible. The seven-day mission would “wring out the wrinkles” in the Shuttle not dealt with on the first three flights. NASA said that it would name a board to review “in excruciating detail” how the boosters could sink in 3,500 feet of water although the drogue parachutes were found floating 150 miles downrange. (NASA Release 82-87; MSFC Release 82-56; NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [prelaunch] June 18/82; W Post, June 28/82, A-l; June 29/82, A-2; Dtln Gd, June 28/82; Marshall Star, June 30/82, 1) During June: NASA announced that Dr. Walter C. Williams, chief engineer since July 1975, would retire in July. Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, would succeed him. Williams began his career with NACA, NASA’s predecessor, in August 1940 and worked during the war to improve U.S. fighter planes. He was founding director of the organization that became NASA’s Dryden facility. He went to Langley Field, Va., in September 1959 as associate director of the new NASA space task group created to carry out Project Mercury and later was director of operations for the project. He then became associate director of NASA’s manned spacecraft center in Houston that later was JSC. He went to NASA Headquarters in January 1963, leaving in April 1964 to work for Aerospace Corporation’s vehicle systems. He became NASA’s first chief engineer in 1975. (NASA anno, June 1/82; NASA Release 82-86) —NASA announced the appointment of George F. Page as deputy director of KSC effective July 5. He had directed Shuttle operations there since 1979 and was launch director for the first three launches of Columbia. From 1964 to 1975 he directed KSC operations planning for 19 Gemini and 25 Apollo spacecraft launches, ending with the lunar landings and the successful ApolloSoyuz project. He directed unmanned launch operations from 1975 to 1979, with more than 54 major launches from both KSC and the Western Test Range (WTR) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA anno June 21/82; NASA Release 82-102)
A formal ceremony in Washington, D.C., marked the acceptance of the Canadian-built remote-manipulator system as “ready for operational use” on the Space Shuttle. NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and Dr. Larkin Kerwin, head of Canada’s National Research Council (NRC), signed an agreement declaring the device (already successfully used on STS-2, STS-3, and STS-4) operational. Although NRC thus fulfilled its obligations under a 1975 memorandum of understanding, it would continue to monitor the arm system on future missions. Next use of the arm would be on STS-7 in April 1983. (NASA Release 82-168)
