NASA began moving the TDRS to its permanent location over the Atlantic Ocean, from 67 W to 41W, said Charles M. Hunter, deputy TDRS project manager at GSFC. Using six tiny thrusters, the move began with a 19-minute bum at 8:57 p.m’. EDT, with a second burn for 17 minutes at 8:57 a.m. September 24. The craft would move to its permanent station at the rate of 1.2° per day, drifting until October 16, when the first of two burns to stop the drift would occur. Another burn on October 17 should put TDRS over the Atlantic just east of Brazil, Hunter said. The fuel to be used, about 8 pounds, would not affect operations over the planned 10-year life of TDRS. (NASA Release 83-145) During September: NASA announced that Richard H. Truly, commander of STS-8, was named the first commander of the Naval Space Command to be set up October 1 at Dahlgren, Va. Selected as a NASA astronaut in August 1969, Truly had been on one of the crews for Shuttle approach-and-landing test flights in 1977. His spacecraft was as pilot of STS-2 in November 1981. (NASA Release 83-133)
Final attempts to contact the Viking 1 lander on Mars failed, and JPL spokesman said that they would try no more “unless NASA Headquarters changes its mind.” The craft outlived its 90-day guarantee by years; it was survivor of a pair of two-part spaceships, each including an orbiter that circled Mars while its robot laboratory sampled and photographed the planet’s surface. Viking 2’s lander and Viking l’s orbiter went mute in April 1980. The $500-million project returned data on Mars, including pictures of rust-red rocks and boulders, dust storms, and periodic layers of frost; recorded temperatures ranged from 124-24°°F below zero. (NY Times, May 23/83, A-17; W Post, May 23/83, A-8)
Tass said that Venera 15, launched June 2, had reached Venus October 10 and fired its engine to assume an elongated elliptical orbit around the planet with a 24-hour period of revolution. Venera 16, still on its way, was scheduled to arrive about October 14. (FBIS, Tas;s in English, Oct 10/83) The New York Times said that Soviet officials had “privately admitted” that one of their rockets exploded on the launch pad as three cosmonauts prepared to join the crew on orbiting space station Salyut 7. However, “in the absence of any public accounting of the incident,” questions remained as to the damage done to the Soviet Union’s space program or its effect on the mission of the crew now in their fourth month aboard Salyut 7. The private sources said that the 160-foot A-2 rocket began to topple on the launch pad before its liquid oxygen and kerosene fuel exploded. The accounts were contradictory, some saying that a woman was in the crew and others that the crew was either injured or merely shaken up by the experience. The explosion could amount to a major setback, in view of a Soyuz crew’s failure to dock with the Salyut last April at the end of a “harrowing 17-hour struggle.” The Washington Post said that the crew sustained “unspecified injuries” and that the event was important because the visitors to the Salyut would have returned to Earth in the capsule that took occupants Aleksandr Aleksandrov and Vladimir Lyakhov to the station June 28, leaving their module for the “permanent crew” to use on their return. No immediate concern was expressed about the latter, as the original capsule was still usable. A later report noted that Aleksandrov and Lyakhov had been endangered September 9 by a leak of nitrogen tetroxide propellant into space; the cosmonauts had put on their space suits in case the toxic gas entered the cabin. They were allowed to remain in orbit after they found no traces of the gas. But the leak had left 16 of the station’s 32 control jets unusable, and less than 1,000	pounds of the gas in its single operating tank, meaning that a new crew could not operate the station in a normal mode. A new crew could fly a different type of space tug to one of the docking ports, however, and use its control jets to maneuver the station. The New York Times reported October 18 that a Soviet official with direct contact to senior mission control that said two experienced cosmonauts were recuperating from effects of acceleration when emergency rockets blew their capsule clear of the exploding A-2 launch vehicle and that the crew did not include a woman. The Washington Post said October 20 that the two cosmonauts on Salyut 7 were “in no danger,” according to Eugeny Tabakaev of the Soviet academy of sciences; the statement followed a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) report that the station was crippled because of a propellant leak. British teacher Geoffrey Perry, a regular listener to Soviet radio transmissions, told AP that he had detected no signs of stress and that the cosmonauts “sound fine.” James Oberg, U.S. specialist on Soviet space programs, said that the Salyut 7 crew could get back to Earth in the Soyuz that took them into space, but the Soviet Union had not used the Soyuz craft after 115 to 120 days in space because batteries and other systems could deteriorate over time. Oberg said that Lyakhov and Aleksandrov were to have returned late in September after another crew arrived but were delayed by the launch-pad explosion. The Soviet Union launched a supply ship, Progress 18, from Baykonur at 4:59 a.m. EDT October 20 to rendezvous with Salyut 7, claiming that the cosmonauts there were “living normally.” Lyakhov and Aleksandrov appeared on Moscow television October 16 and appeared to be “in high spirits.” However, their flight had reached its 116th day October 21, and the previous record for a stay in space was the 114 days set last year in the course of a 211-day endurance flight. It would take 10 days to 2 weeks for the cosmonauts to unload Progress 18, which would be burned on reentry. Nature magazine, published in Great Britain, said that the crisis was exaggerated and concern for the crew came not from Soviet engineers but from physicians, who had seen significant declines in activity and efficiency after four months in space. Nature described as “fanciful” a suggestion that the Soviet Union wanted to keep the cosmonauts in orbit until they could be rescued by the U.S. Shuttle on its November flight. (FBIS, Paris AFP in English, Oct 10/83; Tass in English, Oct 14, 20, 21, 22, 28/83; NY Times, Oct 12/83, A-7; Oct 18/83, C-2; W Post, Oct 12/83, A-19; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 20/83, A-39; Oct 21/83, A-7; Nature, Oct 27/83, 756)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
The press reported the death in North Carolina at the age of “about 26” of Ham, the chimpanzee sent on a Mercury capsule into suborbital flight January 21, 1961, to prepare for the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., first U.S. astronaut. Ham, named after the Holloman Aerospace Medical Center in New Mexico, retired from the space program in 1963 to live at the National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C., and after 1981 in the North Carolina Zoological Park. His trip in “a very primitive space capsule on an experimental suborbital run” was attended with “excitement and suspense,” even dread, because no one could predict whether he would survive the shocks of the trip or undergo emotional trauma. “Ham rose to the occasion and took it all in stride,” the report said. “Never mind that the capsule, through an error, had been shot 40 miles higher than planned or that it had landed 30 miles past the target area where a fleet awai ted it or that it had been traveling 5,000 miles an hour, 800 miles faster than planned. ... During the time radio signals were received the chimp pushed various levers and performed other behavior tasks assigned him.” (WPost, Jan 21/83, A-16; Jan 26/83, B-3; Jan 27/83, A-22)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs told a symposium of several hundred government, industry, military, and foreign space-station planners that President Reagan would approve a manned U.S. space station within the next 12 months. Dr. George A. Keyworth, presidential science adviser, had dropped opposition to the space station and asked NASA to come up with a “grand vision.” NASA hoped to get from the administration and Congress “seed money” of about $200 million for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1984; Beggs said that it would cost $6 to $8 billion to get a permanent station with four to six persons aboard into orbit by 1991. The station would enhance U.S. economic well-being by providing new areas for research. (NY Times, July 19/83, C-3; C Trib, July 18/83, 1)
GSFC said that signals radioed to the NOAA-E environment satellite had stabilized it, apparently solving the attitude-control problems it had developed after launch March 28 from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A team of experts from government and industry drew up instructions for the corrections that resulted in complete recovery, according to Gerald W. Longanecker, project manager. The satellite carried six environmental-monitoring devices and one search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking (SARSAT) experiment, the latter for use in locating and rescuing victims of plane crashes and ships in distress. Launched on a U.S. Air Force Atlas E, NOAA-E went into near-perfect orbit but was found to be in the wrong attitude after reaching a 450-nautical-mile altitude; it was in a spin every 17 minutes instead of pointing its sensors and antennas toward Earth. The correcting signals stopped the tumble and allowed the control system to acquire Earth lock. (NASA Release 83-61) Tass later said that “deviations from the planned rendezvous program” canceled plans to dock with the orbital station, and the crew made a soft landing near the city of Arkalyk April 22 at 5:29 p.m. Moscow time. Radio Moscow had said this would be the first time a piloted craft docked with such a huge space complex. Although North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) radar showed the Soyuz and Salyut in close orbits, the Kettering satellite-monitoring group in England said that the mission did not proceed as expected and that communications between the cosmonauts and ground control were “very terse.” This was the first failure of a Soyuz-T, a type in use for three years. (FBIS, Tass in English, Apr 20/83, Apr 22/83; Beijing Xinhua in English, Apr 22/83; WPost, Apr 19/83, A-20; Apr 22/83, A-l; Apr 23/83, A-l)
The NY Times said that“computer enthusiasts” had invaded NASA’s electronic mail system, left cartoon images and “Kilroy was here” messages for agency employees, and played pranks on others. A NASA official said that the intruders had destroyed some information but had not “significantly disrupted” the electronic mail service. NASA first noticed the intrusions in mid-July, and they continued into mid-September. Besides reading unclassified NASA messages, the intruders had destroyed some messages and created personal passwords and new files for themselves and their computer friends. Some NASA employees who used Telemail had been inconvenienced, but the system had never been halted. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) said that it was investigating a number of youths in connection with the intrusions. To make Telemail easy to use, NASA had told employees to use their first initial and last names as part of an entry code; employee names were available from agency telephone directories sold by the Government Printing Office (GPO). The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) told a House subcommittee that it was trying to increase security for federal computers, and an FBI official asked Congress for a law prohibiting unauthorized entry into a computer. Without such a law, federal authorities were treating the cases as wire fraud, like use of telephone lines to obtain service without paying. (NY Times, Oct 19/83, A-16) Another report said that the FBI had seized computers and other equipment from 15 computer enthusiasts around the United States, mostly teenagers. The bureau said that there was “extensive” penetration into commercial and DOD computers and that intruders had tampered with the files of some corporations. (NY Times, Oct 17/83, A-12) During October: Kurt Debus, who helped develop Germany’s World War II V-2 rocket and worked on the Redstone ballistic missile for the U.S. Army in the 1950s, died after a heart attack at his home near Cocoa, Fla., at the age of 74. He had joined Wernher von Braun’s rocket team on the Baltic coast during the war and came to the United States afterwards. Von Braun said of him: “We develop the rockets and it’s up to Debus to see they do what they’re supposed to do.” In 1952, Debus became director of what would later be NASA’s Kennedy Space Center; his last official act before retirement was to break ground for a KSC landing strip for Shuttles returning from orbit. (W Post, Oct 11/83, B-6)
NASA said that it had signed a contract with Fairchild Industries for design and development of an unmanned space platform called Leasecraft, to be deployed from the Shuttle to serve commercial and government users. James M. Beggs, NASA administrator, said that the move was consistent with administration plans to promote space exploitation by commercial firms. Fairchild said that the platform, which would measure 15 by 15 by 9.5 feet and carry power and command and data-handling modules with other equipment needed by various payloads, would cost more than $200 million. Payloads would include materials-processing and remote-sensing equipment and scientific experiments. (NASA Release 83-143)
Press reports said that the 10th Shuttle mission originally set for November, first to have a secret mission and first to be flown solely for the U.S. Air Force, was delayed “indefinitely” at the request of the Air Force and that NASA officials had “no idea” when it would be rescheduled. The Air Force confirmed the delay but would not discuss the reasons. NASA and the Air Force had an agreement allowing the service to preempt any scheduled Shuttle mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED jit? liritriHUNAiU Unidentified sources said that the reason was the Boeing-built upper stage that failed when the TDRS was launched from the Shuttle in April. Postponement indicated that the payload scheduled for the Air Force would have used the type of upper stage that malfunctioned. A special board convened to investigate the matter had not issued a report. (NY Times, June 14/83, C—3; W Post, June 14/83, A-7)
NASA launched at 11:00 a.m. EST the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) from KSC. Columbia carried the largest space crew ever, which consisted of John Young, commander; Brewster Shaw, pilot; Dr. Robert Parker and Dr. Owen Garriott, mission specialists; and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold, payload specialists. The crew would operate in two shifts to permit 24-hour operation of experiments. The mission was originally scheduled to get under way September 30 but was delayed to October 28 to give engineers additional time to check out a communications satellite needed to relay data to Earth from Spacelab, carried on Columbia. The flight was postponed again when an examination of the booster rockets used for the Space Shuttle mission in August revealed serious erosion of the insulation lining one of the rocket nozzles. The rocket was replaced. Columbia carried Spacelab, designed and built by ESA, which marked Europe’s first major entry into a manned space program. Other firsts associated with the flight was that it carried the heaviest payload on a Shuttle, the 33,584-pound Spacelab and pallet, and that it would include more experiments and spacecraft maneuvers than did any previous flight. Immediately after liftoff, Columbia rolled over and turned northward to put itself into an orbital path that would range from as far north as Scotland and Leningrad to as far south as Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America in order to take pictures of Europe. The orbit would also take Columbia over Moscow and many militarily sensitive areas of the Soviet Union, the first time a U.S. manned spacecraft had flown over the Soviet Union in daylight. No pictures or other sensing would be taken of the ground while Columbia passed over the Soviet Union. The $l-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long laboratory was sealed and pressurized so that the scientists/astronauts could work in shirtsleeves as they carried out more than 70 experiments on 38 sets of equipment. Operating Spacelab were Merbold and Lichtenberg, a new breed of astronaut—payload specialists—who were not career astronauts but scientists trained to operate the science instruments on the mission. Wired with sensors, the scientists were guinea pigs in a number of experiments designed to explore how the body adapted to space and how it performed in the absence of gravity. Blood samples were taken three times so that scientists could study how the ratio of red to white blood cells changed once the body was weightless. Several experiments were conducted to measure eye movements; in another experiment, Garriott was given mild electric shocks to see how the muscles in his body responded to a sudden jolt that was the bodily equivalent of a sudden movement in weightlessness (doctors believed that one of the causes of space sickness might be abrupt movements that disoriented the inner ear). In another experiment, the crew in shifts pushed two balls identical in shape and size, although of different weights, to determine how quickly humans would distinguish weight from size in weightlessness. Other Spacelab studies were concerned with the growth in space of sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes. Exotic metal mixes were melted, and crystals were grown in three Spacelab furnaces. There were experiments intended to determine the practicality of orbiting factories to produce products not possible in the gravity of Earth. During the flight, two antennas failed on the TDRS-1 that was used to relay data from Spacelab to Earth. The failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold had to share the voice link to Mission Control Center in Houston with the four astronauts in Columbia’s cockpit, and it meant that the two scientists got their instructions from the ground via a teleprinter aboard Spacelab. Columbia landed December 8 at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. (NASA MOR M-977-09-83-01 [prelaunch], Oct 83; NASA Releases 83-163, 83-176; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Nov 29/83; W Post, Nov 22/83, A-8, Nov 28/83, A-l, Nov 29/83, A-l, Nov 30/83, A-l; USA Today, Nov 29/83, 1A; W Times, Nov 22/83, C—1; B Sun, Nov 29/83, A-l)
At 8 a.m. EDT June 13, unmanned U.S. spacecraft Pioneer 10 crossed the orbit of Neptune on the way out of the solar system. The 570-pound robot craft 2.81 billion miles from the Sun and traveling 30,558 mph at the time. (NASA Releases 83-39, 83-91; ARC Releases 83-11, 83-18; W Post, June 12/83, A-l; June 14/83, A-l; NY Times, June 14/83, A-l)
. The prototype Shuttle Enterprise, returning from an overseas tour that included the Paris air show, flew over Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md., early in the morning before landing at Dulles airport in Virginia for public viewing at a distance. “Hundreds of thousands,” according to the Washington Post, came to see the Shuttle, “despite soaring temperatures.” Enterprise, and its Boeing 747 transport jet left for California the next day. (NASA Releases 83-89, 83-93; W Post, June 13/83, B—1; USA Today, June 13, 7A; W Times, June 13/83, LA)
Scientists at ARC said that Pioneer 10 would be nearly 2.8 billion miles beyond the Sun at 2 p.m. PDT, when it passed the orbit of Pluto, traveling 30,000 mph on its way outside the solar system. The first manmade object to reach such a distance, Pioneer 10 might go on for millions of years and carry Earth greetings to another galaxy. Launched March 2, 1972, the craft had functioned “almost with flaw,” said project manager Richard Fimmel. Because of its elliptical orbit, Pluto—usually the outermost planet—at this time was nearer than Neptune to the Sun and would travel inside Neptune’s orbit for the next 17 years. Pioneer 10 would cross Neptune’s orbit June 13, effectively leaving the solar system behind. Radio signals moving at the speed of light needed more than four hours to cross the distance between Earth and spacecraft; even after a decade in space, Pioneer 10 was transmitting data of great value to scientists. Since the date of its launch with a predicted lifetime of 21 months, long enough for a Jupiter encounter, Pioneer 10 signals over vastly increasing distances had remained detectable because of improvements in antenna sensitivity. NASA said that it hoped to track the craft for another eight years, to a distance of 5 billion miles, 2.2 billion miles beyond its present location. (NASA Release 83-57; ARC Releases 83-13, 83-14; W Post, Apr 25/83, A-23)
The New York Times carried a report by “American intelligence sources” that three Soviet cosmonauts escaped death but might have been injured when a USSR launch vehicle exploded or caught fire September 27 at a site in Asia. The crew was saved when an escape rocket on top of the capsule pulled the spacecraft away from the booster. The incident, first of its kind in manned space programs, occurred as the liquid-fuel rocket was about to launch the crew to the orbiting Salyut 7 space station. (NY Times, Oct 3/83, B—13)
A report from the House Appropriations Committee said that the Space Telescope, called by NASA Administrator James M. Beggs “the most important scientific instrument” ever to be flown, would cost $200 million more and reach orbit a year later than expected because of difficulties in development. The report blamed delays and cost overruns on NASA for understaffing the program by 50% in its early development, and on Perkin-Elmer Corporation, one of two major contractors, for failing to “properly plan for a project of the technical and manufacturing difficulty of the Space Telescope.” Besides the glitches in tracking and alignment devices, possibly unremovable dust on the primary telescope mirror after 15 months in a Perkin-Elmer “clean room” had lowered its reflecting power by 20 to 30%. (IT Post, Mar 28/83, A-8)
NASA published in the Federal Register a proposal on how it would select passengers to ride on the Space Shuttle, possibly as early as 1985. NASA emphasized in the proposal that it was not accepting applications. It had already received more than 2,000 written requests for rides since the 1960s, and it had received so many telephone calls about riding the Space Shuttle that it had to attach a recorded message to its telephone line to request that potential astronauts have patience. All requests that had been received by NASA would be disregarded, said NASA’s Sara Keegan. The proposed selection plan would use a multitiered process to choose Shuttle passengers. All requests would be screened by an outside review panel appointed separately by NASA for each flight and then reviewed by a panel of seven top space agency officials before NASA’s administrator made the final selection. Several months before liftoff of a flight, the agency would announce when it would accept applications and disclose specific requirements for the flight. Such requirements could change according to the Space Shuttle’s mission. There were, however, broad requirements for all passengers. Citizen observers/participants would have to be in good health and condition, pass a detailed background investigation, and be willing to undergo rigorous training. NASA was accepting comments from the public on its proposed selection process until mid-February. (NASA Release 83-190; Federal Register, Dec 23/83, Vol. 48 No. 248, pages 56770-71. Published in final form in Federal Register, Apr 25/84, Vol. 49 No. 81; NY Times, Dec 16/83, A-ll; WPost, Dec 23/83, A-3) During December: The large number of malfunctions that struck the Space Shuttle Columbia in its final hours of flight during STS-9 forced engineers to inaugurate the most extensive trouble-shooting operations since the Space Shuttles began flying in April 1981. They were not sure how long the undertaking would last, what they might find, or what effect their findings could have on future flight schedules. NASA officials did not rule out the possibility that the Columbia’s troubles could cause a delay in the next Space Shuttle mission scheduled for January 30, 1984. The malfunctions included two computer failures, a navigation instrument shutdown, and an explosive fire in the rear compartment. Early Space Shuttle flights had had troubles with computers and the heat-shielding tiles, but these were straight forward physical defects that were easily identified. The current problems were more perplexing and came when the Space Shuttle was assumed to be a fully tested, operational vehicle. NASA engineers and other aerospace observers had suggested that the Columbia’s problems stemmed from a phenomenon not uncommon in any new, complex technology : that is after the initial text phase, when extreme care and attention were given to every step in a project, it was human nature to relax a bit, and it was the nature of machines to misbehave occasionally in unexpected ways. International Business Machines (IBM), contractor for the computers, would examine the faulty computers; NASA engineers would closely examine data in search of clues to the cause of the two malfunctions, which did not seem to be related to any fundamental design flaw but could have been caused by loose circuitry resulting from vibrations. NASA would ship the inertial measurement unit to its manufacturer, the Singer Kearfott Company in Little Falls, N.J., for examination. (NY Times, Dec 15/83, A-l) —JPL announced that the IRAS had found a ring of planets being born around Fomalhaut, one of the most studied stars in the southern skies. Earlier in the year, the telescope had discovered a primitive solar system around the star Vega. The discovery that Vega and Fomalhaut appeared to have solar systems was the first evidence supporting the theory that Earth’s solar system was not the only such in existence. Vega and Fomalhaut might be undergoing the same kind of evolution that Earth’s solar system went through three to four billion years ago. “The discovery provides the second direct evidence that solid objects of substantial size exist around a star that is not our sun,” said Dr. Gerry Neugebhuer, IRAS program scientist at JPL. “These objects could be a solar system in a different stage of development and evolution than our own or the one that we found to be circling Vega,” he added. The IRAS detected the two extraterrestrial solar systems by measuring the temperature of the bodies circling the two stars. It found them much cooler than the stars but far too warm and far too large to be rings of interstellar dust. (JPL Release, Dec 16/83; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-3) —Lt. Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr., retired December 31 as deputy director, JPL. Following retirement from the Air Force in 1969, he joined JPL as deputy director, functioning as general manager responsible for the day-to-day management of the laboratory’s resources and the direction and coordination of its technical, administrative, and service activities. General Terhune received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in October 1982. He will be replaced as deputy director by Robert J. Parks, JPL associate director. (JPL Release, Dec 12/83)
Senior NASA managers, headed by Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, associate administrator for space flight, had met with contractors and “cleared the way” for returning the tracking and data-relay satellite to KSC’s launch pad in preparation for the first launch of Challenger, the agency said. Results of the second flight-readiness firing led to a decision not to conduct a third firing before launching Challenger early in March. The #1 engine had been removed for exchange with the flight spare. The spare would have the high-pressure pump from the #1 engine installed before the change took place. (NASA Release 83-16)
Professor Konstantin Feoktistov, a senior Soviet space official, told a news conference that “work was being done” on the Soviet space shuttle project, which he described as being “more complex” and more “expensive” than Moscow’s current orbiting manned-station program, the Washington Post reported. Also at the news conference were cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov, who had just returned from their record-long stay aboard Salyut-7. The two confirmed a series of recent mishaps in the Soviet space program, including a fuel leak in their Salyut 7 orbiting station and a launch pad explosion of a booster rocket September 26 that was to have brought a fresh crew to relieve them. Because of the explosion, the two cosmonauts said that their mission was extended by 50 days. General Vladimir Shatalov, space training chief, told the news conference that there was a leak of toxic propellant on the Salyut 7 space station but denied reports that the craft was so crippled by this as to endanger the crew’s lives. “There was a problem with one of the subsystems and there was a leak of a certain amount of fuel,” he said. “That part of the station was switched off and it continues to be viable today.” That subsystem was used for space/maneuvering, the general added, noting that backup systems were sufficient to deal with the problem. Another senior Soviet space official said privately that the Soviets were working on a space shuttle and that in “general terms we are considering both types of orbital vehicles—single-use and multiple-use,” the Washington Post said. (W Post, Dec 13/83, A-10)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
For the first time in the U.S. space program, one satellite used signals from another satellite to navigate. The Air Force System Command said that Landsat D (Landsat 4), a NASA remote-sensing craft built by General Electric, was getting signals from the U.S. Air Force Space Division’s NavStar global-positioning system (GPS) satellite to compute position, velocity, and time. Landsat 4, first satellite to carry a GPS receiver, could record its precise position as it acquired Earth-imaging data. The receiver also eliminated transmission of navigation signals between space and Earth; direct signal reception ensured efficient and economic spacecraft operation. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 4/83, 5)
NASA launched Telestar 3A for the American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (AT&T) from the Eastern Space and Missile Range at 6:49 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37,516-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, 23° inclination, and 664-minute period, preparatory to moving it to geosynchronous station at 96 °W over the Pacific just west of the Galapagos. Telestar 3A was the first of a new series of three domestic communications satellites offering AT&T long-lines customers television, phone, and data service over the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico; it had 24 transponders and 6 spares, each able to relay a color-television signal at 60 million bits per second or up to 3,900 two-way phone calls. (Telestar 1 launched 21 years ago for the first transatlantic television relay could offer only 600 one-way voice channels or one television channel.) Launch of Telestar 3A was declared successful December 16. (NASA Release 83-110; NASA MOR M-492-216-83-01 [postlaunch] Dec 16/83; Spacewam SPX-358, Aug 30/83, 2) During July: NASA appointed Dr. Milton A. Silveira, assistant to the deputy administrator, to succeed Dr. Stanley I. Weiss as chief engineer. Weiss, who came to NASA in 1980 as associate administrator for space transportation operations at Headquarters, was leaving to become vice president for engineering at Lockheed Corporation, where he had worked from 1957 to 1978. Silveira began at Langley with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1951 and worked in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. He was deputy project manager at JSC for the shuttle orbiter program before coming to Headquarters in 1981. (Anno, July 1/83) NASA also appointed John W. Boyd associate administrator for management at Headquarters effective September 4. He had begun at ARC in 1947 and served there until appointed deputy director of DFRC in 1979, returning to ARC in 1980 as associate director. (Anno, July 1/83)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
Efforts to push the $100-million TDRS communications satellite into its proper orbit were suspended when NASA engineers found that two of its maneuvering rockets were damaged and would not work. Firing the 16 small thrusters on the satellite was the obvious way to correct the orbit, but Ron Browning, TDRS project manager, said that engineers from NASA and TRW Inc., manufacturer of TDRS, would take four to six weeks to figure how to operate it with “less than a fully optimal control system.” {W Post, Apr 14/83, A-3)
Associated Press (AP) said that ESA launched Ariane 6 at 7:59 a.m. EDT from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites: the first ESA telecommunications craft, the British Aerospace-designed Ecs 1, and a smaller West German satellite to retransmit amateur radio broadcasts. This sixth attempt to get the three-stage Ariane off the ground was considered a “crucial boost” to Europe’s space program as a way to break th superpower monopoly on space. Ariane faced competition from the U.S. Space Shuttle and from private companies planning to buy conventional Thor, Atlas, and Titan vehicles from the U.S. government. ESA was counting on enough business for everyone, but admitted that Ariane would have had trouble getting any if this sixth launch had failed. (ESA Info 21; WPost (AP), June 17/83, A-2) Mission control stated that the group of five was “the largest human payload in the history of the space age.” The Soviet Union had maintained crews of five on its Salyut space station but had never carried that number on a single launch. First deployment of a payload was at 5:02 p.m. EDT when the crew launched from the cargo bay a seven-ton communications satellite, Anik C2, for Telesat (Canada’s governmental telecommunications organization). At 9:36 a.m. EDT the next day the crew launched a $40 million Palapa B communications satellites for the government of Indonesia. Two previous Palapas launched by the United States were providing communications to Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Palapa B, twice the size of the earlier communications satellite could increase television and telephone traffic in the area by 10% to 15% a year. The 147 million Indonesians living on islands extending more than 3,200 miles east to west had only 560,000 telephones: Palapa B could provide service for as many as a million new telephones in the next 10 years. After the second communications satellite was launched, the four rookie astronauts (Ride, Fabian, Hauck, and Thagard) appeared on the television screen assembled in the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white letters reading “TFNG: We Deliver.” TFNG stood for “thirty-five new guys,” the astronaut class, recruited in 1978, to which all four belonged. Crippen stayed out of camera range, but mission control said “That’s all right, Crip. We can tell you’re a steely-eyed veteran from here.” On June 19 mission control said that the families of the four fathers aboard Challenger had gathered “to wish you a happy Father’s Day.” The four male astronauts had a total of 10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and Fabian, 2 each. Major activities for the next three days would be the release of the mechanical arm and rehearsal for deployment and retrieval of the West German pallet. Ride and Fabian would drop the 15-foot, 5,000-pound package off the Shuttle and try to pick it up again. (This would be a first for an exercise that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June 22 the team released and retrieved the package five times, as television cameras on Shuttle and package sent spectacular shots of the procedure with a backdrop of Earth and black space. When the exercise concluded and the arm and the payload were back in the cargo bay, Crippen reminded mission control that some crews had announced “We deliver” (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when they launched two communications satellites from the shuttle last November): “Well, for flight 7, we pick up and deliver.” The USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova, first woman to make a flight in space 20 years ago, wired congratulations to Sally Ride. The telegram expressed pleasure “to know that a third representative of this planet’s women, now from the United States of America, is in outer space today.” Last year the Soviet Union sent a second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into space. Among more than 20 experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay and mid-deck was the colony of 150 carpenter ants sent into space by high-school students from Camden, N.J., to record their reactions to weightlessness. The ants were considered good space subjects, being hardy and naturally social creatures. Marginal weather at KSC raised a question whether Challenger would land near its launch point, as planned. Landing on the Florida runway was a way to reduce time in preparing Challenger for its next flight. STS-7 cbuld be extended, or landing could be shifted to Edwards Air Force Base in California; a shift to California would mean an eight-day delay in bringing Challenger back to KSC for a mid-August mission, adding pressure to the timetable for launching Spacelab between the end of September and mid-October. The next chance for a Florida runway landing would be early in 1985; the two intervening missions would be a night launch and landing and the heavyweight touchdown of the Shuttle carrying Spacelab. Also of concern was the effect of rainstorms on the Shuttle tile covering: planes carrying strips of the insulation had been flown through rainstorms with a uniform result of “significant erosion of the tile surfaces.” Mission control offered three landing times, 6:53 a.m. and 8:29 a.m. EDT at KSC and 9:56 a.m. EDT at Edwards Air Force Base. The crew appeared on television “stowing the cabin” in preparation for landing. A sign “The Doctor Is In” was held up as Thagard showed viewers the experiments he was conducting to find clues for the cause of space sickness. STS-7 had been the first shuttle mission to have no space-sick astronauts. The Challenger landed at Edwards Air Force Base June 24 at 9:57 EDT after a steady downpour began at KSC. In a congratulatory telephone call to the astronauts, President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling of the mechanical arm and said “You were there because you were the best person for the job.” Ride said that the flight was “the most fun I’ll ever have in my life.” When the astronauts attended a brief homecoming ceremony at Johnson Space Center June 24, Ride refused to accept a bouquet of flowers from a NASA official; she had said before the mission that she wanted to be treated no differently from her four male crewmates. Wives of the male astronauts each received a red rose; Ride’s husband, astronaut Dr. Steven Hawley, did not. (NASA MOR E-420-07-83-04 [prelaunch] June 9; NASA MOR M-989-83-07 [prelaunch] June 13/83; NY Times, June 20/83, A-l; June 23/83, A-l; June 25/83, 16; June 26/83, 4-8; WPost, June 17/83, A-2; June 20/83, A-l; June 21/83, A-6; June 22/83, A-3; June 23/83, A-l; June 24/83, A-3, C-4; June 25/83, A-l; June 26/83, A-2)
Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite. The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%. The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time. The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.” The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts. STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down. The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor. Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42) Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.” India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
Three U.S. biomedical experiments were flying aboard a Soviet spacecraft, Cosmos 1514, launched today. In an announcement following the launch, Moscow said only that “scientific experimental systems with various biological objects” were aboard and made no reference to foreign collaboration. However, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs disclosed that NASA had provided three pieces of medical equipment that the Soviets incorporated in the scientific payload of Cosmos 1514. Later, NASA said that the experiments had to do with blood system and biorhythm studies in monkeys and fetal development studies in rats. Beggs said that talks that paved the way for the Cosmos 1514 experiments were held “about five years ago.” Cosmos 1514 was recovered on December 19, 1983, and in May 1984 TASS reported that the rats on the flight were developing normally and that Soviet scientists believed the weightlessness did not affect the normal development of embryos. (GSFC SSR; FBIS, USSR, May 9/84; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-15)
