Engineers at NASA’s GSFC completed checkout and activation of the Landsat-5 Earth resources satellite, launched from the Vandenberg Air Force Base complex in California on March 1, and turned over today operational control of the spacecraft to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The 1,950-kilogram (4,300-pound) spacecraft was placed in a 705-kilometer (438-statute miles) near-polar orbit. NASA engineers had checked out all computer, communications, telemetry, and other spacecraft systems and declared the spacecraft ready for operational use. With Landsat-4 still functioning, data acquisition over the same ground swath was possible on an eight-day repeat cycle. NASA planned to turn over to NOAA operational responsibility for Thematic Mapper operation and data processing in January 1985. (NASA Release 84-49; NASA Dly Ac tv Rept, Apr 9/84) —NASA announced that it had established an interim Space Station Program office as a result of President Reagan’s January 25, 1984, directive to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station and to do it within a decade. Philip E. Culbertson, in addition to his duties as associate deputy administrator, would assume the role of acting director of the interim office, with John D. Hodge (former director of the Space Station task force) as acting deputy. The interim office superseded the former Space Station task force and would be responsible for direction of the Space Station Program and for planning the organizational structure of a permanent Program Office. (NASA anno, Apr 6/84)
A four-engine Boeing jetliner in a radio-controlled test of an aircraft fuel mixture called “antimisting kerosene” crashed on Rogers Dry Lake, California. A huge fireball engulfed three-fourths of the plane immediately after it crashed. The fireball lasted about six seconds and was followed by an outpouring of black smoke that often accompanies landing crashes. Flames from what officials called a “secondary fire” were visible through the smoke. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and NASA sponsored the $11.8 million crash primiarly to test the new fuel mixture, which was designed to prevent an explosive burst of flames in case of an accident. Safety specialists emphasized that it would take a long time to reconstruct precisely the sequence of events that left the Boeing 720 a much more devastated wreck than had been expected. An initial examination of the plane showed that the interior had been totally gutted by the fire that the crash produced. Despite the outcome, government and industry officials appeared willing to continue efforts to produce a practical way to minimize the fire risk from fuel spilled in accidents. (WPost, Dec 2/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 3/84, A-21; Time, Dec 10/84, 32; WTimes, Dec 3/84, 3A)
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger today named Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA’s associate director for space flight, to be manager of what the Reagan administration called the strategic defense initiative, a program to explore the feasibility of building a space-based defense against nuclear ballistic missiles. President Reagan had suggested the program the previous year. Abrahamson’s job would be to direct and coordinate several research programs that had been under way for some time at DOD and in the Department of Energy (DOE). These included research on several kinds of laser and particle beam weapons, work on large mirrors needed for some lasers, advances in high-speed data processing, and methods of generating large amounts of electrical power in space. Abrahamson had been at NASA since November 1981 and had directed not only the Space Shuttle operation but also commercial sales of Shuttle services and relations with Congress and the space industry. He would begin his new duties on April 15 after the nation’s 11th Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch on April 6. (NY Times, Mar 28/84, A-19) —NASA announced that Jesse W. Moore would become acting associate administrator for spaceflight on April 15, succeeding Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who would become director of strategic defense at DOD. Moore, who had been Abrahamson’s deputy, had come to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as the deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. He was director of the Spacelab Flight Division until December 1981, when he assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division in the Office of Space Science and Applications. In February 1983 he was appointed to the position of deputy associate administrator for spaceflight. (NASA Release 84-40) —U.S. Ambassador to Portugal Allen Holmes and Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Gama signed today in Lisbon an accord that would provide for a satellite tracking station in Portugal. Under the accord, the United States would provide Portugal with $60 million annually, of which $20 million would be for military aid and $40 million for economic aid. The United States would use the station to track flying military targets; U.S. plans called for five satellite tracking stations in the world, and stations in New Mexico, Hawaii, and South Korea were completed. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua in English, Mar 28/84)	" During March: In an interview following his around-the-world trip to sell the U.S. Space Station idea to U.S. allies, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said, “I thought the trip went well, I thought it went extremely well.” He added that he had proposed that as much as one-fourth of the proposed $8 billion cost of the Space Station be borne by western Europe, Japan, and Canada. “They didn’t exactly stand up and cheer when I said I’d like them to think about contributing a couple of billion dollars, but they didn’t blink at the numbers either,” he said. Beggs said that the countries had about a year to decide if they wanted to join in a partnership with the United States, since NASA planned to begin awarding contracts for the Space Station’s final design in the spring of 1985. He noted that all of the countries had laid down conditions under which they would agree to participate: the station must provide technological challenges to their industries; they must have what Beggs called a “clearly defined role” in the direction of Space Station operations and selection of flight crews; they must have access to the entire station; and their industries must have the same access that U.S. industry had. (W Post, Mar 27/84, A-2)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced today that JSC was named “lead center” for the agency’s Space Station Program. In a letter to center director Gerald D. Griffin, Beggs said that he was requesting the center to form a program office to execute five basic program responsibilities: systems engineering and integration, business management, operations integration, customer integration, and support of NASA Headquarters Space Station Program Office. Beggs noted that he planned to form a new organization at NASA Headquarters to direct the Space Station Program and that he would make assignments to other centers under overall project management of JSC. Terry White, a NASA spokesman in Houston, said that space station work would probably not require a large increase in personnel there because people working on the Space Shuttle program would shift over to the Space Station, the New York Times reported.
The White House approved a policy that would free the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to begin processing several applications from companies hoping to provide satellite telecommunications services, thereby breaking INTELSAT’s 20-year monopoly on such service. President Reagan signed a “finding” that it was in the national interest to have alternatives to INTELSAT. The announcement came after the State and Commerce departments had fought for months over who would define the new international telecommunications policies. And, of course, INTELSAT and its U.S. representative, ComSatCorp, tried to block entry of private competitors into the international market. David Markey, assistant secretary of commerce for telecommunications and information policy, said that the new policy would not permit private satellite networks to mount full-fledged competition against INTELSAT. “It will be clear that [such networks] should be restricted to non-public switched voice services,” he added. (W Post, Nov 28/84, C—1) During November: Upon the departure at the end of November of Dr. Donald P.	Hearth from NASA, Richard H. Petersen will move from deputy director to director of LaRC. Hearth had been center director at Langley since September 1975. He joined NASA in 1962 and had held various agency positions, inlcuding deputy director of Planetary Programs at NASA Headquarters. Petersen had served as deputy center director at LaRC since July 1980.	He began his career at ARC in 1957 and was chief of the Aerodynamics Division there from 1975 until he joined Langley. (NASA Release 84-163)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and Professor Ernesto Quagliarello, president of the Italian National Research Council (CNR), signed today in Rome two memoranda of understanding; the separate agreements established the development of the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) and the development and launch of Laser Geodynamics Satellite-2 (Lageos-2). The TSS would be a data-gathering satellite that would be carried into orbit by the Space Shuttle and released from payload bay on a tether. It would provide an important new reusable, multidisciplinary facility for conducting space experiments in Earth orbit and open the way to several areas of longterm scientific experimentation not otherwise possible. NASA would develop the TSS deploy, perform the system-level engineering and integration, and launch TSS on the shuttle. CNR would develop the two-module (science and service) TSS satellite and provide system-level support to NASA for technical aspects of the satellite. Eleven countries were conducting laser ranging activities with the passive Laser Geodynamics Satellite-1 (Lageos-I) launched by NASA in 1976. The agreement signed today outlined the terms for the development of Lageos-2, which would significantly enhance study and understanding of the solid earth and its dynamic processes. Lageos-2 would be identical in configuration to Lageos-1 and would be placed in an orbit of similar altitude but with a different inclination (51-53° prograde instead of 70° retrograde). Lageos-2 would contribute to the study of plate tectonics and the accumulation of crustal strain in areas of high seismicity through very accurate measurements of baseline changes resulting from crustal motion. The two satellites, in essentially opposite orbits, would improve the precision of current laser-determined baselines by a factor of two and would make possible achievements of a precision of one centimeter for baselines of several thousand kilometers. CNR would be responsible for the fabrication of the Lageos-2 satellite, integration of the apogee stage and the Italian research interim stage, and delivery to NASA. NASA would provide existing ground support equipment, hardware, and software remaining from the Lageos-1 mission, technical consultation, and launch on the Space Shuttle as a payload of opportunity with a planned launch in 1987. (NASA Release 84-34)
The NASA Army Rotor Systems Research Aircraft (RSRA), a helicopter/airplane testbed in a fixed-wing mode, returned to Ames-Moffett Flight Research Facility following the flight testing of a new helicopter rotor system in a flight environment. The purpose of the flight tests was to demonstrate the fixed-wing capability of the research helicopter/airplane hybrid and to expand its flight envelope in that configuration. The evaluation included taxi tests, acoustic tests, control power/stability tests, and rotor hub drag investigation as well as takeoff and landing technique investigation and envelope development. A total of 13 flights expanded the RSRAs fixed-wing envelope capability to 262 knots (about 300 miles per hour) and its altitude to 10,000 feet. (ARC Release 84-23) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED itN'TNTKIMAUg BLUB 509 C. Leestma; payload specialists Marc Garneau, a Canadian; and oceanographer Paul D. Scully-Power. It was the most crew members to fly on a Space Shuttle mission. During the first day of flight, crew members deployed NASA’s Earth Radiation Budget Satellite (ERBS); however, the two solar panels that supplied electricity to the 5,000-pound satellite refused to unfold. Ride corrected the ERBS problem by using the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to place the satellite’s solar panels in the sunlight to thaw the hinges. It took almost three hours to get the panels warm enough to respond to commands to unlock. The satellite was placed in orbit off the west coast of Mexico, instead of south of Bermuda. While trying to determine the source of the ERBS problem, Kathryn Sullivan deployed the Shuttle Imaging Radar-B (SIR-B), a 35-by-7-foot radar camera, which had difficulty stabilizing when only one of it two “leaves” was erected. The radar antenna would send out thousands of pulses every second, and the large number of echoes the radar antenna received allowed it to draw a photograph-like image of the part of Earth that its beams struck. During the flight, a storm of cosmic rays apparently caused by sunspots knocked out for about 13 hours NASA’s TDRS, which affected the imaging radar system. Among the parts of the world that the radar had planned to map but would probably lose were the entire Amazon River basin, the islands that made up Indonesia, and the seas off the Cape of Good Hope. The radar was also to track the progress of tropical storm Josephine, southeast of Florida in the Atlantic Ocean, which would force Challenger’s landing from Cape Canaveral to Edwards Air Force Base. An ice buildup on the exterior of the Space Shuttle’s water vents forced the crew to alter slightly the use of the ship’s water facilities. The buildup, caused by a slight malfunction of the backup cooling systems, posed only an inconvenience as the astronauts had to heat up the water vents to melt away the small accumulations of ice, raising the temperature inside the cabin to as high as 90°. Crippen corrected the craft’s air-conditioning system, and the temperature inside Challenger neared its norm of about 75 ° On October 11, Sullivan became the first American woman to walk in space when for 3 1/2 hours she performed tasks requiring a kind of patience, dexterity, stamina, and strength originally believed in the space program to be unique to men. She stepped into space at 11:44 a.m. EDT along with Leestma. With each held by a single tether, they worked in daylight and darkness to rehearse a critical fuel transfer, stow a troublesome antenna, and photograph their efforts for ground engineers. Challenger landed at 12:27 p.m. EDT at KSC in the second of four attempts to land there instead of at California’s Edwards Air Base and the first in three missions that Crippen was not waved off a Florida landing by bad weather. Dr. Shelby Tilford, NASA director of space science, said that the mission was successful despite disappointments with the imaging radar. Tilford said that all other Challenger experiments worked perfectly. The space-borne mapping camera, carried on a Space Shuttle flight for the first time, took 2,300 frames of film in mapping parts of every continent. Challenger apparently returned to Earth in good condition, except for minor damage to the two rear engine parts suffered during ascent. (NASA MOR E-420-41-G-09 [prelaunch], Sept 28/84, [postlaunch], Oct 5/84; NASA Release 84-132; NASA Fact Sheet, Sept 84; NASA Press Kit, Oct 84; W Times, Oct 9/84, 2A, Oct 10/84, 5A, Oct 12/84, 3A; WPost, Oct 5/84, A-2, Oct 9/84, A-4, Oct 11/84, A-17, Oct 12/84, A-6, Oct 13/84, A-3, Oct 14/84, A-5; NY Times, Oct 11/84, A-18)
President Reagan approved today National Space Strategy intended to implement the National Space Policy, which was supplemented by the President’s 1984 state of the union address. Concerning the STS, the Strategy pointed out that the STS was a critical factor in maintaining U.S. space leadership, and, therefore, it was NASA’s first priority to make the STS fully operational and cost effective in providing routine access to space. The Strategy further noted that the STS was to be fully operational by 1988. Regarding the civil space program, the Strategy indicated that NASA should develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade and that the United States should seek agreements with friends and allies to participate in the development and use of the Space Station. In the area of commercial space programs, the Strategy called for the United States to encourage and facilitate commercial expendable launch vehicle operations and minimize government regulation of these operations. Concerning national security space programs, it was mandated that the national security sector must pursue an improved assured launch capability to satisfy two specific requirements—“the need for launch system complementary to the STS to hedge against unforeseen technical and operational problems, and the need for a launch system suited for operations and crisis situations.” The Strategy further stated that to fulfill this requirement, the national security sector should pursue the use of a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the STS. (National Space Strategy, WH Fact Sheet, App F-4, Aug 15/84, 137)
NASA announced the crew assignments for Space Shuttle flights 51-D, scheduled for launch in February 1985, and 61-D, set for January 1986. Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., would command 51-D. Shaw was pilot of the orbiter Columbia on STS-9, the first Spacelab mission flown in November and December 1983. His crew would consist of Bryan D. O’Connor as pilot and mission specialists Mary Cleave, Sherwood C. Spring, and Jerry L. Ross. Mission 51-D would be the 21st Space Shuttle flight and the 9th for the orbiter Challenger. The principal objectives of the six-day flight would be deployment of a SYNCOM communications satellite and retrieval of the free-flying Long Duration Exposure Facility. John M. Fabian, an Air Force pilot with more than 3,500 hours of flying time, would fly as one of the pilots on 61-D. He flew as mission specialist on STS-7 in July 1983 and was scheduled for 51-A in October as a mission specialist. Flight 61-D mission specialists would be James R Bagian, M.D., and Rhea Seddon, M.D., who is also scheduled to fly on mission 41-F in August. Mission 61-D would be the fourth Spacelab flight, focusing on experiments in life sciences during its seven days in space. It would be the ninth flight of the orbiter Columbia. A commander and another pilot for 61-D would be named at a later date. (NASA Release 84-11) —Donald J. Johnston, Canadian Minister of State for Science and Technology, announced that a Canadian would fly as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, set for launch in October, in addition to two earlier Canadians already scheduled for Shuttle flights. NASA offered Canada the opportunity to fly a payload specialist in keeping with President Reagan’s initiative to increase international cooperation. Shuttle flight 51-A would be a six-day flight, carrying Telesat Canada’s ANIK C-l satellite and a Getaway Special experiment designed by two Canadian high school students. The Canadian crew member and backup for the October flight would be announced in March. (NASA Release 84-12) Seven hours after launch, the astronauts pushed Westar VI, Western Union’s $30 million satellite, out of the cargo bay to join two identical satellites already serving North America. However, NASA officials said that the satellite could not be contacted by radio and was considered lost in space. Officials said that the satellite’s on-board rocket engine, which was to propel it into higher orbit, either misfired or never fired. Radars operated by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NAADC) later found the satellite in an erratic orbit above and behind Challenger. The radars found two large pieces in an orbit more than 800 miles high at its peak and just over 200 miles high at its lowest point above Earth. On February 5, a large balloon that the astronauts were to chase through space exploded just after it had begun to inflate. Plans called for the astronauts to back up to 120 miles away from the balloon, then move in over the next eight hours to contact it. Instead, the crew spent 90 minutes tracking pieces of the balloon and never got farther than 20 or 30 miles from the debris. The astronauts tracked the balloon’s largest piece with radar for almost 20 miles and used special binoculars and an optical sextant to follow the same piece more than 20 miles by watching sunlight reflected off the balloon’s aluminum surface. The Indonesian satellite Palapa-B2, launched February 6, went into a useless orbit, believed to be caused by the same technical problem that Westar VI suffered. The NAADC located Palapa-B2 about seven hours after its ejection from the Challenger’s cargo bay, but it was in an orbit so low that it “cannot perform its mission,” said Richard Brandes of Hughes Aircraft Company, builder of the satellite. He added that both satellites’ rocket motors apparently shut down 15 seconds early; they were intended to burn for 80 seconds. On February 7, astronauts Bruce McCandless and Robert Stewart left Challenger and flew unrestrained for the first time, adding another milepost to man’s conquest of space. They unhooked their lifelines and rose up more than 100 yards away from the Space Shuttle. Propelled by $10 million jet-powered backpacks, they traveled at 4.8 miles a second, although they had no sensation of speed. The two reentered Challenger after 5 hours and 55 minutes. The exercise was a rehearsal for the next Shuttle flight, when other astronauts would try to retrieve an ailing satellite, bring it into the cargo bay for repair, and release it to orbit again. On February 9 the two took a second walk in space, which lasted 6 hours and 17 minutes. The Space Shuttle made its first landing at KSC on February 11, when it touched down at 7:16 a.m. EST. The Florida landing had been a Shuttle program goal because it would save money and time by eliminating sending maintenance crews to California to prepare the vehicle for a return flight to Florida on the back of a Boeing 747. It was the first Florida landing in two attempts and the first of six planned for the year. Challenger was in relatively good shape following the landing, although its windshield, fuselage, and landing gear were damaged. The windows were hazed and pitted; and 31 of its 33,000	protective tiles, two brake assemblies, and all four tires on the main landing wheels would have to replaced. Repairs should not slow the preparation of Challenger for its next flight in April. (NASA MOR M-989-41-B [prelaunch] Jan 30/84; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 6/84; WPost, Feb 2/84, A-2, Feb 4/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 8/84, A-l, Feb 9/84, A-12, Feb 11/84, A-2, Feb 12/84, A-l, Feb 13/84, A-3; W Times, Feb 6/84, 2A, Feb 7/84, 1A, Feb 8/84, 1A; USA Today, Feb 6/84, A-l)
NASA named Neil B. Hutchinson manager and John W. Aaron deputy manager of the Space Station Program Office at JSC in Houston, Tex. Hutchinson was serving in a staff assignment to the Johnson director since his return in January 1984 from a one-year assignment at NASA Headquarters, where he was director, Space Shuttle Operations Office in the Office of Space Flight. Aaron had been chief of the Spacecraft Software Division at JSC since 1981. He also had served as avionics flight software project manager for the Shuttle approach and landing test and orbital flight test programs. (NASA Release
The Washington Post reported that a secret military payload set for launch July 14 on the Space Shuttle had been canceled and that the mission would be scrubbed without it, according to Air Force and NASA officials. A Pentagon spokesman declined to identify the payload or say when it would be flown. Glynn Lunney, Shuttle program manager, said “if they remove the payload, we won’t fly.” The canceled mission left astronauts Thomas Mattingly, Loren Shriver, Ellison Onizuka, and James Buchli without a flight for the second time; they were to have flown the Shuttle in the fall of 1983 on a military mission canceled because of rocket problems. (W Post, Feb 14/84, A-l)
NASA announced the start of the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE), a new astronomy satellite project that would be launched into Earth orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1988. The purpose of the explorer was to make the first all-sky map in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) band of the electromagnetic spectrum, a band between ultraviolet and X-ray light. The EUVE, managed by JPL, with scientific instruments supplied by the University of California, Berkeley, was a true explorer in that it would conduct the first in-depth investigation of that critical band and was expected to discover stars and other celestial objects with unexpected characteristics. The EUVE would orbit Earth at an attitude of 340 statute miles and from that point above the atmosphere would be able to scan the sky for emissions of extreme ultraviolet radiation. EUVE would use four 40-centimeter (15.7-inc.h) ultraviolet telescopes to conduct the all-sky survey and a spectrometer to carry out detailed observations of the new sources and stars expected to be discovered. JPL was responsible for overall EUVE project responsibility. The UCB would supply the 1,100-pound science payload, consisting of the extreme ultraviolet telescopes and the spectrometer; and the university’s Space Sciences Laboratory would design and fabricate the payload. JPL would control flight operations, and the science operations center would be at the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley. (NASA Release 84-125) Discovery was oriented with the port side in direct sunlight, so when the crew awoke the next morning they found about half of the large ice block had melted. Then, astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr., switched on heaters in the pipes leading to the nozzle and fired the orbiter’s thrusters to see if the vibrations would shake the ice free. Next, Hartsfield, assisted by Judith Resnik, took the controls of the mechanical arm and following procedures outlined by Sally K. Ride on the ground knocked off with little difficulty all but about 5 inches of the ice chunk. The remaining ice apparently then melted in the warmth of the sunlight. Discovery landed September 5 at Edwards Air Force Base, completing its six-day maiden flight. During the flight, crew deployed three communications satellites, LEASAT-1 (SYNCOM-1), Telestar-3, and SBS-D in the first three days of the flight; extended an experimental solar-powered array in a test for future Space Station construction; and processed a sample of a hormone that could lead to a commercial pharamaceutical product. Lt. Col. Richard M. Mullane, one of the astronauts on board, said that Discovery “performed superbly,” while NASA officials pointed out that all the mission’s objectives were accomplished. (W Post, Sept 4/84, A-6; NY Times, Sept 3/84, A-l, Sept 4/84, A-l, Sept 5/84, A-l; W Times, Sept 5/84, 4A)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
NASA announced that a six-member team from GSFC was helping to establish the first satellite data link to the South Pole that would make possible real-time collection of scientific data from the pole, which was not possible in the past. The effort was in support of a joint program with the National Science Foundation; the Applied Research Laboratory of the University of Texas, Austin; NOAA; and a number of other government, private, and education institutions. To establish a real-time communications link by any means other than by satellite would cost as much as $35 million compared with approximately $250,000 via satellite, “The project could revolutionize communications in the region,” said Goddard engineer Michael Comberiate. “Currently, scientific data collected from the Pole during the winter months must be stored and shipped out by aircraft during Astral Summer” (November 1-February 1). The link would use existing polar-orbiting satellites to relay data from the pole to McMurdo Sound, which would retransmit the data to a geostationary satellite that, in turn, would transmit the information to the continental United States. This routing was necessary because signals from the transmitter at the Pole (90°S latitude) were too far below the horizon to be acquired by a geostationary satellite. The McMurdo station, however, was located on the edge of the Antarctic (77 °S) and was barely in view of the geostationary satellite. The link with polar orbiting Ixindsat 4 and Landsat 5, with Dynamics Explorer 1 (DE-1), and with Nimbus 7 would allow reliable transmission of routine, high-volume data from scientific investigations being conducted at the Pole by 20 different institutions. (NASA Release, Dec 21/84) —A Titan 34-D rocket with a top-secret payload was launched at 7:02 p.m. local time from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in what might be the final military space mission of the year. An Air Force statement did not indicate whether the payload reached the planned orbit. The next announced DOD launching was scheduled for January 23, 1985, when the Space Shuttle would carry an intelligence satellite into orbit. (NY Times, Dec 23/84, A-14) During December: NASA announced that a publication of infrared celestial objects, presented in a series of catalogs and maps of 96% of the entire sky, was completed by the international science team of the IRAS. This was a milestone in the history of astronomy and would provide a wealth of new information about the universe in a wavelength region that was nearly impossible to study from the Earth’s surface. The IRAS catalogs printed nearly a quarter-million infrared sources—stars, galaxies, and newly forming stars—in addition to entirely new classes of objects. The catalogs and sky maps would be used for decades by astronomers investigating the nature of celestial objects that emitted much of their energy in infrared wavelengths as well as by astronomers seeking to understand objects at other wavelength regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. The catalog contained roughly 130,000 stars, 20,000 galaxies, 50,000 dense condensations within the infrared cirrus, and 40,000 objects of all types within the plane of the Milky Way galaxy. The catalogs were presented in several formats, including a five-volume book containing 5,000 pages of computer printout information on the location and infrared characteristics of 245,839 individual point sources found by the telescopes. The catalogs were also available on microfiche (24 cards) and magnetic tape comprising 60 megabytes of data. IRAS was a joint project of the space agencies of the United States, United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. The telescope satellite was launched by January 25, 1983, and conducted a 10-month all-sky survey of infrared objects from Earth orbit until its supply of liquid helium coolant was depleted November 23, 1984. (NASA Release 84-169) —Paul F. Holloway would become deputy director of LaRC, effective February 3, 1985, succeeding Richard H. Petersen. Holloway had been director for space at LaRC since May 1975 and had joined NASA in June 1960 as an aerospace research engineer. Since that time he had held various agency positions, including acting deputy associate administrator of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology at NASA Headquarters and chief of the Space Systems Division at Langley. He received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal in 1980 and the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1981. (NASA anno, Dec 10/84; LaRC Release 84-114) —Krafft A. Ehricke, 67, father of the space-launched Centaur interplanetary vehicle and a leading space scientist for more than 40 years, died December 11 in La Jolla, Calif. Born in Berlin, Ehricke was brought to the United States with other members of the German V-2 rocket team after World War II to launch the U.S. space program. Ehricke worked briefly for Bell Aircraft Company in Buffalo, N.Y., after the war and later for Consolidated Vultee Corporation, which had a contract with the Air Force to develop the Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile. Vultee eventually became part of General Dynamics. The Atlas project produced the United State’s first ICMB, and versions of it were still flying as space boosters. (W Times, Dec 13/84, 8C; W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7; NY Times, Dec 13/84, D-30) —Vladimir N. Chelomei, 70, a rocketry expert who designed the Soviet Union’s first jet engine, died December 8 in Moscow. Tass, which carried the news of his death, did not report the cause. His work was closely connected with the Soviet space program and aircraft design, and he is credited by The Great Soviet Encyclopedia with the 1942 design of the Soviet’s first jet engine. He had headed a major scientific research, design, and development organization for 29 years. (W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7)
President Reagan established a National Commission on Space, to be composed of 15 members appointed or designated by the president; not more than 9 advisory, nonvoting members representing federal departments and agencies; 2 advisory, nonvoting members appointed by the president of the Senate Trom among the members of the Senate; and 2 advisory, nonvoting members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among mnembers of that body. The commission was directed to study existing and proposed U;S. space activities; formulate an agenda for the U.S. civilian space program; and identify long-range goals, opportunties, and policy options for civilian space activity for the next 20 years. It was to submit its plan and any recommendations for proposed legislation to the president and Congress within 12 months. (WH anno, Oct 13/84)
MSFC announced that Morton Thiokol’s Wasatch Division near Brigham City, Utah; had successfully static-fired a new, lightweight version of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster at its northern Utah facility. Preliminary results from the two-minute firing indicated that all objectives were met and that the system operated as expected. The case of the new motor was made from a composite material of plastic reinforced with graphite fibers wound into a cylinder. Each of these filament-wound cases weighed about 30,000	pounds less than the current steel case that made up most of the length of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel focket booster. Use of the lighter cases could increase the Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity about 4,600 pounds. Two more of the filament-wound booster motors would be test fired by Motron Thiokol in the spring and summer of 1985. Also in the spring of 1985, flight motor segments containing filament-wound cylinders would be shipped to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for use by NASA and the U.S. Air Force in the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg planned for October The test was conducted under the direction of MSFC, Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 84-86; Marshall Star, Oct 31/84, 1) During October: The astronauts of western Europe formed an Association of European Astronauts (AEA), to which all European astronauts who had flown or been selected to train for a specific mission were eligible to join. The group would hold its first meeting on October 5 and 6. The purpose of the association was to encourage get-togethers for the exchange of views on training experiences and the projects concerned. The AEA had seven members: three ESA astronauts, Claude Nicollier, Ulf Merbold, and Wiibbo Ockels; two French astronauts, Patrick Baudry and Jean-Loup Chretien; and two German astronauts, Reinhard Furrer and Ernst Messerschmid. During meetings they planned to exchange experiences, compare USSR, U.S., and European approaches, and discuss future plans for Europe in manned spaceflight. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84) —Dan Germany, crew systems manager at JSC, observed that, after five years and $12 million, the Space Shuttle toilet still did not work, with failures on 10 out of 11 missions. “It’s very disappointing,” he said. On one mission, Robert Gibson had to use a crowbar to free the toilet mechanism; Sally Ride and Fred Hauck employed a camera bracket. NASA would test a new solution in August 1985 in which a bag would fit inside the commode and be removed after every flight. This reminded observers that NASA once spent $1 million to develop a pen to use in weightlessness. An engineer asked later, “Why didn’t you use a lead pencil?” (SF, Sept/Oct 84) —A commemorative envelope sold in the gift shop at JSC gave details and drawings of a U.S. Navy space program so secret that its name could not be used on the telephone, the Washington Post reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine as saying. The publication said that the envelopes, called postal cover, carried the words “Project Whitecloud,” accurate drawings of a mother satellite, and drawings of three smaller spacecraft. The envelopes said that the satellite disperses the smaller craft to cover more ocean surface and that it used radar-frequency antennae to detect shipboard radar and communications signals. The Navy had no immediate comment. (W Post, Oct 23/84, A-15) It was later revealed that the information had been taken from the May 1976 issue of Aviation Week & Space Technology.
NASA launched from the Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., aboard an Air Force Atlas launch vehicle NOAA-9, a 3,775-pound Advanced Tiros-N spacecraft that also carried search-and-rescue equipment. The satellite was placed in a 540-statute-mile, circular, near-polar orbit with an inclination of 98.86° to the equator. Total orbital period was 102.12 minutes, with, an average of 72 minutes in sunlight and 30 minutes in the Earth’s shadow. Because the Earth rotated 25.59° beneath the orbiting spacecraft during each orbit, the satellite would observe a different portion of Earth’s surface with sufficient overlap from orbit to orbit. NOAA satellites collected meteorological readings and transmitted the data directly to users around the world for local weather analysis and forecasting. Information from the satellites was also used for hurricane tracking and warnings, agriculture, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industries. NOAA-9 was the latest in a series of RCA-built TIROS weather satellites dating back nearly 25 years to TIROS-1, launched on April 1, 1960. It was the 6th in the current series of 11 satellites developed to give scientists the most comprehensive meteorological and environmental information since the start of the nation’s space program. The satellite cost $43.5 million; launch vehicle costs were $11.4 million. NOAA-9 also carried the second set of Earth Radiation Budget Experiment instruments, an atmospheric experiment that would increase knowledge of PffiCEDIHG PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Earth’s climate and weather systems, particularly how climiate was affected by radiation from the Sun. (NASA MOR E-615-84-05 [prelaunch], Nov 5/84, NASA Mission Summary, Nov 8/84; NASA Release 84-150; LaRC Release
President Reagan, in his State of the Union address, endorsed the development of the U.S.’s first permanently manned space station. “Wc can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic and scientific gain. Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade,” he said. “A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science, communications and in metals and life-saving medicines which can be manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these challenges and share in their benefits. .. .Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today,” he said. NASA presented the agency’s plans to the presidenl on the day that he spoke to astronauts in the Spacelab orbiting in the Space Shuttle in December 1983. NASA Administrator James N. Beggs had sought the space station as a science laboratory, astronomical observatory, space manufacturing center, servicing facility for spacecraft, and an assembly site for larger orbiting structures. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director William J. Casey had opposed any major commitment to space station funding because they feared it could draw money from their own space programs, government officials said. The officials added that military and intelligence agencies were concerned that they would have to share the space station with civilian agencies such as NASA and sometimes with astronauts of other countries. NASA also had found little enthusiasm when it turned for support from other agencies. When the National Academy of Sciences space science board was asked whether basic research in science would “require or be enhanced by the space station,” Thomas M. Donahue, chairman of the space board, said the answer was no. “I don’t think you could ever really justify $20 billion for a space station,” he said. At this early stage, there was no design for the space station, but officials of NASA had previously sketched the broad outlines of the most likely initial design. {Weekly Compilation of the Papers of Ronald Reagan, Jan 25/84, 87ff; NY Times, Jan 26/84, A-l; W Post, Jan 18/84, A-l, Jan 29/84, A-4)
The second and last of two lithium releases from the Federal Republic of Germany’s IRM was completed, part of the world’s first active probe reaching beyond the Earth’s magnetosphere. Data from the first release on September 11 was being analyzed to determine if the U.S. satellite inside the Earth’s magnetosphere had detected the lithium released outside. NASA launched on August 16 the AMPTE satellites in a stack aboard a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. (NASA Release 84-140) During September: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the establishment of the new position of assistant administrator for commercial programs, reporting directly to him, to provide a focus for and facilitate efforts within NASA to expand U.S. private-sector investment and involvement in civil space-related activities. Isaac T. Gillam IV, formerly assistant associate administrator, Office of Space Flight, would assume the new position with L.J. (Bud) Evans Jr., formerly assistant to the deputy associate administrator for commercialization, to serve as his deputy. In announcing the position, Beggs said, “In support of the President’s policy on commercial uses of space, the commercial programs office will be responsible for providing management direction within the agency for our efforts to establish new links with the private sector to stimulate the development of business in space. It will also be responsible for maintaining existing relationships with industry through the functions of industry affairs, technology utilization, and shuttle marketing.” (NASA Release 84-129)
The New York Times reported that space industry experts and government intelligence officials had said that U.S. Air Force satellite photographs of launching pads in central Asia showed that the Soviet Union was developing a booster rocket for a Soviet version of the Space Shuttle and a new family of big rockets similar to those used by the United States for the Apollo Moon program. A special feature of the new rockets was that they would use liquid hydrogen, a cryogenic (supercooled) type of fuel technology that had eluded Soviet space experts but had been mastered in the United States nearby 20 years ago. The Pentagon had originally described the Soviet development of new booster rockets and a Space Shuttle in April. The new disclosures gave added detail of the Soviet program, including checkouts on the launching pad and the development of cryogenic fuels. “It’s a major step to go to liquid hydrogen,” said James E. Oberg, an expert on Soviet space technology.” They’ve been using the same boosters for 20 years. Now they appear to be trying to build a new family.” The Pentagon’s “Soviet Military Power 1984” had originally suggested the existence of a new family of Soviet booster rockets. The publication asserted that the biggest of the new Soviet rockets could lift payloads of up to 150 tons into low orbits around the Earth, about seven times more than the largest operational Soviet booster and five times more than the biggest U.S. booster, the Space Shuttle. The publication also said the Soviet Union’s space shuttle differed from the U.S. Shuttle only in the respect that the main engines were not on the orbiter. In addition, the publication published pictures of a small Soviet space plane that had undergone flight tests. (NY Times, Aug 30/84, B-13) —NASA, launched at 8:41 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery (STS 41-D) on its maiden voyage after three earlier postponements, another one-day postponement due to computer problems, and a last-minute delay to avoid possible collision with a private line. Discovery carried for mission 41-D a six-member crew of commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnick, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker, a McDonnell Douglas engineer. It also carried the heaviest cargo flown in orbit aboard a Space Shuttle. About eight hours after liftoff, three of the crew members deployed a U.S. communications satellite, SBS-4, which was owned by Satellite Business Systems, McLean, Va., and was designed to relay data, including telephone and television transmissions. About 45 minutes later its on-board engine ignited flawlessly to send it to a position 22,400 miles above the equator just west of South America. The successful launch helped dispel doubts about the solid-fuel rocket motor technology when two satellites last February did not reach orbit. Also planned for launch from the Space Shuttle were the Leasat-2, owned by Hughes Communications Services, Inc., and leased by the U.S. Navy, and the Telestar 3-C of AT&T. On board would be NASA’s Office of Astronautics and Space Technology OASTOl, a collapsible solar array, and the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System (CFES) of McDonnell Douglas. On the same day as the liftoff, President Reagan visited GSFC and addressed several hundred of Goddard’s employees. In his remarks, Reagan said that “there is nothing that the United States of America cannot accomplish. If the doubting Thomases would just stand aside and get out of our way.” He went on to speak of the creation of new jobs, technologies, and medical breakthroughs as a result of the rigors of the space program. (NASA Release 84-112; NASA Press Kit June 84, August 84; WPost, Aug 31/84, A-l; W Times, Aug 31/84, 3A)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that engineers had determined the problem with two types of rocket motors that had caused the loss of two $75 million satellites and the near-loss of a third and had led to postponements of two Space Shuttle flights, the Washington Post reported. A report from McDonnell-Douglas said that a team had found a way to determine which rocket nozzle would fail in space and which would work. Such a procedure might have saved the two communications satellites that gone into useless orbits. However, the solution had come too late to put a Canadian communications satellite on the next Space Shuttle flight scheduled for June 19. (W Post, May 4/84, A-2) —In a continuing series of reports on orbiting cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov, who had been in space for 85 days aboard the Salyut-7, Tass said that the crew had completed planned operations with the cargo craft Progess-20, storing supplies and pumping drinking water into the station’s tanks. Kizim and Solovyev then made their fourth walk in open space. The two removed a heat-resistant coating that had been installed during a previous space walk, assembled a second conduit, and checked it for airtightness. The two then reinstalled the heat-resistant coating, put tools into a container, and returned to the station. Their walk lasted 2 hours and 45 minutes, bringing their total time in open space to 14 hours and 45 minutes during 4 walks in 12 days. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 4/84)
An Arianespace Ariane I rocket lifted off at 9:33 a.m. EDT to orbit a U.S. communications satellite 22,300 miles above the equator in the world’s first strictly commercial space venture. Virginia-based GTE Spacenet Corporation built the satellite, which was intended to relay thousands of simultaneous television, telephone, and data transmission channels to U.S. domestic subscribers over the next 10 years. The corporation would launch other satellites later in the year and early in 1985. ESA had contracts for 28 launches worth more than $800 million, plus options for another 19. More than 40% of the orders came from outside Europe. (W Post, May 22/84, A-24) During May: NASA and Deere & Company, Moline, 111., signed a memorandum of understanding to cooperate on the design of metallurgical tests to be conducted aboard a future Space Shuttle flight. In 1981, Deere became the first private company to sign a Technical Exchange Agreement with NASA that permitted the company to perform cast iron solidification experiments on board conventional suborbital NASA aircraft, which simulated microgravity for 30 to 60 seconds. Deere was already working on the design of additional metallurgical tests, where engineers used data from the low-gravity tests conducted earlier. Based on this work, Deere and NASA engineers concluded that further experimentation would be productive. The Space Shuttle tests would permit experiments in space for longer periods, which could yield new information to aid in the search for stronger irons. These tests could also provide new data about the process for forming iron molecules, leading to improved foundry efficiencies. (NASA Release 84-56) —NASA announced that astronaut Terry Hart, who had operated the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to retrieve the Solar Maximum Satellite during the April 6-13, 1984, Space Shuttle flight, would leave NASA effective June 15 to work in an engineering management position for the newly formed Military and Government Systems Division of Bell Laboratories in Whippany, N.J. The division would produce large digital communications networks for government applications. Hart was also a member of the astronaut support crews for Shuttle missions 1, 2, 3, and 7, serving as capsule communicators in mission control for those flights. (NASA Release 84-59) —Officials at the U.S. Department of State blocked an offer by the Soviet Union to use its rockets to launch Western satellites, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The Soviets had offered to “sell” their rockets to INMARSAT, the International Maritime Satellite Organization based in London, for launching a new generation of satellites in the 1980s. INMARSAT was running a network of communications satellites that routed telephone calls and data among some 2,300 ships and their shore bases. However, it had not decided on the companies that would supply the new satellites, which could number up to nine and cost up to $500 million. Under the Soviet Union plan, satellites would have to travel to the Soviet rocket site prior to launch into space, and the satellites would undoubtedly contain a large proportion of U.S. parts. Such a transfer would be prohibited under the technology control regulations that sought to stop the channeling to unfriendly countries of hardware that could be used in weaponry. The State Department said that “under no circumstances” would it permit the transfer to the Soviet Union of American-made satellite components. Only two organizations had submitted tenders to INMARSAT to build the satellites: a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Corporation and British Aerospace and a consortium of Marconi of the United Kingdom, Aerospatiale of France, and Ford Aerospace of the United States. The Soviet Union had said that it would make available its Proton rockets for a fee of about $23 million a launch. That was roughly half the comparable charge for a satellite launch by either the Space Shuttle or the Ariane rocket sold by Arianespace, a semipublic company dominated by French interests. U.S. officials feared shipment to the Soviet Union’s main launch site at Baykonur in Central Asia of hardware containing electronic components that could be useful to the Soviet’s military buildup. (CSM, May 3/84, 1) —NASA announced that Dr. Hans M. Mark, deputy administrator of NASA since July 1981, would become chancellor of the University of Texas System, effective September 1, 1984. In announcing the appointment, Texas Board Chairman Jon Newton said of Mark: “With his Air Force and NASA background, he has demonstrated the management ability to administer effectively a complex organizational enterprise such as the U.T. System, which involves 119,000 students, 50,000 faculty and staff, and an operational budget for FY84-85 of $1.8 billion.” Mark was born in Mannheim, Germany, and in February 1969, after receiving his doctorate in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1954, became director of NASA’s ARC. He had also served as a consultant to government, industry, and business, including the Institute for Defense Analyses and the President’s Advisory Group on Science and Technology. (NASA Release 84-65) —Martin A. Knutson was named director of Flight Operations and Ames Dryden Site manager for ARC. In this position, Knutson would be responsible for the operation of more than 40 highly specialized research and support aircraft at ARC and its Ames Dryden Flight Research Center. He also would be responsible for site management of the Mojave Desert facility that conducted NASA’s high-speed flight research and served as one of the prime landing sites for Space Shuttle missions. Knutson joined NASA in 1971 as the ARC’s manager of the Airborne Instrumentation Research Project. He was instrumental in creating the project and in acquiring its U-2 aircraft and was a pilot with over 6,000 hours of flight time. (ARC Release 84-11)
