Many of the experiments carried in Spacelab D-1 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger on Mission 61-A [see Space Transportation System/ Missions, Oct. 30] achieved more than 100% of mission goals, due in part to the continuous cooperation between experiment teams who coped with hardware problems and changing conditions on board the space laboratory, Aviation Week reported. Peter Sahm, Spacelab D-1 mission scientist, said this coordination allowed a rescheduling of experiment activity during the final mission days, maximizing the overall scientific return in spite of delays caused by hardware problems. In one of the repairs, Spacelab D-1 crew members used a saw to cut off a plastic cap on a valve that fed liquid into the fluid physics module's experiment zones. "The valve had an incorrect setting, which perhaps was made before launch," said Berndt Feuerbacher of West Germany's Deutsche Fors-chungs und Versuchsanstalt fur Luft und Raumfahrt's (DFVLR) Institute for Space Simulation. The DFVLR executed and controlled the mission on behalf of West Germany's BMFT ministry of research and technology. "They tried to reset the valve with a wrench, but they couldn't put the wrench to the nut because there was a plastic cap over it. So they asked for, and received authorization, to cut away the plastic cap, then were able to use the wrench." Feuerbacher said other repair/troubleshooting work by the Spacelab D-1 crew members included West German payload specialist Dr. Ernst Mes-serschmid using a vacuum cleaner to collect debris from a heating facility in the Werkstofflabor material science double rack and writing a software patch on the Werkstofflabor to work around a malfunctioning vacuum sensor that incorrectly indicated a lack of vacuum. NASA mission specialist Dr. Bonnie Dunbar also used the vacuum to clean up metallic dust particles from a sample that broke in the Spacelab D-1 Medea's gradient furnace with quenching device. These corrective actions demonstrated the need for trained crew members in complex spaceflight operations and for positive control from the ground, Wolfgang Finke, head of space program activities at the West German BMFT ministry of research and technology, indicated. "I think it also underscored the good working relationship between the German Space Operations Center here and NASA in the U.S. to overcome problems as they occurred," Finke said. (AvWk, Nov 18/85, 55 and 65)
NASA Administrator James Beggs stirred up a controversy when he reportedly told a Washington gathering of the American Stock Exchange that the Soviets had "turned us down, flat, with no explanation" on the proposal of a joint space mission, the Washington Times reported. Later NASA spokesman Miles Waggoner said the Soviets had not rejected the idea, but a joint manned space mission was not likely to happen within the next few years. President Reagan had offered the Soviets a chance to participate in a cooperative space venture about a year previously. The Soviets responded that they believed it was not the time to fly that kind of mission. "To us, that means the item is still open," Waggoner said. "This time, though, Mr. Beggs decided to look at it from the other perspective." Other NASA officials, indicating the agency hadn't received any new word from the Soviets about the proposal, speculated Beggs might have said what he did to provoke a reaction from them. Originally, NASA planners envisioned a joint practice rescue mission in which a U.S. astronaut would use a jet backpack called a manned maneuvering unit (MMU) to fly from a Space Shuttle to a Soviet Salyut space station. The astronaut might also use the MMU to push a cosmonaut back to the Space Shuttle for a brief time. (W Times, June 12/85, 4A)
NASA officials said damage sustained by Discovery during mission 51-D [see Apr. 19] could endanger its next mission and the upcoming week's flight of Challenger, the Washington Times reported. "We may have to do a fair amount of tile work on this one," Space Shuttle chief Jesse Moore said. "Fifty tiles has been our standard up until this last one." However, NASA engineers were more concerned about a hole on a control flap, called an eleven, on the ship's left wing. Such damage had not occurred previously. The chief Space Shuttle mechanic said the hole "most likely" developed after a heat-shield tile, jarred loose during Discovery's liftoff, allowed temperatures of more than 1,200° F to penetrate the wing flap during reentry. Also, NASA said it would not approve the Challenger mission or Discovery's next flight, scheduled for June 12, until technicians completed their examination of damage and determined why the brakes locked. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
NASA announced the appointment effective November 25 of Joseph Alexander to deputy chief scientist with responsibility for providing assistance to the chief scientist in advising the Administrator and in establishing policy related to scientific aspects of NASA programs and missions. Alexander joined Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in 1962, where he participated in the establishment of NASA's program in space radio astronomy and conducted studies of the sun, the planets, and the galaxy from earth-orbit, lunar-orbit, and planetary flyby spacecraft. In 1970 he became head of the Galactic Studies Section where he was responsible for scientific studies associated with the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite program. Following leave as a visiting scientist at the Department of Astro-Geophysics at the University of Colorado, Alexander became head of the Planetary Magnetospheres Branch and directed a research team conducting both experimental and theoretical studies of planetary environments by using instruments on board spacecraft such as the Interplanetary Monitoring Probes, Mariner-10, Magsat, Pioneer-11, and Voyager 1 and 2. From January 1984 until March 1985, Alexander was a senior policy analyst at the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy where he concentrated on issues related to space science and technology in the civil space program. He then returned to GSFC as associate chief of the laboratory for extraterrestrial physics. A member of the American Geophysical Union, the U.S. National Committee of the International Union of Radio Science, and the International Astronomical Union, Alexander received in 1960 a B.S. degree and in 1962 an M.A. degree, both in physics, from the College of William and Mary. (NASA anno., Dec 2/85)
NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced it had awarded a total of $8.7 million in contracts to Sundstrand Corp., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Boeing Aerospace Co., and Harris Corp. for advanced development contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of the power system for the proposed permanently manned space station. A major technical issue in Phase B was determination of whether photovoltaic arrays or a solar dynamic (heat engine) system should supply solargenerated power for the space station. Photovoltaic arrays were the accepted system for electricity production in manned and unmanned space missions. However, the space station's electrical power requirements were ten times greater than any mission flown to date and would necessitate arrays of approximately one-half acre for the initial station. Therefore, there was interest in solar dynamic systems because of their higher overall efficiency and relatively smaller size. In a solar dynamic system, an alternator driven by a turbine in a heat engine cycle produces electricity. Focusing the sun's rays by means of a concentrating mirror into a heat receiver heats the engine gas or liquid. The system operates as a closed-cycle heat engine, and a radiator cools the working fluid and rejects waste heat into space. Sundstrand Corp., under its $1,010,303 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, would study the magnitude of possible chemical and thermal degradation in the working fluid of an organic rankine cycle engine. Under its $1,010,000 cost-reimbursement contract, Grumman would study solar dynamic waste heat radiator technology. Boeing Aerospace Co., under its $3,117,059 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, would study the heat receiver/storage unit and identify and recommend testing required for concept verification. And Harris Corp., under its $3,619,870 cost-sharing contract, would generate conceptual designs for the solar dynamic dish concentrator, as well as identify and test materials, identify and recommend testing required for concept verification, perform engineering designs, fabricate the concentrator, and conduct verification and testing. (LeRC Release 85-77) SPACE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS (STS) Civilian in Space Program
NASA announced that a flight simulation laboratory, the Man-Vehicle Systems Research Facility (MVSRF), was in operation at its Ames Research Center to give scientists a new tool to study human factors in operating commercial aircraft. The MVSRF contributed to flight safety by allowing researchers to simulate the complex set of relationships among pilots, their crews, converging aircraft, the weather, and air traffic controllers. Using the facility, scientists could study the effects of new and increasingly automated technologies on flight crew performance. NASA's human factors researchers worked directly with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), airplane manufacturers, and commercial airlines to improve flight safety. For example, with the 727 simulator, NASA scientists researched airplane landings to learn methods that minimized fuel consumption while allowing pilots to maintain safe distances between their planes and other air traffic. The MVSRF included an exact replica of a Boeing 727 cockpit, a mock air traffic control station, and a cockpit known as the advanced concept flight simulator (ACFS). In both the 727 replica and the ACFS, a computer visual system provided out-the-cockpit window displays of approaching aircraft and landscapes of many U.S. airports. The computer system also depicted clouds and other weather conditions, the glow of the horizon at dusk and dawn, and the varied texture of the area illuminated by the simulated aircraft's landing lights. Researchers at the MVSRF put the pilots and controllers through created situations, during which the researchers monitored communications among flight crew members and between the crew and traffic controllers. They also read the aircraft's instruments and observed flight control settings while making audio and video recordings that included tracking a pilot's eye movements. (NASA Release 85-162)
Former NASA administrator James Beggs, General Dynamics, and three executives of the company today pleaded not guilty to charges of plotting to hide cost overruns during development of a prototype of the DIVAD antiaircraft gun [see NASA/Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], the Washington Post reported. "I plead not guilty to each count," Beggs, a former company executive, told U.S. District Court Judge Ferdinand Fernandez. Fernandez scheduled a trial to begin April 8, 1986, although prosecutor Randy Bellows said the case was too complex to be heard so quickly. Bellows said the government had 2.7 million documents to review. Thomas Sullivan, attorney for General Dynamics, told Fernandez that the defendants wanted the trial to begin in the spring because a government suspension of most contracts with the company until the case was resolved had put the defense contractor "in a real serious bind . . . This company could be literally . . . put out of business by this suspension," Sullivan said. Attorneys estimated the trial could take more than 12 weeks, with Bellows saying he would call at least 70 witnesses. (W Post, Dec 17/85, A13)
The investigation into the August 12 crash in a remote mountain area of a Japan Air Lines Boeing 747-100SR after it lost most of its vertical stabilizer and rudders focused on damage in the aft pressure bulkhead of the aircraft, Aviation Week reported. Japan's Aircraft Accident Investigation Committee said it was attempting to determine whether the bulkhead damage was caused by a crack or cracks that existed in the bulkhead, by explosive decompression in the cabin, or by the crash impact. The Boeing Co. said inspections as of August 19 of the aft pressure shell of 43 Boeing 747 aircraft showed no evidence of cracks. In addition to cracks in the bulkhead, lower ends of 5 of 18 triangular panels, or gores, were buckled toward the rear. Boeing Co. had replaced 9 of the 18 panels after the aircraft was involved in a hard landing June 2, 1978. Further optional or mandated inspections of the wide-body transport fleet stalled the previous week due to lack of information on damage to the JAL aircraft. Information from Japan was sparse, partly because of restrictions placed on access to the wreckage and because of damage done to some of the vital evidence by members of the rescue team. Rescuers had cut the bulkhead into pieces and removed them to clear the way for rescue. Boeing's accident investigation team had not been able to make a close inspection of the bulkhead by the previous week. One of the few pieces of evidence—damage to the vertical fin—led Boeing to suggest that Boeing 747 operators inspect the fin and rudder structure. And reports that a depressurization occurred prompted the company to suggest inspection of the external and aft portion of the pressure shell structure. The Federal Aviation Administration declined to take action pending receipt of more information. (AvWk, Aug 26/85, 28)
President Reagan nominated Anthony Calio, who served at NASA for 16 years, to be administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Washington Post reported. Pending confirmation of the nomination by the U.S. Senate, Calio, who was deputy administrator of NOAA, would replace John Bryne. (W Post, July 23/85, A13)
NASA announced that, following launch of Atlas/Centaur 62 carrying the seventh Intelsat V payload, a significant leak occurred in the Centaur liquid oxygen (L02) tank during Atlas and Centaur separation, resulting in loss of L02 and precipitation of a series of anomalous events that compromised vehicle performance and caused loss of the mission. Centaur main engine start and steady-state operation began for the first burn sequence; however, the engines burned fuel rich as a result of an attempted correction of the L02 loss. Also, Centaur's first main engine cutoff had occurred approximately 11 seconds early, as a result of L02 mass loss (approximately 1483 lb.) through the tank opening. After first main engine cutoff, the leading L02 ullage gasses (HE and G02) created a disturbing force on the vehicle, causing it to tumble out of control during the ensuing coast period. During the coast period, the L02 tank pressure vented down to less than the hydrogen tank pressure at 1040 seconds, causing reversal and rupture of the intermediate bulkhead so that the two tank pressures were essentially the same throughout the remainder of the flight. Although 2nd Centaur engine start was achieved, the engines shut down after less than seven seconds of operation because of inadequate tank pressurization and subsequent engine cavitation. This made it impossible to achieve proper orbit, and NASA terminated the mission. Following the failure, NASA Headquarters initiated a Flight Review Board composed of representatives from the NASA centers, U.S. Air Force, and INTELSAT. During the investigation, NASA obtained special assistance from Physics International for analytical shock analysis of various blast-shield and tank-pressure configurations, General Dynamics/Ft. Worth Division for shaped charge firing tests and consultations, and Pratt & Whitney Aircraft for special engine testing to resolve L02 back flow anomaly and special postflight reconstructions. The investigation teams' findings indicated that the most probable cause of the failure was due to shock induced loads on the L02 tank at high tank pressures causing tank failure. Corrective actions taken to clear AC-63 for flight would include reduced tank pressures to prior levels, increase in the interstage adaptor to blast-shield gap, and a check for ambient flight pressure and leaks on each tank. (NASA MOR M-491-203-84-07 [postlaunch] Mar 8/85)
Although a mission to put a human colony on Mars seemed unlikely anytime soon, members of the National Commission on Space [see U.S. Space Policy/National Commission on Space, Mar. 29] said it appeared to be only a matter of time until such an undertaking took place, the Washington Post reported. The commission was due in May 1986 to present a report outlining what it thought the U.S. space program should look like over the next 20 years. The U.S. last visited Mars in 1976, when unmanned Viking 1 and 2 missions landed and began collecting data. The Mars Observer was scheduled for a 1991 launch to study the planet from orbit. NASA officials said that beyond that there was nothing concrete on the drawing boards, although they were considering sending an unmanned craft to land on Mars, collect samples, and return in a manner similar to early moon explorations. (W Post, June 5/85, A5)
The USSR today launched a secret rocket from its Tyuratam launch site that may have been an antisatellite weapons test or the first launch of a new Soviet rocket that used liquid hydrogen fuel instead of kerosene, the Washington Post reported. The rocket later broke into three pieces, the largest of which was three feet long, the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) said. One piece fell out of orbit June 24 and burned up in the atmosphere; the two other pieces came down June 28. The objects were in an orbit 121 miles high at the lowest point and 215 miles at the highest. The orbit was inclined at 64.4°, a course only slightly off the one the Soviets use to test new rockets and satellites, because it passed directly over a highly instrumented corridor in the Soviet Union. U.S. intelligence sources said they were baffled by the small size of the three pieces. One source suggested the launch may have been a test of a new Soviet rocket that used liquid hydrogen fuel that resulted in the launch vehicle exploding with most of the debris falling to earth out of radar contact. Another source speculated it might have been a test of a new antisatellite weapon that failed or was deliberately blown up. The June 21 mystery launch followed that same day the launches of Cosmos 1663 and Progress 24. The Soviets launched Cosmos 1664 June 26, resuming their numbered Cosmos series after skipping the June 21 "noname" launch. NORAD gave the secret launch the designation 1985-53-A. (The "53" stood for the 53rd object put into space that year; "A" meant NORAD classified it as a payload, not a rocket launcher. NORAD gave the suffix "B" to launch vehicles that went into orbit.) (IV Post, July 5/85, A2) Space Program
The Washington Times, in its report on the Space Shuttle 51—E mission delay, said that NASA Administrator James Beggs had indicated the delay might be a week or two. In announcing earlier delays, NASA had said they would not alter the planned March 19 launch of the 51-D Space Shuttle mission, Aerospace Daily reported. However, in announcing the new 51—E launch date, NASA said the current 51-D mission launch would slip three days. (W Times, Feb 27/85, 4A; A/D, Feb 28/85, 1)
At the third in a series of hearings on assured access to space NASA and Defense Department officials said today before the House Science and Technology space science and applications and Armed Services research and development subcommittees that available data did not support the need for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in the early 1990s. But the officials acknowledged that there could be a period around 1992 and beyond in which unforeseen launch demands would strain capability, Aerospace Daily reported. Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) pointed out that earlier testimony had revealed a launch demand for 26 to 33 Space Shuttle equivalent flights per year in the post-1992 timeframe, and Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, acknowledged that a flight capability of 30 per year would require a fifth orbiter. He said that NASA projected the annual launch capability of a four-orbiter fleet in the 1990s timeframe to be 24 flights, 20 from Kennedy Space Center and four from Vandenberg AFB, with the ability to surge temporarily to 28 flights per year. When asked to factor in potential extended downtime of one orbiter, Moore replied that NASA had not made a projection of lost flights because it would be directly related to the length of the downtime and when it occurred. He added that NASA could probably fly 20 to 24 flights with the three remaining orbiters if one were out of service for periods up to one year; a sustained launch capacity for three orbiters would be in the range of 15 to 20 flights per year, he said. Edward Aldridge, undersecretary of the Air Force, said that, although the Department of Defense (DOD) was committed to at least eight Space Shuttle missions per year, its current known requirements through the mid-1990s averaged 10 launches per year. Including the one-to-five Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year projected through 1995 for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research, he said the total DOD requirement became roughly 11 to 15 Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year. Those numbers excluded any mission supporting potential deployment of SDI-related systems, he added. At the same hearing, Gen. Robert Herres, commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), said he thought the "time had passed" during which the U.S. might have built a fifth orbiter. He pointed out that resources needed for it might better be devoted to new technology and options, "which afford us more flexibility and versatility." Offering an opposing view, Hans Mark, chancellor of the University of Texas System and former NASA deputy administrator, said that the argument for a fifth orbiter could not be based either on currently projected flight rates or on backup requirements. He said only the proposed space station and SDI requirements could increase space operations to the point where a fifth orbiter was necessary. (A/D, July 26/85, 137)
NASA announced it had presented at a ceremony at NASA Headquarters its 1984 inventor of the year award to Dale Kornfeld, Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), and John Vanderhoff, Mohammed El-Asser, and For-tunato Micale, all of Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, for their "process for preparation of large-particle size monodisperse latexes." The monodisperse latex reactor processor, an experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle, had produced microspheres in zero gravity in sizes ranging from 5 to 30 micrometers. The maximum size particles produced on earth, with the required standards of quality and uniformity, were about 2 to 3 micrometers. Researchers used microspheres in calibrating sensitive scientific instruments such as microscopes, filters, and particle counters. Medical uses included identification of cancer and glaucoma and the study of the transport of materials inside living organisms. Industrial applications included the production of finely ground products such as paint pigments, inks, toners, explosives, and other powder materials. NASA took an important step toward making the microspheres commercially available when it presented 15 grams of 10-micrometer particles to the Commerce Department's National Bureau of Standards for certification as "standard reference material." (NASA Release 85-44)
NASA deputy associate administrator for space science and applications Samuel Keller, speaking at a weekly staff meeting, said "We expect 1986 will be the most demanding year we've ever had,'' the Washington Post reported. In January Voyager would encounter the planet Uranus. In March the Space Shuttle would fly a mission dedicated to observing Halley's comet. In May NASA would launch Ulysses, which would fly to Jupiter and use the planet's gravity to "slingshot" itself around the sun, and Galileo, which would orbit Jupiter. In August the Space Shuttle would carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit. The three spacecraft cost $2 billion not including launch costs. Keller's toughest time would occur in May, the Post said, when Ulysses and Galileo at the same time would be in the cargo bays of two Space Shuttles on their launch pads. NASA would try May 15 to launch Ulysses and then Galileo four days later. If anything delayed the May 15 launch, NASA had 24 days to get the Space Shuttle into space, a launch window that allowed the two spacecraft to fly to Jupiter using the least amount of fuel. "I'll be glad when 1986 is over," Keller said. (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21) October24: NASA announced that an October 29 conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies would provide a forum for government executives to discuss the Reagan Administration's program to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. Following welcoming remarks by Dennis Whitfield, chief of staff to the Secretary of Labor, and David Braunstein, director of NASA's productivity programs, conference participants would be briefed on several perspectives on the President's productivity improvement program. Stephen Scholossberg, deputy under secretary for labor-management relations, Department of Labor, would then provide a labor-management view of quality and productivity. In the afternoon, NASA astronaut Bruce McCandless, first human to freely maneuver in space without a tether, would speak on the importance of quality and productivity in the space program. John Franke Jr., assistant secretary for administration, Department of Agriculture, would then give case examples of management's commitment to quality; and Commodore John Kirkpatrick, commander, Naval Aviation Logistics Center, would discuss quality improvement through total quality management. (NASA Release 85-146)
NASA today invited Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who chaired the U.S. House science and technology subcommittee on space science and applications, to be a congressional passenger on an unspecified flight of the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Nelson, who represented the district in which the Kennedy Space Center launch site was located, later held a news conference at his office in Melbourne, Florida, to announce acceptance of the invitation. The first congressional Space Shuttle passenger on an April 1985 flight was Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the committee that oversaw NASA spending. Although Nelson, unlike Garn, had no flying experience, he was an outspoken supporter of the space program. (W Post, Sept 6/85, A8)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced rules to permit new two-engine jetliners to fly lengthy remote routes that had required three- or four-engine planes, but each airline would have to prove its aircraft and flight crews met FAA standards. The FAA took the action because of the reliability of modern jet engines and because military and business jets with two engines had flown across the North Atlantic safely for several years. The rules also addressed special provisions for airframe reliability, backup electrical and hydraulic systems, maintenance, cargo-compartment fire protection, and crew training. Under current rules, a two-engine plane could be no farther from an airport than 60-minute flying time on one engine; the FAA proposal would extend that to two-hours flying time on one engine. When the rules became final, they would allow Boeing's two-engine 767 jumbo jet to fly the most fuel-efficient North Atlantic routes, which would take flights far from airports in Greenland and Iceland. Boeing had pushed hard for the rule change, the Washington Post reported, to expand the sales potential of its 767. (FAA Release 5-85; W Post, Feb 7/85, A7)
Construction was proceeding at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) toward the October completion of the Shuttle Processing Contract (SPC) logistics facility to house approximately 190,000 items of Space Shuttle program stock, including orbiter fuel cells, various electrical components, tires, brakes, windows, nuts, bolts, and washers then stored in three KSC warehouses and four areas of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, the Spaceport News reported. NASA would consolidate seven Lockheed Logistics Directorate departments and its own Launch Support Services Directorate at the facility, with 500 Lockheed and NASA employees working in 75,000 sq. ft. (about a quarter of the total) set aside for office space. The Lockheed-managed facility would be KSC's first automated logistics warehouse for storage of flight hardware and SPC ground-support equipment. An automated inventory system would interface with the Shuttle Inventory Management System (SIMS) and a manual system. Retrieval procedures would require four roboticized forklifts to find and fetch items, an automatic conveyor, and a manned, three-story high forklift. As part of the SPC agreement, Lockheed selected Austin Co. as the facility's architectural and engineering firm and builder at a basic design and construction cost of about $16 million. (Spaceport News, Mar 1/85, 1)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator James Beggs and Japanese Minister of State for Science and Technology, Reiichi Takeuchi, signed that day in Tokyo a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for the conduct of a cooperative program concerning detailed definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of a permanently manned Space Station. Under the MOU, the U.S. and Japan would conduct and coordinate over the next two years parallel Phase B studies and exchange information. Japan would study an experimental module that had pressurized workspace and an exposed workdeck. Cooperation during the space station's development, operations, and use phases would require separate agreements. In a speech that day to the Federation of Japanese Economic Organizations, Beggs outlined initial uses of the space station and reported on specific projects undertaken by other countries participating in space station development. He then noted, ". . . in negotiating with our potential partners, NASA has emphasized that we view the space station as a potential long-term international partnership—one that should last for decades. Any nation that joins with us in such a full partnership must be prepared to make significant investments in the station, and also be prepared to help operate and use it. "We expect our partners to continue to shoulder responsibility for owning and maintaining their portions of the facility, while continuing to enjoy the overall benefits our joint efforts will make possible. And we expect their contributions to remain a permanent part of the station's infrastructure." Beggs then added, "To cement our long-term relationships, the United States will provide partners with assurance on equitable access to all of the space station's facilities. We also will protect their technology and intellectual property and ensure them suitable roles in the station's management and operation." (NASA Release 85-71, NASA Note To Editors, May 8/85)
A computer failure 25 minutes before launch today forced postponement for at least two days of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the NY Times reported. Launch crews planned to replace the malfunctioning computer, inspect the Space Shuttle's fuel plumbing, and try to launch Discovery on August 27 at 7:02 a.m. EDT. At 7:15 the Space Shuttle crew and Johnson Space Center (JSC) flight controllers almost simultaneously noted warnings that a backup guidance and control computer was registering errors. This came as the backup computer was undergoing a final check to see that its programs agreed with those driving the Space Shuttle's four main computers. NASA halted the launch countdown while engineers at Kennedy Space Center and JSC examined data retrieved from the malfunctioning computer and compared it with data from one of the regular computers. They concluded that the trouble was an apparent failure in the computer, which could not be remedied in time for a launch. That the computer worked perfectly in tests before August 25 and worked in tests after the failure, although it showed signs of trouble, puzzled engineers. NASA was about 99% sure that it was a hardware failure, although only an inspection of the computer by JSC engineers would determine the exact nature of the problem. It was the second postponement in two days for the Discovery and its crew of five, and NASA officials were growing concerned that Discovery might not reach orbit in time for repair of the crippled Leasat 3 satellite. Any delay beyond August 29 would cancel the repair effort, and the crew would have to confine themselves to deploying three communications satellites in the first three days of the mission. The flight would thus fall short of the eight days then planned. Arnold Aldrich, manager of the Space Shuttle program at JSC, said NASA would not reschedule beyond August 29 any attempt to repair Leasat 3, as that would have too disruptive an effect on other flights scheduled in the next few months. If it had been only a matter of replacing the computer, the delay would have been a day. However, the need to inspect insulated ducts that carried liquid-hydrogen to the Space Shuttle's three main engines necessitated the twonday postponement. After NASA had pumped the super-cooled fuel into the Space Shuttle system two consecutive mornings and drained it again, there was a chance that the contractions and expansions caused by the alternating freezing cold and Florida heat might have damaged the engines, which in extreme cases could cause them to explode in flight. (NYT, Aug 26/85, All) November27: NASA announced that it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base until mid-July 1986. NASA originally scheduled this mission, STS 62-A, for no earlier than March 20, 1986. Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward "Pete" Aldridge, Jr. said, "There are no major problems at the Vandenberg site. We have repeatedly stated that safety and quality would not be sacrificed for schedule. Our decision reflects our continued commitment to this philosophy." Aldridge added that, "We have had to make some facility modifications because of what we learned from routine Air Force/NASA operational readiness inspections. We have also added time to the schedule to allow for better preparation and evaluation of the operational systems tests and we have extended the training period for the launch crew of this historic, first West Coast shuttle mission. "This revised schedule will permit us to complete ongoing modifications, inspections, rework and operational testing with higher confidence than could be permitted with the March 20 schedule," he added. "It also minimizes the potential for conflict with the NASA Ulysses and Galileo planetary missions scheduled in May." NASA Office of Space Flight associate administrator Jesse Moore concurred, adding, "NASA agrees completely with the Air Force regarding Vandenberg. Our first commitment is to the safety of the crew and the reliability of the vehicle and launch systems. The development of the Vandenberg site is proceeding very smoothly. This readjustment gives us all more time to carry out our commitment to safety and reliability." The decision to delay meant NASA would deliver the orbiter Discovery to Vandenberg around March 1, 1986, and NASA and Air Force officials would continue to evaluate the STS 62-A schedule in order to establish after January 1 a firm launch date. (NASA Release 85-158)
NASA announced that effective today it permanently established the office of NASA productivity programs to direct, initiate, coordinate, monitor, and evaluate agencywide productivity improvement and quality enhancement initiatives. David Braunstein would continue as the office's director and would report to the NASA administrator. The office was established to ensure NASA's leadership in the development and application of advanced technology and management practices that contributed to significant increases in agency and national productivity. In making the announcement, NASA Administrator James Beggs said that NASA would provide a participative and challenging environment for all employees, and it would develop a team approach with its contractors to achieve the highest levels of productivity. (NASA announcement, May 15/85)
The National Space Institute (NSI) announced establishment of "Space Outreach '85," a program to acquire original ideas from the public as to potential uses of space for social and economic benefit. The program was intended to broaden what appeared to be a too narrow debate on a new and clarified set of long-term civilian space goals. Rules for the program were that ideas could not exceed 750 words; submissions could not include projects already under review by the federal government; and proposals must be creative, innovative, and feasible. The NSI would present all ideas received during the program to Congress, NASA, and, in particular, the newly created National Commission on Space [see Mar. 30]. Judges for the program, which had the support of the Sophron Foundation of McLean, Virginia, were Walter Boyne, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum; Evert Clark, technology editor, Business Week, former astronaut Michael Collins; and Robert Cowen, science writer for the The Christian Science Monitor. The NSI would present awards for the outstanding entries, with the writer of the most innovative suggestion receiving an all-expense-paid trip to see a Space Shuttle launch. (NSI Release, May 13/85) August 9; World amateur radio operators participated in the shuttle amateur radio experiment (SAREX) on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, the Lewis News reported. SAREX allowed people connected with amateur radio to talk with Challenger's crew and watch TV transmissions from the flight deck. The SAREX test, conducted during off-duty hours in cooperation with onboard mission specialists/ham operators Tony England and John-David Bartoe and mission commander Gordon Fullerton, allowed world amateur radio operators access to the Space Shuttle's voice and video transmissions to earth on amateur 2-m band. A video buffer circuit designed, built, and tested by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ham operators was key to SAREX's success. The SAREX system worked in two primary modes, one mode at a time. The first allowed voice communications back and forth between radio operators on the ground and spacecraft crew. The second primary mode was amateur TV. Using a set-up similar to the ham radio system, amateur TV operators and the Space Shuttle crew sent images to one another—the first such use of two-way video in space. Users transmitted color TV pictures in a slow-scan-mode—one picture every 8 to 36 seconds. SAREX, closely connected to the Young Astronaut Program, was a joint effort of the American Relay League and NASA. A ham radio experiment with mission specialist Owen Garriot conducted in 1983 on STS-9 was generally credited as the genesis for the current SAREX. (Lewis News, Aug 9/85, 1)
NASA announced that H. William Wood, deputy associate administrator (Networks), Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems (OSTDS), was retiring effective early in January after more than 30 years of government service. Wood had served in his present post since April 1984. Before that he managed the Network Systems program as the division director since 1981. Wood was a research engineer at Langley Research Center when NASA was formed in 1958; and in 1959 he became the group leader with the Tracking and Ground Instrumentation unit for the Mercury Network. His other NASA assignments included associate director, Network Systems Division; NASA senior scientific representative in Australia; and associate director, Operations, in the Network Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center. Earlier, Wbod had served several years in the U.S. Air Force. Wbod received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal and two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, and he is a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society. In 1955 Wbod received a BSEE degree from North Carolina State University. (NASA anno., Dec 18/85) December23: NASA announced that Dr. Charles Kupperman was appointed effective immediately as executive assistant to the deputy administrator. Kupperman came to NASA after serving as executive director of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. From 1978 to 1981 he was the research associate and defense analyst for the Committee on the Present Danger, and he also served as a member of President Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign and defense transition team. Kupperman was a consultant to R&D Associates and taught at the School of International Relations, University of Southern California. Kupperman graduated Phi Beta Kappa with a B.A. degree in political science from Purdue University, received an M.A. degree in political science from the University of British Columbia, and a Ph.D. in international relations from the University of Southern California. He was the author of articles on defense, the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), and national security policy for academic and public journals. (NASA Release anno., Dec 23/85)
Speaking to a standing-room-only crowd at NASA Headquarters and all NASA centers via closed-circuit TV, former administrator James Beggs said today that federal fraud charges against him were "baseless" [see NASA/Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], that he expected to be cleared, and expressed thanks for an "outpouring" of support, the Washington Post reported. "These charges relate to things that happened in General Dynamics six and seven years ago," Beggs noted and said that he had reviewed the charges and believed, "we acted in an entirely ethical, legal and moral sense." "The charges, therefore, are baseless . . . They are outrageous, ridiculous and I feel confident that once this is brought to trial that I'll be completely exonerated of the charges." Beggs also noted that the suits against defense firms were creating a climate that would blight the work of NASA and of the defense community. "The very adversarial relationship that is being created by the suits against the contractors, the very bad kind of statements that are being made in the press, and elsewhere, is going to make our job in the future much more difficult," he said. "Not just here, but in the Defense Department as well." Earlier, the NY Times reported that all top 27 administrators at NASA and field installations had sent a statement to Congress and the White House endorsing Beggs as "an individual with the highest standards of integrity which have earned him the esteem and respect of his colleagues." The statement said he had revitalized the space program and regretted "the untimely interruption of his work," calling him a man of the "highest integrity, totally dedicated to NASA, an extremely able executive." (W Post, Dec 6/85, A16; NYT, Dec 6/85, A5)
NASA Administrator James Beggs and U.R. Rao, chairman of the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), signed a launch services agreement covering the reimbursable launch of INSAT 1C around mid-1986 from the Space Shuttle, the Marshall Star reported. A multipurpose satellite, INSAT 1C would provide communications and meteorological services to India. In addition, the two agreed that an ISRO scientist/engineer would serve as a payload specialist during that Space Shuttle mission and discussed other possible NASA/ISRO cooperative activities in space applications and space science. (Marshall Star, Jan 23/85, 4)
A Congressional Office of Technology Assessment report on space cooperation, commissioned by Sens. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hi.) and Claiborne Pell (D-R.l.), said the U.S. and USSR could conduct valuable scientific exchanges, but the U.S. must handle any renewal of exchanges carefully in order to protect national security, the Washington Times reported. The report, the release of which coincided with the 10th anniversary of the joint Soyuz-Apollo docking mission in space, said the U.S. space program could particularly benefit from Soviet expertise in the life sciences and planetary sciences and that cooperation could lead to "substantive gains" in some areas of U.S. space research and applications. In 1982 the U.S. cut off scientific contact between the two countries to protest the Soviet's invasion of Afghanistan, the declaration of martial law in Poland, and the exile of Russian human rights activist Andrei Sakharov. However, Congressional attitudes toward joint U.S.-USSR ventures had changed since then. The report addressed scientific and practical benefits of cooperation, the potential for transferring sensitive military technology and know-how, the foreign policy aspects of space cooperation such as reducing tensions, and perceptions about Soviet motivations and behavior with respect to overall U.S.-Soviet relations. Angelo Codevilla, an aide to Sen. Malcolm Wallop (R-Wyo.) and an expert on strategic space programs, said the key to cooperation with the Soviets is "to what extent do we give away the whole store" of the U.S. technology advantage. (VV Times, July 17/85, 2A)
30 p.m. they had done in four hours a job given them to complete in five. NASA referred to the first activity as ACCESS (assembly concept for construction of erectable space structures), researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center explained, and the second as EASE (experimental assembly of structures in extravehicular activity). Together they were the first flight demonstration of construction of large space structures, so called because they were distinguished by different assembly methods and physical characteristics. The astronauts used no tools in the construction, rather they snapped together prefabricated components to form the EASE/ACCESS structures. EASE/ACCESS should provide NASA with valuable on-orbit construction experience as well as a comparison of assembly rates and techniques used in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tank tests. The activity should also help evaluate potential assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques for the proposed space station and identify ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. TV views at NASA Headquarters showed the astronauts trading places twice during their work and appearing in almost complete control of a job that had never been done before in space. Ross had the only complaint, saying his gloved hands were sweating and that he was using too much oxygen. When the two had finished assembling the six required pyramids, astronaut David Leetsma at mission control told them to take a break. "I'd be willing to do at least one more," Ross replied. "It feels good to do some good hard work." The two then proceeded to begin work again. Spring once hit his feet against the tower, and Ross by mistake hit a switch with his hand that turned on an outside light, the only "accidents" that occurred during the exercise, although they triggered a warning from Atlantis's commander Brewster Shaw, Jr. "You guys are going great but just remember to be careful. The way that thing shakes up there, it's not going to be easy to chase anything down if it breaks loose," he cautioned. (WPost, Nov 30/85, A1; Marshall Space Flight Center Release 85-60)
In an administrative realignment reflecting the maturation of the Space Shuttle program, NASA announced the appointment of Arnold Aldrich, a 26-year NASA veteran and head of the Space Shuttle projects office at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), to manager of the National Space Transportation System (NSTS). He would fill the vacancy left when Glynn Lunney retired in April. The Level II NSTS organization at JSC would assimilate the projects office, consolidating all program elements under Aldrich. With this combined responsibility, Aldrich would take charge of integration of all Space Shuttle program elements including flight software, orbiter, external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, main engines, payloads, payload carriers, and Space Shuttle facilities. His responsibilities would also include directing the planning for NSTS operations and for management of orbiter and government furnished equipment projects. NASA named Richard Kohrs, who was acting program manager, and Lt. Col. Thomas Redmond, U.S. Air Force, deputy managers. In a related move, Thomas Utsman, head of Space Shuttle management and operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), would become deputy director of KSC, with NASA dividing shuttle management and operations into two primary organizations: Shuttle engineering and Shuttle operations. The engineering directorate, headed by Horace Lamberth, would expand to include skills necessary for sustaining engineering of the orbiter. The operations directorate, headed by Robert Sieck, would retain all functions necessary to manage day-to-day Space Shuttle processing and its logistical support. NASA would transfer later in the year from Johnson Space Center to KSC launch support services and orbiter thermal protection system manufacturing contracts, functions closely associated with KSC responsibilities for Space Shuttle maintenance and launch preparation. At the beginning of 1986, KSC would take over logistics responsibility for spare parts refurbishment and procurement and would assume sustaining engineering responsibility for orbiter subsystems. (NASA Release 85-112)
In testimony today before the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration, Smithsonian Institution Secretary Robert McCormick Adams said the Smithsonian opposed a bill introduced by Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) that would authorize funds to construct a museum administered by the National Air and Space Museum for historic airplanes and spacecraft at Dulles International Airport, the Washington Post reported. He said the Institution had more immediate legislative priorities, although it would support planning appropriations. In 1976 Goldwater was instrumental in pushing funds through Congress for the National Air and Space Museum. The bill Goldwater introduced in June called for $42.6 million in government appropriations in FY 89 and beyond, contingent on an equal amount in matching donations from the private sector. Adams questioned whether the Institution should, or could, raise that much money, particularly because the Institution had more pressing fund-raising commitments. Although Goldwater was on the Smithsonian's Board of Regents, he was pushing the issue now, Terry Emerson, his legislative assistant said, because "its just an interest in priorities." Emerson noted that politicians had a greater sense than did Smithsonian officials of the interest in technology-related museums. "Later they'll come in once they see the overwhelming interest in it," he added. "Once enabling legislation is enacted," Goldwater said, "I believe numerous private individuals and firms will begin a major fund-raising campaign that will produce enough matching monies to get the first construction going by fiscal year 1989." The Smithsonian's Board of Regents initially approved in September 1983 the concept for the air museum, citing insufficient space at the National Air and Space Museum and the difficulty of transporting large aircraft and spacecraft to the Mall building. Under the plan, the Federal Aviation Administration would lease 100 acres of its land at Dulles without compensation. Proximity to a runway was essential, because many of the aircraft and spacecraft, such as the Concorde and Space Shuttle, were too large to be transported on roads. The committee would rule on the proposed legislation in September. (W Post, July 25/85, B9)
NASA announced that its anonymous and voluntary Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS), managed by Ames Research Center, had evaluated some 42,000 incident reports in eight years and had issued 805 alert bulletins and 28 research reports to improve airway safety. Designed and implemented by NASA in 1976 at the request of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ASRS gave pilots and flight controllers a means of reporting incidents that would otherwise have passed unnoticed, resulting in revisions to both air traffic control procedures and FAA regulations. NASA served as a neutral third party in operating the system, protecting the confidentiality of those who reported. In addition, FAA could grant participants limited immunity from disciplinary action except in cases of accident or criminal conduct. The system had identified, for example, the need for more flight-controller help to general aviation pilots operating at night over unfamiliar terrain and restriction of cockpit conversation and activity in transport aircraft flying below 10,000 ft. The system had also produced a number of changes in airline, military, and general aviation pilot flight training based on real flight data. Reports in the ASRS data base had become a major resource for human-factors research and behavior models. ASRS received about 500 incident reports a month; experienced pilots and controllers screened these to identify existing safety problems and forecast future problems and trends, and NASA used the data for safety research for FAA, the National Transportation Safety Board, Department of Defense, and other government agencies. ASRS issued a monthly safety bulletin and also alert bulletins for hazards needing rapid response. (NASA Release 85-12) During January. NASA announced that its new findings on the nature of high-altitude, clear-air turbulence (CAT), based on data gathered from airline flight-data recorders, could eventually lead to CAT prediction, enabling pilots to fly around the invisible wind swirls. The findings provided the first detailed description of hazardous, clear-air turbulence, a series of swirls or vortices of air embedded in upper-level wind streams at altitudes between 35,000 and 40,000 feet. The findings also showed that a jet traveling at 500 mph flew through a single-vortex core in about one second. During that second, the wind would push the plane upward and then down, exerting the weight of an extra G (a measurement of gravity) on passengers. Planes might encounter two to four vortices in succession about four seconds apart, possibly causing injury to flight attendants and passengers without fastened seat belts. Ames Research Center investigators had found that the strongest vortices occurred at about 25 miles downwind of large thunderstorms or mountain ranges, which caused a swell in the upper-level wind stream, and that wind shears formed vortices at the tropopause, the boundary between the troposphere and the stratosphere. At the tropopause, higher-velocity jet streams traveled just above lower-speed windstreams, the difference in the speeds forming a wind shear. The investigators had verified that wind-shear layers, pushed up over a thunderstorm or a mountain range, acted like ocean waves when forced to rise over an obstacle. The air would form a series of swells that turned to waves that curled like those on the sea. They would continue to curl until they formed complete circles or vortices that whirled at high speeds before disintegrating. As a result of its research, NASA hoped one day to be able to give pilots better indications of when and where they might encounter the vortices. (NASA announcement, Jan 85, 9) February 27\ In its just-released annual "Aviation Forecasts," which covered FY 85-86, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) forecasted healthy growth for the nation's major air carriers in the next dozen years and slow but steady growth for general aviation (private and business flying). The agency noted that U.S.-certificated air carriers had recorded passenger gains in each of the previous three years and in FY 84 achieved their largest operating profit in history—$2 billion. The FAA said airlines, over the 12-year forecast period, would increase passenger enplanements at better than 4.5% annually, from 336 million in FY 84 to 573 million in FY 96. Commuter airlines had increased passenger boardings 14% in FY 84, a figure expected to more than double during the forecast period to 54.2 million in FY 96. The FAA expected the general-aviation fleet to increase from 213,300 aircraft in 1984 to 270,500 in 1996, an annual growth rate of 2%. FAA projections for takeoffs and landings at airports with FAA control towers indicated an increase from 57 to 92 million, as the number of aircraft handled by the agency's en route control facilities would rise from 31.6 to 45.7	million. (FAA Release 8-85) During March: A panel organized by the National Academy of Engineering in conjunction with the National Research Council (NRC) published its assessment of aviation technology in, “The Competitive Status of the Civil Aviation Manufacturing Industry," the NRC Newsreview reported. U.S. aircraft manufacturers in the past had been particularly successful in translating advanced technology into products suited to the marketplace; however, as competition intensified, the timing of the introduction and the fit of the product to customers' needs had become increasingly important. European countries had tried repeatedly to create a viable air transport manufacturing industry; in 1970 their efforts were realized in the creation of Airbus Industrie, which drew on the resources of many companies in a number of countries. Those foreign companies created a dilemma for U.S. manufacturers, whose product lines were not extensive. Furthermore, U.S. markets were relatively open to competitors, while many foreign markets were closed to American-made products. The panel foresaw a need for U.S. manufacturers to form international partnerships, especially as the U.S. aircraft industry was often in virtual competition with governments as well as with private commercial companies. And the panel determined that U.S. manufacturers had to be even more sensitive in interpreting the needs of foreign customers. The panel did conclude that it was possible to further improve reliability of aircraft and air travel, as well as increase efficiency in fuel consumption and operations. Studies cited by the panel indicated that a variety of technological changes together could improve fuel efficiency by as much as 30-50%. Introduction of advanced turboprops or propfans could provide up to 20% additional improvement, and the experimental unducted propfan engine could raise that figure. In the technology area of advanced structures, the panel viewed the U.S. and Europe as on a par in developing this technology. Although the U.S. led in application experience, Europe threatened the U.S. position. In propulsion technology, the panel saw the U.S. lead as not unassailable; Rolls Royce was the principal foreign competitor, and the U.K. was committed to maintaining a comparative position with the U.S. The panel rated U.S. R&D facilities as the best in the world, European facilities as adequate, and Japanese facilities as handicapping their efforts to benefit from technological developments. (NRC NewsReport, Mar/85, 11)
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
NASA launched at 11:15 a.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis, the maiden voyage of the orbiter and the 21st mission in the Space Shuttle program, on mission 51 -J, a secret flight for the Department of Defense (DOD), the NY Times reported. The secrecy was part of DOD's efforts to make it difficult for the Soviet military to monitor the Space Shuttle takeoff and find out the identity and mission of the payload. Despite these precautions, it was widely reported that a primary goal of the flight was to launch a pair of $100-million military communication satellites. DOD apparently planned to station the satellites, designated DSCS III for Defense Satellite Communications System, 22,300 miles above earth, where they would relay messages to U.S. military forces around the world. The commander of Atlantis was Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, flying his third Space Shuttle mission; the pilot was Air Force Lt. Col. Ronald Grabe. Other crew members were Maj. David Hilmers of the Marine Corps, Army Lt. Col. Robert Stewart, and Air Force Maj. William Pailes. The first four were members of NASA's astronaut corps; Pailes was an Air Force pilot assigned to the mission to assist in deploying its secret payload. In accordance with security rules, NASA gave out little information about the flight. There were no space-to-ground communications released to the public and no postlaunch news conference. Nearly five hours after the launch, mission control in Houston said, "On the maiden voyage of Atlantis, the crew is doing well and all systems on board the orbiter are performing satisfactorily." NASA officials said it would issue no other status reports during the mission, which might last a week or more. Atlantis was the lightest and most advanced of the four orbiters. In its planning and construction, engineers removed minor design flaws found in earlier versions and incorporated the latest in electronic technology and light-weight, high-strength structural materials. NASA strengthened Atlantis mainly so it could withstand more vigorous launchings from the Air Force's facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base. These launches, which would take the Space Shuttle into orbits around the earth's poles, required greater thrust from the Space Shuttle's engines. Although the mission was devoted to the military, NASA officials said there was a civilian experiment on board to study exposure of the orbiter and its crew to cosmic rays, which were extremely high-energy particles from space that bombarded the earth and the orbiting Space Shuttles. (NY Times, Oct 3/ 85, A18, Oct 4/85, B5)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press conference, reported that President Reagan had requested a NASA budget of just under $7.9 billion, reflecting the President's determination to continue America's space leadership and to achieve the goal of a permanently manned space station. The budget covered some unforeseen items not addressed by 1985 budgetplanning estimates, including the Congressionally mandated development of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), scheduled for launch in 1989, and acceleration of the advanced turboprop propulsion system for FY 87 flight testing. The budget contained four major appropriations requests: a total of $2.9 billion for R&D, which included funds for previously approved space science and applications programs, development of ACTS, initiation of the orbiting maneuvering vehicle program, and promotion of commercial use of space; $3.5 billion for space flight, control, and data communications to support Space Shuttle production, operations, and tracking and data acquisition (a decrease of $92 million from FY 85's budget plan); $149 million for facilities construction (down $1 million from FY 85); and $1.3 billion for research and program management. (NASA release Feb. 4/85; NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/ 85)
A controversy between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA [see Space Transportation System/Reve-nues, Feb. 25] appeared over when NOAA agreed to launch meteorological satellites (Metsats) into orbit in return for which NASA would give NOAA a discount for carrying the satellites into orbit aboard the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. A deal between NOAA and the Air Force that would have saved NOAA $90 million in launch costs never went through, in large part because NASA and NOAA began working behind the scenes to bury the hatchet, the Post said. The previous week NASA Administrator James Beggs sent Anthony Calio, NOAA administrator, a letter outlining a deal governing three Metsat launches starting in 1989. NASA agreed to share with NOAA the $80 million cost of modifying the Metsat for a Space Shuttle launch, to put a Metsat on a Space Shuttle within three months after NOAA asked for it, and to shave $6.5 million off the $105 million in feed NASA ordinarily would charge NOAA for the three launches. "We gave them a good price," Beggs said. "They're on the shuttle at what essentially is our cost for launching them." (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21)
NASA announced that students in classrooms throughout the continental U.S. would have an opportunity to observe various aspects of Space Shuttle mission 51—L and to listen, look, and learn from NASA's Teacher in Space, Christa McAuliffe, during her flight on Challenger. A few students would also be able to question McAuliffe about the mission. TV viewers with satellite dishes would be able to access the live lessons directly from the RCA satellite Satcom F-2R, Transponder 13. The Public Broadcasting Service, as a result of an agreement with NASA, would carry the live lessons via the satellite Westar IV, Transponder 12. PBS would offer the programs to member stations after requesting that they preempt regular instructional TV or classroom programming to carry the lessons live. McAuliffe would teach two lessons on the sixth day of the flight [see Space Transportation System/Civilian in Space Program, Oct. 2]; the first at approximately 11:00 a.m. EST, the second at about 1:00 p.m. EST. Classrooms with access to a satellite dish or cable network that carried NASA-Select would also be able to participate in a "Mission Watch," which covered aspects of the entire Space Shuttle flight from the day before launch through the conclusion of the mission. Barbara Morgan, backup for McAuliffe, would moderate the Mission Watch broadcast. (NASA Release 85-156)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that Warren North, JSC specialist in astronaut selection and training, retired February 1 after 38 years with NASA. North had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA's predecessor agency) in 1947 as a test-pilot engineer at LeRC. In 1959 North had transferred to NASA Headquarters, where he participated in early planning for Project Mercury, including selection and training of the seven original Mercury astronauts; in 1962 North assumed leadership of the JSC division responsible for training astronauts for Gemini rendezvous and docking development flights and for the Apollo lunar landing program. North was currently special assistant to the JSC flight-operations director for planning Space Shuttle crew training and flight-simulation equipment and techniques. North received a bachelor's degree from Purdue University and master's degrees from Case Institute of Technology and Princeton University. (JSC Release 85-7)
Having served as NASA deputy administrator for only two weeks, Dr. William Graham was not known well by most NASA employees; but, as acting administrator replacing James Beggs, Graham had a clear opinion of NASA and his opportunity to lead it, the Washington Post reported. Graham, who had a Ph.D. in electrical engineering, said in an interview today that "NASA's a marvelous organization ... For a technologist, this is like dying and going to heaven." Thus, Graham characterized himself as a professional technologist, which his background would certainly indicate. He had worked as a project officer with the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico, was a founder and executive of R&D Associates in California, and had served on numerous advisory panels on nuclear weapons, strategic military policy, and undersea warfare. However, this emphasis in his career on weapons research and military policy aroused some unease at NASA, the Post commented. "He's from the other side of the river," one NASA official said, referring to Graham's long association with the Pentagon. But Graham had sought to assure Congressional committees recently that his appointment was not designed to lead to the "militarization of NASA." Graham's close ties to the Reagan Administration were seen as possibly beneficial to the space agency. And Graham commented that he would follow President Reagan's "very strong and clear space policy." Some associates noted that even as acting administrator they expected Graham to "take a strong hand" in agency affairs. Graham had already announced that he intended to meet soon with all the agency's top executives and then visit the research and operations center at Cape Canaveral, Houston, Pasadena, and elsewhere. "I'm a hands-on kind of person," he said. "I like to get out and walk the halls and talk to people." (W Post, Dec 6/85, A29)
NASA announced it had submitted to the U.S. Congress today a report by its Advanced Technology Advisory Committee (ATAC) that said automation and robotics would be significant elements of the NASA Space Station program and that the initial Space Station design should accommodate evolution and growth in these technologies. The report, required under Public Law 98-371 that appropriated FY 85 NASA funds, noted that all Space Station elements, including the core station and associated unmanned platforms, vehicles, and ground facilities were candidates for the technologies, necessitating accelerated R&D in automation and robotics. The Automation and Robotics Panel, which assisted the Advisory Committee in a six-month study led by the California Space Institute, said that a desired level of funding for automation and robotics research would be 13% of the total Space Station costs; a minimum acceptable level was 7%. An augmented research program, the report said, would result in improved productivity from the initial station and much greater productivity from later versions of the Space Station. The report also said successful incorporation of automation and robotics into the Space Station program could lead to deployment of a new generation of flexible and adaptable space systems, which could provide the U.S. with new methods of generating and exploiting space knowledge in commercial activities and thus preserving U.S. leadership in space and industrial systems. Other report recommendations included: development of criteria for incorporating automation and robotics technology in the Space Station; verification of automated equipment performance, including terrestrial and space demonstration to validate technology for Space Station use; use of automation techniques to enhance NASA's management capability; establishment of measurements to verify inclusion of automation and robotics in the Space Station; development of a program for technology transfer to U.S. industries; and design of satellites and payloads accessible from the Space Station to accommodate service and repair by robots. NASA would incorporate report recommendations into the Phase B definition and preliminary design contracts [see Mar. 14] it was negotiating with industry teams. The Advisory Committee, made up of personnel from NASA Headquarters and centers, would continue to monitor automation and robotics developments and would report semi-annually to Congress. (NASA Release 85-46)
Air safety experts, flight attendants, and some members of Congress were complaining that the emergency evacuation tests run by airlines had little resemblance to a real accident, the Washington Post reported. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations required that all jetliners pass an evacuation test that showed a planeful of passengers could be evacuated in 90 seconds. Such tests determined how many seats a plan must have in relations to the number of exits. However, flight attendants typically rehearsed several days for the tests in which there was no smoke, no fire, no elderly participants, or children. Federal regulations didn't prohibit manufacturers from using their own employees for the tests, although no "passenger" could rehearse for the evacuation. Although regulations required a certain percentage of elderly persons or children for the tests, FAA officials said they often waived the requirement because of concerns that they might be injured. Rep. James Oberstar (D-Minn.), whose U.S. House public works and transportation subcommittee on investigations and oversight monitored the FAA, said that changes in the FAA's handling of evacuation requirements were long overdue. "We've got . . . no uniformity, just sort of a haphazard approach to rule making and safety, and lives of people are at stake," he said. Rep. Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) of the same subcommittee called the approach to evacuation taken by the FAA and industry "just totally out of touch with the real world." The controversy over the adequacy of evacuation requirements had simmered for months since the FAA permitted the Boeing Co. to eliminate two of ten exit doors on its 747 jumbo jet. Boeing officials convinced the FAA to allow elimination of the two over-wing emergency doors on the plane, because federal regulations required two doors for every 110 seats and none of the 747s with sealed doors would carry more than 440 seats. The FAA's Seattle office, which handled certification of large commercial aircraft, approved the change without a test to see whether passengers actually could evacuate the plane within 90 seconds and instead relied on a mathematical calculation using old evacuation tests. Critics complained that those tests were themselves flawed. (WPost, Sept 6/85, A21)
NASA announced it appointed Dr. Raymond Colladay associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology to be responsible for the overall management of the agency's aeronautics, space technology, and terrestrial energy programs including the institutional management of Ames Research Center (ARC), Langley Research Center (LaRC), and Lewis Research Center (LeRC). On April 18, 1982, NASA had named Colladay deputy associate administrator for the office of aeronautics and space technology; since April 17, 1985, he had served as acting associate administrator for that office. Colladay began his career with LeRC in 1969, where he conducted analytical and experimental research in advanced high-temperature gas turbine engines. In 1974 NASA named him head of the turbomachinery fundamentals section and then temporarily assigned him to NASA Headquarters as acting chief of the propulsion branch in the aircraft energy efficiency office. Later he served as assistant manager of the LeRC efficiency engine project, deputy manager of the advanced propulsion systems office, manager for propulsion research and technology, and beginning in 1982 director of the research and technology division. Colladay received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Michigan State University, East Lansing. He authored or co-authored more than 20 NASA technical reports and journal articles relating to aeronautical and space research. (NASA Release 85-93)
The information gathered by several Space Shuttle missions underscored the need for improved weather forecasting at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA along with the U.S. Air Force developed a plan to improve the quality of weather data available at KSC as well as the manner in which it was presented to the forecaster, Spaceport News reported. KSC officials recently held a ribbon cutting ceremony at the Range Control Center on Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to inaugurate the new Cape Canaveral Forecast Facility (CCFF), marking completion of a $3 million three-year effort by NASA, the Air Force, and contractor Pan Am World Services. The facility was the first important tool for improving the efficiency of the weather forecaster during launches and landings of the Space Shuttle. The facility housed a system called MIDDS, meteorological interactive data display system, which animated and overlaid data from various forecasting tools in color graphic displays. For example, a forecaster could begin with display of a current satellite picture; over that he could place a color enhanced radar display of shower activity. Next he might add a graphic presentation of indications from wind towers around KSC; and over that he could display locations of lightning potential as well as where lightning was striking cloud-to-ground. Motion added to the entire composite picture would illustrate trends in weather activity over a period of time. The system could overlay maps of upper wind data or barometric pressures collected from weather balloons or sounding rockets. The forecaster could also display figures from the data network of other weather stations around the country or the world. Although the console was at the Cape Canaveral facility, the new rotating antenna was at Patrick Air Force Base to compensate for the blind spot directly above the radar. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration radar located in Dayton Beach supplemented the Cape radar. A forecaster could call up a current graphic display of any official weather radar in the U.S. A lightning location and protection (LLP) system would show cloud-to-ground strikes up to 100 miles away, from which antennas were located ten miles north of the vehicle assembly building and at Melbourne Regional and Orlando International Airports. These antennas supplemented an existing network of 30 area field mills that detected lightning potential. NASA officials hoped within five years to have at the facility a clear air doppler radar, of which there were only six in the country. It would reduce the number of wind towers needed and improve forecasting efficiency. In the meantime, Space Shuttle weather officer Scott Funk said, "We haven't tapped the full potential of the new MIDDS system. Most weather forecasters have never seen anything like this. But there are still a number of potential capabilities the system has which we will add next year." (Spaceport News, Oct 11/ 85, 7)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced its researchers completed at KSC a series of three intensive tests that verified the compatibility of Spacelab 2 experiments in space. Known collectively as the "mission sequence test," the tests determined for the first time that actual experiment flight hardware for the mission operated in tandem with the Spacelab flight systems. MSFC's Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester said they learned they “could operate this complex system with high efficiency within acceptable Spacelab resource allocations." MSFC had responsibility for managing the first three Spacelab missions in a series of Spacelab flights that extended over several years. The first mission flew in 1983; the next would fly later in April. "This third and last test was a simulated six-hour slice of the actual on-orbit timeline," Lester said. "It simulated the commanding of experiments as if they were being done both from the payload operations control center (at Johnson Space Center) and from the flight deck of the orbiter." The period chosen was one that would put maximum stress on the computer, "a worst-case scenario," Lester explained. "Without a situation like that, we wouldn't have gotten the confidence we have now that we're ready to go." The 13 Spacelab 2 experiments, covering seven scientific disciplines, would rest on three pallets and a special support structure. Unlike the other two Spacelab missions managed by MSFC, there was no habitable laboratory. Spacelab 2 crew would operate the experiments from the aft deck of the orbiter interior. (MSFC Release 85-19) During April: NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-B/Spacelab 3, an ESA<Jeveloped Spacelab carrying 15 experiments [see Spacelab, Apr. 17], was scheduled for launch April 29 from KSC. The mission's main objective was to provide a high-quality microgravity environment for materials processing and fluid experiments. For the second time in U.S. space history, crew members would perform scientific investigations continuously. Two scientists who developed Spacelab 3 experiments, payload specialists Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg, a materials scientist from EG&C Energy Management Corp., and Dr. Taylor Wang, a fluid physicist from JPL, would conduct onboard research during the mission. Mission specialist Dr. Don Lind, a high-energy astrophysicist, and Drs. Norman Thagard and William Thornton (both medical doctors making their second Space Shuttle flight) would also do scientific research. The payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center would manage all Spacelab 3 operations. Members of the Marshall Space Flight Center mission management team and the investigator teams that developed Spacelab 3 experiments would monitor, direct, and control experiment operations from the ground control center. The mission control center in the same building as POCC would control the orbiter and basic Spacelab systems. (NASA Release 85-60)
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Administrator Donald Engen, citing improvements in scheduling practices and air traffic control, told airlines today that on April 1 he would remove minute-by-minute restrictions on the number of flights at airports in Atlanta, Chicago, Denver, and the New York City area, the Washington Post reported. He said delays would continue to occur but should be reduced and more manageable. Before the restrictions, the air traffic system had experienced an unprecedented number of delays, averaging 1,400 daily 15-minute or longer delays nationwide the previous August. Between November 1 and January 31, 1984, average daily delays dropped to 863, a reduction of 46%. Not all delays were attributable to airport congestion or air traffic control problems; the FAA generally blamed about 60% of them on weather. Also likely to contribute to a decrease in delays was the increasing ability of the FAA to monitor traffic nationwide through its computer system and to redirect planes to less-busy routes. Engen noted that the airlines had indicated they would continue to operate the schedules adopted under the restrictions and would not revert to the bunching of large numbers of operations within short time periods. (W Post, Mar 15/85, A16)
Fourteen-year-old Todd Holmes of Fort Smith, Arkansas, unofficially became the youngest person to solo in a glider, the Washington Times reported. According to Federal Aviation Administration regulations, a pilot had to be 14 before he or she could solo in any kind of aircraft and 16 to be licensed in a passenger-carrying glider or to fly a powered aircraft. The agency did not keep statistics on who might have been the youngest person ever to solo. Todd, who got his glider license on his 14th birthday, said, "I could've done it two weeks ago, but I had to wait until I was 14." (W Times, Aug 1/85, 4B)
Discovery and its five-man crew on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 landed at 9:16 EDT today at Edwards Air Force Base after a seven-day mission [see Aug. 27], the Washington Post reported. During the mission, the crew deployed AUSSAT-1 for the Australian government, ASC-1 for the American Satellite Corp., and Leasat 4 for Hughes Communications (reports indicated Leasat 4 had lost its UHF communications link). In addition, the crew successfully retrieved and repaired the Leasat 3 originally deployed on STS 51-D. Later Hughes issued a statement saying "Leasat 3 is under full control by Hughes' ground command, and telemetry data continued to confirm the good health of the satellite. The liquid propulsion systems are intact and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures appear to be rising gradually toward acceptable levels," the JSC Roundup reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said after the mission that "1 would have to characterize this mission as near to perfect as you can get. It was a perfect mission from the outset, one that shows America's space program at work." Moore added that he hoped there would be only two more Space Shuttle landings in California before pilots could resume landing in Florida. NASA switched to Edwards Air Force Base landings after brakes failed and a tire blew out in an April landing on Kennedy Space Center's concrete runway. (IV Post, Sept 4/85, A7; JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 1)
In remarks at a meeting marking the 25th anniversary of the Gagarin Space Training Centre, Gen. Georgiy Beregovoy, center commander, said that it had become an international space academy where 58 USSR cosmonauts and participants in international space programs from the socialist countries and from France and India trained, FBIS, Tass in English reported. Beregovoy also said results of space research were used in virtually every sector of the national economy, with more than 800 USSR institutions and organizations using the research results. He said that during missions, cosmonauts were concerned with problems of agriculture; radio and electronics engineering; metallurgy; welding; studies of sea currents, offshore areas, and bottom sedimentation in river estuaries; and compiling maps of shoals and coastal areas. In other remarks at the meeting, Leonid Kizim, a participant in the longest space mission, which had lasted 237 days, said that during its 25 years the training center had become a major research institution capable of resolving most of the USSR's complex scientific and technical problems. (FBIS, Tass in English, Apr 9/85)
NASA announced it would alter its process of soliciting astronaut applications for pilot and mission specialist positions to one where it would accept applications from civilians on a continuing basis beginning August 1, 1985, and nominees from the military on an annual basis. NASA would make selections in the spring of each year with successful candidates reporting in the summer. Mission requirements and attrition rate of the current astronaut corps would determine number of candidates selected. (NASA Release 8589)
Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgi Grechko in the Soyuz T-13 spacecraft returned to earth September 26 from the Salyut 7 orbiting complex, making a soft landing 220 km northeast of Dzhezkazgan, the Washington Post reported. Vladimir Vasyutin, Viktor Savinykh, and Aleksandr Volkov remained onboard Salyut 7. The partial replacement of the crew, FBIS Moscow Domestic Service in Russian reported, for the first time provided for continuous use over a prolonged period of a manned space complex, thus substantially enhancing its efficiency. The present Soviet space effort was the fourth long-term expedition aboard the Salyut 7 station since its 1982 launch. The overlapping of crews meant that the Salyut 7 would not have to be shut down and restarted. Left empty after the previous mission ended in October 1984, the station suffered an electrical failure that created severe and dangerous problems for Dzhanibekov and Savinykh when they docked June 8 with the station. The Soviet space program emphasized endurance flights in space with the ultimate goal of establishing large permanently manned orbiting complexes. The previous Soviet space mission set a record for human endurance in space when three crew members lived aboard Salyut 7for 237 days. (W Post, Sept 27/85, A21; FBIS Moscow Service in Russian, Sept 26/85)
NASA launched from KSC at 5:00 p.m. EDT today Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger carrying Spacelab-2. The flight was the eighth for Challenger and the 19th Space Shuttle mission. The flight commander was Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, who served as pilot on the third Space Shuttle mission. Air Force Col. Roy Bridges, Jr. was pilot; mission specialists were Dr. Anthony England, a geophysicist; Dr. F. Story Musgrave, a physician; and Dr. Karl Henize, an astronomer who at the age of 58 was the oldest American to travel in space. Payload specialists were Dr. Loren Acton, a solar physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, and Dr. John David Bartoe, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory. Approximately 5 minutes and 45 seconds after launch onboard computers shut down Challenger's center engine (SSME 1) due to failure of the orbiter's two high-pressure, fuel turbo-pump discharge temperature sensors. Challenger was 70 miles above earth at the time, about 50 miles below the orbit considered safe for a manned spacecraft. The two remaining main engines ran smoothly and burned about a minute and 10 seconds longer than originally planned, putting the Space Shuttle into a lower-than-scheduled orbit. The crew then used two auxiliary engines to raise the orbit in steps from an initial 122 miles to 194 miles at 10:30 p.m. the night of launch. The crew also dumped as much as 4,400 lb. of fuel to achieve the higher orbit. In explaining the problem with SSME 1, NASA associate administrator Jesse Moore said the onboard sensors first indicated that the center engine might be overheating four minutes after liftoff, the Washington Post reported. "Computers then ordered the center engine fuel pump to bypass one valve and use another to feed fuel into the combustion chamber," he said. Two minutes later computers again sensed that the fuel pump was overheating and automatically shut down the center engine.The mission control center in Houston also received indications of dangerously high temperature readings on a second engine and instructed the crew to disconnect a backup sensor to prevent the second engine from shutting down before the spacecraft reached orbit. The crew encountered the next problem when attempting to operate a $60 million telescope-pointing device. The instrument pointing subsystem (IPS) and its four solor telescopes were one of 13 experiments carried on the European-built Spacelab-2. Mission specialist Henize told mission control that the pointing attempts were "rather dismal," the NY Times reported. Lee Briscoe, flight director, elaborated to reporters. "It appears that we are able to find the sun, find the stars, get into what we call a rough track mode," he said. "But we never appear to get into a fine track and actually finish the total tracking." Since the problem appeared to be with the computer programming that drove the unit, NASA radioed up a new version of the programming. However, it initially failed to correct the problem, and NASA told the crew to try harder. Eventually the IPS operated successfully after the crew inserted a series of software patches developed at Marshall Space Flight Center. NASA extended the mission duration by one day to allow additional collection of engineering and scientific data. The Spacelab-2 aboard Challenger was the second of its two verification test flights and consisted of an igloo attached to a lead pallet, the IPS mounted on it and a two pallet train behind, with an experiment special support structure. Experiments conducted during the Spacelab-2 mission were in the fields of life sciences, plasma physics, infrared astronomy, high-energy physics, solar physics, atmospheric physics, and technology. Experiments were located on the IPS, the three pallets, the special support structure, the orbiter mid-deck, and one on the ground (NASA FOR M-989-51-F [postflight] Sept 27/85, [prelaunch] July 9/85; NASA MOR M-977-51-F-03 [prelaunch] July 1/85; W Post, July 30/85, A1, July 31/85, A3; NYT, July 31/85, B4)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
Continuing a project begun in 1984, some of the world's most prominent lightning experts gathered during the summer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to study lightning strikes and their effects, the Spaceport News reported. KSC attracted scientists with a variety of research interests because it was one of the nation's areas of highest frequency of strikes and the presence of French experts who had mastered the technique of triggering lightning. Taking part in the summer's project were representatives of NASA, the U.S. Air Force's Wright Aeronautical Lab, the Federal Aviation Administration, the U.S. Naval Laboratory, France's Center for Nuclear Studies, three U.S. universities, and two industry organizations. Since late May, the 36 lightning investigators had conducted studies at a specially equipped lightning research facility located on the shore of Mosquito Lagoon about nine miles north of the vehicle assembly building. The facility included a launch site for the three-foot rockets used to trigger lightning and two nearby trailers that housed the research teams and their equipment. From their control center, the French experts triggered lightning events by launching a small rocket that trailed a thin copper wire to an altitude of about 2000 feet. The wire acted as a trigger, attracting a stroke, which vaporized the wire while traveling down an electrical pathway to the ground. Special instruments and cameras near the launch site recorded the strike in detail. The triggered lightning events allowed researchers to obtain ground measurements that they could use in atmospheric and lightning research. Researchers might eventually use information from the studies to design advanced lightning protection systems for KSC facilities and for greater protection for aircraft such as the Space Shuttle that contained electronic flight control systems. Other research at the facilities included using a Convair C-580 to obtain measurements on a lightning strike; a study to determine how lightning strokes gained access to power lines; investigation of the Maxwell Current, which developed in a particular pattern before, during, and after thunderstorms; and attempts to obtain three-dimensional photos of lightning strikes. In addition to hosting the project, KSC was contributing funding to some of the university research. Project managers hoped to attract more participants in the future with the promise of research leading to tangible benefits in lightning protection and prediction. (Spaceport News, Aug 16/85, 7)
NASA Administrator James Beggs criticized the Air Force and NOAA for plans to launch some satellites aboard surplus Titan II missiles rather than using the Space Shuttle, saying it would cost NASA $500 million, the Washington Post reported. "You know the old syndrome," he said, "if it wasn't invented here [at the Air Force] it can't be all that good ... I don't like it. It is not good for our short-term future and makes it that much more difficult for us to get on an even footing in the next five years." The controversy had begun with an Air Force decision to refurbish and redevelop obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch up to 12 Air Force satellites that NASA had assumed would be flying on the Space Shuttle. When NOAA heard of the Air Force decision, its acting administrator, Anthony Calio (a former NASA official), had contacted the Air Force about launching over the next seven years three advanced weather satellites, called Metsats, into polar orbit. When questioned, Calio had said the Air Force offered a deal that would save NOAA $90 million—it would cost $100 million to redesign the Metsats to fly on the Space Shuttle and $105 million in launch fees versus an Air Force charge of $115 million for the three Titan II launches, resulting in a net saving of $90 million. "This agency has a budget of $1 billion a year so we're talking about 10% of our annual budget. This is strictly a business deal," Calio concluded. Beggs responded that he always assumed the Air Force and NOAA would use the Space Shuttle, although they had not signed a formal agreement. He said he did not believe NOAA would save that much and that the Air Force would bear the refurbishment cost to redevelop the Titan II, estimated by Beggs at $100 million. "I believe what we're talking here is a savings to NOAA and a net loss to the U.S. Treasury," Beggs said. "I think this whole scheme should be looked at very carefully by the administration and by Congress." And he mentioned his concern that the Air Force plan could set a dangerous precedent. (W Post, Feb 25/85, A1)
The testing of the AFTI/F—111 mission adaptive wing program at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center (DRFC) was an important milestone, the DRFC X-Press reported. It was the aircraft's first taxi under its own power in four-and-a-half years. In the test, the control room was fully staffed, the air crew was aboard the aircraft just as they would be for the first flight, and the airplane operated as if it were ready to fly. Engineers checked and verified all aircraft and control room displays, including the mission adaptive wing color panel that duplicated cockpit displays and featured a caution panel that identified discretes, a trouble-shooting tool. "Things went really well," said Ames DRFC AFTI/F—111 project manager Louis Steers. "There were some small problems on the aircraft, but no show stoppers." (DFRC X-Press, Aug 30/85, 2)
NASA announced that its Comet Halley Active Monitoring Program (CHAMP), a middeck payload to obtain wide field visible and ultraviolet data on Comet Halley using handheld equipment, would have its primary flight January 1986 on the Space Shuttle (STS) mission 51 —L. It was during that time that the comet would be most active but viewing from earth would be most difficult due to the narrow viewing angle between the comet and the sun. The first flight of CHAMP would be on STS mission 61-C in December 1985; the third, on STS mission 61 —E March 1986. The December and March flights would provide important pre- and post-perihelion baseline data that would assist with the interpretation of the January flight data. NASA considered CHAMP data supplemental to the extensive and detailed space-based data to be obtained from the flight of the ASTRO payload on STS mission 61-E, the Spartan-Halley payload on STS mission 51-L, the UVX payload on STS mission 61-C, and the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft. However, the CHAMP data would be unique in its nature and ability to provide a single context for all of these activities, because it would make observations on three Space Shuttle missions. Before each observation, the assigned mission specialist would set up the experiment by mounting the CHAMP equipment in the appropriate window. On the January flight, the mission specialist would use the orbiter Challenger's UV transmissive side hatch quartz window. On the other two flights, data probably would be acquired through the aft flight deck windows. During observations, the orbiter would be oriented so the appropriate window was pointed to within 5° of the celestial coordinates of the comet, with attitude drift rates of less than 1.002° maintained. Each observation required exposing a series of one to four calibration shots plus six to eight frames of film for images or spectra during the approximately five-minute period occurring in each orbit when the comet was in view and the sun was at least 8° below the earth's horizon. NASA hoped there would be an observation for each flight day during the seven-day December and March missions, and up to 20 observations during the January flight. However, conflicts with other operational requirements might reduce the actual number of observations, although unusual cometary behavior could require additional time allocated to the experiment. (NASA MOR E-420-61-C-20 [prelaunch], Dec 17/85)
A new study issued by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) said competition from other nations and several private companies in launching spacecraft put the U.S. under pressure to protect its economic and technological leadership in space, the NY Times reported. This protection could be accomplished by reassessing the Space Shuttle's pricing policy, promoting greater private investment in space-related goods and services, and forging a long-term space policy to assure a competitive edge, report recommended. The European Space Agency, a consortium of 11 western European governments, broke the U.S. monopoly in launch services for the West with its Ariane rocket program. Arianespace, a corporation owned by the French government and European banks and aerospace companies, was aggressively pursuing customers for Ariane's services and had won several contracts that would otherwise have gone to U.S. conventional rockets or the Space Shuttle. France was planning later in the year to use the Ariane to inaugurate the world's first commercial remote-sensing satellite service, competing with U.S. Landsats that surveyed the world's geologic, water, and agricultural resources. China announced the previous month a new commercial space program using its own satellites, launching rockets, and ground stations. The Chinese had rockets capable of boosting satellites into the high orbit needed for communications satellites. Japan, emphasizing the export potential of space technology, was developing its own rocket launching capability and was planning to launch the next year the first of a series of ocean and land remote-sensing satellites. India also had joined the nations launching satellites, and Brazil was building a rocket base with the intention of becoming the first South American launching power. Although the USSR was apparently tempted to enter the commercial market, western space experts questioned whether the Russians would ever be a major force in commercial space operations. They said the USSR might be reluctant to allow outside scientists and businessmen access to their facilities and other governments would probably not allow advanced communications satellites to be exported to the Soviet Union. In its report, the OTA said that other nations developed their own space launching capabilities out of a desire to be technologically independent, to gain any economic benefits that derived from space technology, and to be regarded as "space powers." Consequently, the report concluded that the U.S.'s "competitive strategy based on price or superior technology alone will not prevent foreign entry into the launch service business." At stake, besides prestige, was a share of what by the end of the century could be a $50 billion annual business, according to estimates by some economists in the aerospace field. The report recommended that the U.S. government investigate new trade and regulatory policies to reduce the risks and uncertainties that hindered private investment in space technology. The study concluded that NASA by itself was "not well-equipped either to promote or to regulate growth in the commercial exploitation of space." The report suggested the regulation of "space industries" should be integrated with the regulation of their counterparts on earth. (NYT, July 26/85, A1)
NASA announced appointment effective October 7, of Richard Barnes to be director of the International Affairs Division. Barnes would replace Kenneth Pedersen, who had served in the job since November 1978 and would spend the following year on sabbatical as research professor at the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service. Barnes recently had completed four years as NASA European representative based at the American Embassy in Paris, where he was responsible for liaison with the European Space Agency and the national space agencies of Western Europe on cooperative projects and for identification of potential future joint space projects. In 1961 he joined the NASA Office of International Programs where he served in various capacities, including deputy director of international affairs, before his Paris assignment. Before joining NASA, Barnes was affiliated with the Atomic Industrial Forum, Inc. and served with the Atomic Energy Commission's Division of International Affairs and the Bureau of Ordinance of the Navy Department. Barnes received his B.A. degree from Dartmouth College and a master of public administration degree from Harvard University. He also graduated from the Industrial College of the Armed Forces and served on commissioned active duty with the U.S. Navy during the Korean War. (NASA Release 85132)
NASA announced it had signed a memorandum of understanding for its materials processing in space research program with Grumman Corp. to experiment with directional solidification of gallium arsenide and other semiconductor materials and various metals and alloys. The process would apply to production of semiconductor crystals and magnets for electrical motors, with initial emphasis on semiconductor materials. Directional solidification would use precisely controlled temperatures to melt and solidify a material, during which the material's crystalline structure would align in a fashion that should virtually eliminate any compound imperfections. Flawless semiconductor crystals would yield a greater quantity and quality of microcircuit chips, leading to higher-speed electronic devices that would consume less power and to greater miniaturization. The agreement called for an information exchange, with NASA and Grumman Corp. designating personnel for the program. NASA would put up no funds for the program; Grumman expected to spend $6 million in the first three years. (NASA Release 85-23; W Times, Feb 13/85, 8B) NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION During October: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) announced that its university programs, primarily involving undergraduate students, combined futuristic space concepts with realistic engineering design challenges. The first program, cosponsored by NASA Headquarters and Ames Research Center (ARC) and Johnson Space Center (JSC), required students to design a spacesuit glove that would allow astronauts maximum flexibility at eight lb.-per-sq-in., the pressure planned for future extravehicular activity. Ten universities responded to a request for proposals, and a team from Kansas State University won the design competition. The second broader program, entering its second phase of a two-year pilot effort, required universities to adopt NASA advanced space design projects for senior design classes. Each university received a grant and was aligned with a NASA center that provided guidance, data, and lecturers during the academic year and 10-week summer work assignments for three students. The initial group of centers, schools, and projects were: ARC/University of Wisconsin/manned Mars habitat; ARC/University of Colorado/geosynchro-nous space station; Langley Research Center; (LaRC)/Virginia Polytechnic Institute/orbital servicing center; LaRC/Massachusetts Institute of Technology/ lunar base-manned Mars mission; Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)/ Georgia Institute of Technology/lunar site preparation; Lewis Research Center (LeRC)/University of Washington/space manufacturing facility; LeRC/Univer-sity of Michigan/lunar space transportation system; and JSC/University of Texas and Texas A & M/manned Mars mission. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 10)
1986.	Military Airlift Command's 89th Military Airlift Wing at Andrews Air Force Base would receive the first jumbo jet in late 1988; the second in 1989. Existing Air Force One aircraft were deficient in three basic ways, Air Force officials said. They were getting more difficult to maintain; they were so crammed with equipment that there was no room for new communications equipment, an emergency medical treatment facility, or improved work areas for the president and staff; and they did not meet Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) standards and had limited performance, especially range. The Air Force said the new aircraft must be certified by the FAA, have three or more engines, and be a model that had at least two years of airline service time. "The two-year in-service requirement guarantees a performance record will be available to evaluate the maturity of aircraft design relative to safety, reliability, and maintainability," said Col. Robert Black, program manager of ASD's Deputy for Airlift and Trainer Systems. Other Air Force One performance requirements under evaluation would call for the aircraft to take off from a 9,300-foot runway and fly 6,000 nautical miles nonstop. The new plane had to have a minimum cruising speed of about 528 mph while flying between 36,000 and 45,000 feet and a high-speed cruise capability of about 575 mph. On the new Air Force One the president and staff would have state-of-the-art communications complete with secure voice terminals and cryptographic equipment for writing and deciphering classified messages. The cabin areas would provide seating for 80 passengers and 23 crew members; and presidential accommodations would consist of an office, stateroom, and adjacent dressing room and lavatory. Other features would be a conference room; guest, staff, press, and Secret Service compartments; and a complete medical treatment facility. Onboard galleys would allow stewards to prepare and serve about 50 meals from each galley. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 20/85, 4) Civil Aviation
A prime time TV series for the first time would offer a comprehensive look at the history of manned U.S. and USSR space flight, the Ames Research Center's Astrogram reported. SPACEFLIGHT, a series of four one-hour programs sponsored by the Public Broadcasting System and the Du Pont Co., would chronicle man's achievements in space from the rocket plane that first broke the sound barrier to the touchdown of the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The series' executive producer, Blaine Baggett, said his staff interviewed some 40 key participants in space activities—astronauts, people on the ground, scientists, and historians. In addition, the Soviet science attache in Washington provided about 10 hours of film footage. Among those interviewed for the series were Chuck Yaeger, first man to break the sound barrier; Scott Crossfield, first to travel twice the speed of sound and to pilot the X-15; Werner von Braun, who worked on the U.S. rocket program; Alan Shepard and John Glenn, first American in space and first American to orbit the globe, respectively; and Sally Ride, first American woman in space. From the point of view of the USSR, the series sought answers to such questions as who the chief designer was of the Soviet space program and why the Soviets were first in the early days of space activities. SPACEFLIGHT also examined future space plans such as space colonies, space stations, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 11/ 85,4) PRECEDING PAGE SLAJ^K ftQT FILMED PAfilA.{0 INTENTlOHAtlT BUN*
NASA announced cancellation of the March 7 Space Shuttle Challenger flight due to problems associated with the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B). NASA officials determined that, in addition to repairing the previously announced problem with one cell of the TDRS's 24-cell flight battery, it was necessary to remove the TDRS-B from the Challenger cargo bay in order to repair a timing problem that became apparent during testing of the TDRS-1 then in orbit. Under certain operational conditions, the timing circuits could cause errors in the system switching sequences, interrupting user support. Tests run February 27 and 28 at spacecraft contractor facilities confirmed the problem. Although NASA and its contractors had developed procedures to operate the TDRS-1, these procedures were not acceptable for multiple spacecraft operations, requiring modifications for TDRS-B and subsequent spacecraft. Because the TDRS spacecraft had encryption devices to protect the system from interfering signals, NASA could not provide further technical detail on the problem. NASA expected a delay of several weeks for modifications, at which time it would remanifest TDRS-B. NASA would place the Anik-C (Telesat-I) satellite scheduled for the STS 51—E mission on the Discovery STS 51-D mission and delay retrieval of the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) from the 51-D mission to a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 85-31)
NASA Administrator James Beggs approved the addition of an asteroid 28 Amphitrite-flyby option to the Galileo mission, permitting a December 1986 final flyby decision and changing the Jupiter arrival date from August to December 1988, the JSC Roundup reported. Approval had followed a two-year study by scientific groups, mission designers, and program officials, in which the National Academy of Sciences and NASA's Solar System Exploration Committee identified asteroids investigations as an essential element of a balanced planetary exploration program. The asteroid flyby could not compromise or risk mission objectives. NASA would make the final decision for a flyby after launch based on analysis of spacecraft health, particularly the attitude-control and mission-operations systems. Amphitrite, about 200 km in diameter and one of the larger of the minor asteroids, was in a near-circular solar orbit in the middle of the asteroid belt at 2.5 Astronomical Units (AU) from the sun (the earth's distance was 1 AU or about 150,000,000 km). A specially convened hazards workshop had concluded that, at a 10,000-to 20,000-km flyby distance, hazard to the spacecraft was no greater than flying through the asteroid belt as 2 Pioneer and 2 Voyager spacecraft had done, and measurements analysis and Doppler-tracking data could achieve significant scientific objectives. As Amphitrite had a rotation period of about 5.39 hours, Galileo's mapping spectrometer could photograph and scan most of its surface. Data analysis would reveal size, shape, mass, density, exact rotation rate, pole orientation, detailed surface morphology, and mineral composition, thus indicating whether Amphitrite was a primitive accumulation of solar nebulae condensates or an evolved body that was a fragment or perhaps a core of a broken-up minor planet. With this data, scientists could possibly confirm or refute a hypothesis that asteroids were sources of many of the meteorites that had fallen on earth. NASA had developed a new trajectory containing both Amphitrite and Jupiter, constrained by launch-vehicle energy and the existing launch window, that would result in a Jupiter arrival date delay from August 29, 1988 to December 10, 1988. Since the flyby would require early added-propellant expenditure, NASA would decrease the number of Jupiter-tour orbits from 11 to 10 and lengthen the tour from 20 to 22 months, permitting achievement of all major 11-orbit tour objectives. The delayed arrival and increased tour time would add five months and about $20-25 million in costs to the mission. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 1)
The NY Times reported that NASA officials said the next Space Shuttle mission would not occur until mid-April as a result of the time needed to repair two one-foot-sq. punctures in one of the cargo bay doors of the orbiter Discovery. NASA officials said Discovery would definitely fly the mission, although they had considered substituting Challenger. Rockwell Internatl. was fabricating the replacement material for the punctures and would fly the material to Cape Canaveral that day or the next. Although NASA could not set a launch date until it had completed repairs, unidentified sources said that, if all went well, launch would be about April 19.	(NYT, March 13/85, A14)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
The U.S. Air Force's Electronic Systems Div. awarded Grumman Corp. a $657 million contract to build the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS), an airborne radar system for spotting tanks, personnel carriers, or any other enemy vehicle moving or standing still, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. A C-18, a militarized version of Boeing's 707, would serve as the radar's airborne development platform. The JSTAR would include radar equipment and operations and control displays as well as communications links to ground terminals and weapons systems. Under the fixed-price incentive contract, a Grumman team including Boeing Military Airplane Co. and United Technologies Corp.'s Norden Systems Div. would design, build, and test two full-scale<levelopment airborne radar systems. The Air Force and Army would test the JSTARS ability to detect, locate, and track enemy ground vehicles and to help ground commanders plan attacks to destroy them. The Air Force expected field testing to begin in March 1990. Col. Harry Gillogly, JSTARS program manager, said the airborne systems would provide "an electronic high ground to observe maneuvering enemy forces," telling Air Force and Army commanders what forces to apply where and when in order to inflict the most damage at the least cost. "Both services will be able to attack key targets," Gillogly said, "the Air Force with direct-attack aircraft and missiles, and the Army with artillery, maneuver forces, and ground-launched missiles." (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 1/ 85, 1) National Space Commission
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with Space Industries, Inc. (Sll) for the company to construct and operate an industrial space facility (ISF), the first habitable privately owned commercial platform in space, which NASA would deploy from the Space Shuttle. Sll also signed a separate agreement with NASA's space station office that would provide for exchange of information during the definition and preliminary design phase of the space station. The agreement laid the groundwork for subsequent discussions and negotiations during the space station development period to begin in mid-1987. Sll was the first private company to sign an agreement with NASA's space station office to share information that could result in a commercial facility capable of compatible operations with the space station. The modular ISF would initially measure 35 by 14.5 feet. Although not intended to be permanently manned, it would be habitable and provide a shirt sleeve work environment for astronauts when docked with either the Space Shuttle or space station. NASA Administrator James Beggs said, "We hope the ISF will be the first of many such platforms to be funded and built by private industry that will complement the permanently manned space station and lead eventually to an industrial park in space." Max Faget, president of Sll, said, "The facility is scheduled to be deployed in 1989 and will respond to a variety of private research and manufacturing needs. Industry could take advantage of the unique gravity-free environment of space to conduct experiments that cannot be effectively duplicated here on earth." Sll considered the cost of building the ISF to be proprietary. Under the novel agreement, a provision stipulated that Sll would reimburse NASA for all costs incurred by the government associated with the deployment of the ISF when it became operational and was revenue generating. (NASA Release 85119)
before liftoff and delaying STS mission 61-C until early in 1986, the NY Times reported. The shutdown came four seconds before ignition of the three main engines. NASA had called for a delay of 54 minutes earlier in the morning when clouds moved over the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA aborted the countdown when a computer on the ground sensed that a pump on one of the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket boosters was spinning at 86,000 rpm, exceeding the turbine's "red line" limits by almost 7,000 rpm. The device, described as a hydraulic power unit, provided power so the nozzle of the solid-fuel rocket booster could pivot slightly in flight, helping to control the direction of the orbiter's ascent. NASA officials indicated there was a backup pump on the booster, but that, if a single pump failed before liftoff, safety precautions called for abort of the countdown. That particular hydraulic power unit had flown twice before on the resuable solid-fuel rocket boosters, NASA officials said, and similar devices had flown up to four times before requiring replacement. It was the first failure in the Space Shuttle program of that particular part. NASA would have to repair or replace the failed pump and said it had rescheduled the launching for January 4, 1986, so there would be no interference with the holidays. The delay until January would also allow NASA to avoid paying the Air Force to keep open its Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral and paying launch pad workers triple-time pay for working between Christmas and New Year's, the Washington Post reported. "The team is obviously disappointed," said Robert Sieck, director of Space Shuttle operations at KSC. "But we're going to isolate the problem and fix it and get on with the launch process." NASA said the delay would have no impact on the 16 Space Shuttle missions, including 61-C, that it had scheduled for 1986. (NY Times, Dec 20/85, B10; W Post, Dec 20/85, A2) Main Engines
European Space Agency (ESA), Japanese, and Canadian officials the previous week expressed concern about NASA's expectations of how the costs of operating the proposed space station should be shared, as fears increased that the U.S. Congress or the Office of Management and Budget might slip the planned 1993 operational date for the $10 to $13 billion facility, Aviation Week reported. The officials were meeting with NASA managers to lay the groundwork for critical space station decisions due by December that would determine what type of contribution they would make to the basic $8 billion U.S. investment. The international space officials were unanimous in their view that the non-U.S. contribution to the station's operational costs should be largely amortized through open access and use of their respective portions of the station system—not through funding transferred to the U.S. As the discussions progressed, the possibility of a space station schedule delay to help cut the U.S. budget deficit in FY 87 became a growing factor. Sen. Slade Gorton (R-Wash.), chairman of the Senate science subcommittee, and Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, both influential space supporters, were cautioning that congressional action on the FY 87 NASA budget could trim space station funding and delay the project's 1993 planned operational date by a year or more. Fuqua told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable, a group formed to foster space commercialization, that a slip now, while undesirable and likely to drive up costs later, could be absorbed by the program more easily than one later when the hardware phase was underway. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 18)
NASA overcame the final obstacle to achieving four-way international cooperation (the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Canada) on the U.S. manned space station when NASA and The European Space Agency (ESA) compromised in a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on wording in three areas: technology transfer, nondiscriminatory access for European users to the Space Station, and station elements that would be candidates for European participation, Aviation Week reported. NASA Administrator James Beggs and ESA Director General Reimer Lust resolved at an early March meeting the differences over wording concerning technology transfer and European user access. A compromise formulated by W. Germany and approved in late March by ESA members resolved the issue of which components would be open to European development. "The final step for Europe is approval of the MOU by ESA's council, which has its next meeting at the end of April," Michel Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, said. "I don't foresee any difficulties there because the ESA member delegates have been informed of the negotiations and are aware of the final wording." Bignier went on to say NASA accepted "certain small nuances" concerning nondiscriminatory access for Europe to the station and that both sides made compromises on the issue of which elements would be included for European cooperation. And he added that ESA "basically accepted NASA's proposed text" on technology transfer for the Phase B memorandum but said the wording would not apply to follow-on agreements covering hardware development. "We felt this was not as critical an issue in Phase B as it will be in the later Phase C/D," Bignier explained. Philip Culbertson, NASA associate administrator for the Space Station, said international participation in the station was essential to overall U.S. planning for the facility. "The investment of our potential partners from around the world will give the station a significantly greater capability than we in the U.S. could provide alone," Culbertson said. "We believe we will end up with a capable Space Station for all of us to use." (AvWk, Apr 1/85, 16)
NASA announced that effective January 24, Dr. Dale Compton became deputy director of Ames Research Center (ARC), where he had been director for engineering and computer systems since February 1983. Compton joined NASA in June 1957, serving as deputy director of astronautics, then chief of the space science division and manager of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). Recipient of the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal, Compton earned a B.S. degree in 1957 and an M.S. degree in 1958, both in aeronautical engineering, and a Ph.D. degree in aeronautical and astronautical engineering in 1969. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/ 85) During February. Ames Research Center (ARC) announced it had formed the information sciences office to do basic and applied research in artificial intelligence (Al), automation sciences, and space-related computer science technology, with emphasis on applications to the NASA space station. NASA had designated ARC as the lead center in Al research, and the new office's research would cover Al programming languages, expert-systems development, knowledge representation and information understanding, machine vision and learning, sensor fusion, and optical processing. Space-related computer-science research would focus on symbolic-processing and data-flow architectures; network design, protocols, and simulation; and optical read/write information-storage technology. ARC would combine in-house studies, primarily on applied research and development of flight experiments to validate and demonstrate the technologies being developed, with the work of outside research organizations, such as SRI International, Symbolics Inc., Innovative Optics, Inc., Stanford University, University of California at Berkeley, MIT, University of Texas, and University of Michigan, on basic research issues to accomplish project objectives. ARC would orient research toward the user community, particularly other NASA centers, focusing on both technology development for user applications and help to users during implementation. Space station automation would be the primary application, and ARC had signed agreements with Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center to work together on this implementation. ARC would also advise on space station automation through participation on NASA advisory groups such as the space station automation study team, space station automation and robotics panel, advanced-technology automation committee, and NASA headquarters space station data systems steering committee. (ARC Release 85-6)
In the first test of the precision location/strike system (PLSS), three TR-1 aircraft picked up a radar signal like one an enemy might use to guide a missile attack and passed the signal direction and time data to a ground station computer. The computer analyzed the data, compared inputs from the three aircraft, and pinpointed where the radar signal was coming from, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. If the source had been an enemy site for radar-directed missiles, artillery, or an anti-aircraft system, the U.S. Air Force could quickly direct an F-16 to it for an attack. The PLSS passed the test by zeroing in on a prepositioned radar emitter the moment its signal started. Lt. Col. Dayl Donahey, PLSS program director for the Aeronautical Systems Division, called it "a giant leap forward" for future wartime capabilities of U.S. tactical forces. "The system performed better than expected at this point in its development testing," he said. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. was developing the PLSS, which featured an integrated, lethal mix of ground-based and airborne electronics. In an operational scenario, the three highly instrumented, high-altitude TR-1 s would fly race-track patterns behind the forward edge of a battle area. Around the clock, in all kinds of weather, the TR-1 listening platforms would detect enemy electronic transmissions. Despite dense electromagnetic interference, the TR-1s could pick up individual pulses of enemy radar. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 23/85, 1)
NASA announced that space age technology was in use in the Republic of Gabon, Africa, where solar photovoltaic power systems installed in four rural villages would improve public health and education facilities and lighting and sanitary water supplies. NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the project, which was jointly funded by the U.S Department of Energy (DOE) and the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources of the Republic of Gabon; the Gabon government selected the villages to participate in the program. The project provided a photovoltaic power system, lights, air circulation fan, and a refrigerator/freezer for vaccine storage to each village dispensary and a power system, lights, and a color TV and video cassette recorder/player to each village school. The villages' sanitary water systems had a newly drilled well, a photovoltaic system, a submersible well pump, a water storage tank, and a water distribution system that piped water to village fountains. Public lighting systems included a power system and sodium vapor lamps mounted on poles. All systems were instrumented to collect data for performance analyses. Total photovoltaic array capacity for all systems was 12.1 kw; output of the smallest array was 80 watts for street lights, the largest 3 kw for one water pump. Batteries for the solar arrays should last about 10 years before replacement; solar arrays had a life expectancy of at least 20 years. According to Tony Ratajczak, project manager at LeRC, "The goal of DOE and the Republic of Gabon, for this project, is to investigate and evaluate the economic, social and technical value of photovoltaic power systems in aiding progress and improving the quality of life in Gabon." (NASA Release 85-68) During November: NASA announced that three physicians from Washington University Medical Center, St. Louis, Misssouri, met the previous month with NASA scientists from National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) to discuss using remote sensing techniques as an analytical tool for use in the field of body scanning known as nuclear magnetic resonance or NMR. Dr. Michael Vannier, radiologist and principal investigator for the project, said NMR was already used on a number of organ systems in the brain. However, interest had grown in how magnetic resonance imaging might fit into the scope of breast diagnostic techniques. So Drs. John Gohagan and Ed Spitzna-gel, also of Washington University, on behalf of the National Cancer Institute's Breast Imaging Project joined Vannier at the discussions. The meeting resulted in a three-year collaborative effort among the Mal-linckrodt Institute of Radiology in St. Louis, NSTL, and the Kennedy Space Center. Vannier commented that the union with NASA was vital to maximize the potential of NMR scanning. "One of the characteristics of these magnetic resonance scanners is that they provide very specific anatomic information about the location and size of a tumor. However there are other ways to get the same information, one being the use of a mammogram, or breast X-ray." At NSTL, scientists Doug Rickman and Jim Anderson were responsible for applying the analytical capabilities to make NMR scans a notable advancement over other methods of X-ray and body scanning techniques. They had demonstrated the use of ELAS software to enhance NMR images, thus increasing disease detection accuracy. Vannier explained, "No one in medicine really has the kind of experience with classifying or analyzing these types of images this way. That's why we are using NASA expertise to help us." By incorporating the ELAS software used in processing satellite imagery into the system, NMR scans could provide not only information on the location and size of a tumor, but also its biological behavior. That is, physicians could determine the status of a mass of tumor directly from the NMR image without having to enter the body surgically. Close affiliation with pathologists while working on actual cases was important in determining whether there had been misclassification on the image processing machines, Gohagan said. "Our goal is to ultimately get the kind of discrimination necessary to distinguish different anamolous conditions," he explained. For example, blood clots would appear distinctly different from benign tumors, and a marked difference would be evident between benign and malignant tumors. Vannier concluded that, as a result of the collaboration, an improvement should evolve in the way NMR images are acquired. "I think it will have significant influence on what we do in the future," he said. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 7)
Space Shuttle mission 51-F was aborted today at three seconds before liftoff when the orbiter Challenger's onboard computer automatically shut down the main engines, Spaceport News reported. Seconds after main engine start, main engine No. 2 lost redundancy to operate the chamber coolant valve. NASA's ground rule restricted launching without an operating backup system in that area of the main propulsion system. Although the valve did assume its proper position after a command from a backup system, the loss of redundancy resulted in a major component failure flag being sent to the orbiter's computers. Challenger Commander Gordon Fullerton later thanked the Kennedy Space Center team on behalf of the crew, saying the team acted quickly and professionally and that at no time did the crew feel apprehensive. In answering a Washington Post reporter's question later, Fullerton said, "We all have mixed emotions here, but we're thankful the system worked the way it should. It was the longest three seconds I've ever experienced." Launch operations manager Thomas Utsman said that crews would strip parts of the malfunctioning engine and that engineers had identified four different parts that could have failed when they should have been pumping fuel from the hydrogen tank into the engine chamber. When the liquid-fuel engines ignited, valves that fed fuel into the chambers were fully open so engines could attain speed instantly. Just before liftoff, the valves were partially closed to cool engines slightly and prevent too much fuel from entering the chamber. The valve on main engine No. 2 failed to close partially, signaling the computer to shut down the system. The first Space Shuttle abort occurred June 26, 1984, when an onboard computer shut down two of Discovery's three engines four seconds before liftoff. That abort triggered an investigation that led to a complete overhaul of Discovery's main engines. NASA had to move Discovery back to the Vehicle Assembly Building where its cargo was removed and placed aboard another orbiter that flew into space two months later. "We don't think the engine valve itself failed the way a valve failed the [other] time we had a launch abort," Space Shuttle program manager Robert Lindstrom said. "I really believe there's a fair likelihood we'll get off again in another week." The delay did have an impact on the mission's objectives. The infrared telescope in Challenger's cargo bay could be operated successfully only in a completely dark sky. Had the flight left on schedule, the sky would have been dark for most of the following seven days until a new moon. NASA had scheduled the next Space Shuttle launch using the orbiter Discovery for August 24. It was not immediately clear how the Challenger's abort would affect that mission. (Spaceport News, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 13/85, A3)
Reiichi Takeuchi, chief of Japan's science and technology agency, said Japan had decided to take part in the U.S. space station beginning with the preliminary design stage, FBIS, KYODO in English reported. He said the Japanese would sign with NASA Administrator James Beggs a memorandum on the decision when Beggs visited Tokyo early in May. The agreement would cover two years of work, at which time, Takeuchi said, the two countries would probably sign a similar document for later stages of the project. Takeuchi noted he expected the U.S. would ask Japan to design the laboratory room of the Space Station, scheduled for operation in 1992. He estimated the cost at 200 to 300 billion yen. Under the memorandum, the U.S. would provide Japan with technical information on how the Space Station would be used. (FBIS, KYODO in English, Apr 12/85)
NASA officials said they might alter Space Shuttle launch countdown procedures to avoid the type of last-second problem that forced postponement of mission 51-F earlier in July [see Space Transportation System, Launch Schedules, July 12], the NY Times reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, said in an interview that "We want to minimize the chances of a needless shutdown. There may be a way to soften up some of our criteria. "Before you take off on an airplane the pilot normally tries all his flaps and hydraulics," Moore said. "We don't have a chance to do that on the launch pad right now, and we want to perform those kinds of checks." Moore indicated new procedures being considered for the countdown included increasing the amount of time allowed for the Space Shuttle's computers to verify the correct functioning of the engine valves and broadening the criteria under which they were meant to operate. Moore added that criteria for safety would not change. The new procedures would add "no risk" to crew members, he said. The consideration of new procedures likely reflected growing confidence in the Space Shuttle as well as concern about foreign competition for launches. NASA officials said Space Shuttle launches must proceed smoothly and regularly if the program is to be a commercial success and that the current schedule called for one launch a month, eventually going to one every two weeks. (NYT, July 29/85, A8)
Sudden squalls almost on top of the launch pad early today forced postponement for at least a day of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the Washington Post reported. A series of unforecasted thunderstorms blew in from the mainland directly across the flight path, and dark thunderheads surrounded the launch pad for five miles in almost every direction. NASA aborted the launch five minutes before liftoff. NASA officials were concerned not only about the Space Shuttle climbing through rain and lightning but also about the crew's ability to see the KSC runway in case they had to make an emergency landing the early minutes of the flight. Rain could damage the orbiter's tiles, and lightning could harm its computers and guidance systems. NASA rescheduled Discovery's launch for between 7:57 and 8:11 a.m. EDT August 25. Among the factors necessitating that launch window were the position of the satellite planned for salvage and timing of deployment of three communications satellites. If an August 25 launch was impossible, there were launch opportunities the following three days. NASA had announced earlier that highlights of the eight-day mission included an attempt to repair and salvage the Leasat/Syncom IV-F3 satellite and deploy it for normal operation, and deployment of the ASC 7/PAM-D for the American Satellite Co., the AUSSAT //PAM-D satellite for the Australian government, and the Leasat IV-F4 satellite for the U.S. Navy. The physical vapor transport of organic solids (PVTOS) experiment sponsored by 3M Corp. would also fly on the mission. PVTOS was the second of some 70 experiments the 3M Corp. planned to conduct aboard the Space Shuttle over the next ten years. On the 51-1 mission, solid materials would vaporize into a gaseous state to form thick crystalline films on selected substrates of sublimable organics. Researchers at 3M would study crystals produced by PVTOS for their optical properties and other characteristics that might ultimately have important applications to 3M's businesses in electronics, imaging, and health care. The company's first experiment, flown in November 1984, dissolved materials that led to a solid crystalline product. (NASA Release 85-118; W Post, Aug 25/85, A3)
The 16th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, March 11-16 at Johnson Space Center (JSC), would highlight exploration programs planned by the U.S. and the USSR, including a discussion of major trends in space science and the possible role of the space station in planetary exploration, JSC announced. Speakers at the special session would include Dr. Geoffrey Briggs, director of the Solar System Exploration Division, NASA Headquarters; Dr. V. L. Barsukov, Vernadsky Institute of Sciences; Dr. Eugene Levey, chairman of the Planetary Sciences Department, University of Arizona; and Dr. Ronald Greely, a planetary scientist from Arizona State University. Other sessions of major significance would be the Florensky Memorial Symposium on Venus, possibly including results from the Soviet Venusian probes, and the Shergotty Consortium, focusing on the debate concerning meteorites that may have originated from Mars's surface. Planners had scheduled 27 regular session with 315 oral presentations taken from 497 abstracts published in the official conference proceedings. (JSC Release 85-11)
NASA announced the astronaut crews for two upcoming Department of Defense (DOD) Space Shuttle missions, including the 1st from Vandenberg AFB. Robert Crippen (Capt., USN) would command mission 62-A, scheduled for launch no earlier than Jan. 29, 1986, from Vandenberg. Other crew members named were Guy Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), pilot; and mission specialists Dale Gardner (Commander, USN), Jerry Ross (Maj., USAF), and R. Michael Mullane (Lt. Col., USAF). Crippen had flown with John Young on the orbiter Columbia's maiden flight in April 1981 and was commander of STS-7, 41-C, and 41-G. Dale Gardner had served as a mission specialist on STS-8 and 51-A; Mullane on 41-D. Karol Bobko (Col., USAF) would command mission 51-J, scheduled for launch September 1985 from KSC. Ronald Grabe (Lt. Col., USAF) would serve as pilot; David Hilmers (Maj., USMC) and Robert Stewart (Col., USA) as mission specialists. Bobko had served as pilot on STS-6 and would command 51-E scheduled for launch in March; Stewart had flown as mission specialist on 41-B and had been the 2nd person to fly the manned maneuvering unit on that flight. (NASA Release 85-25)
At a news conference to discuss the recent flights of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgiy Grechko, Soviet space officials said today that they expected to have a permanently manned space station by 1990, but that the Salyut 7 orbital laboratory would not be the spacecraft that hosted the rotating crews, the NY Times reported. Oleg Gazenko, head of the health ministry's Biomedical Problems Institute, which oversaw space medicine, said no unresolved problems remained to block development of the permanent station and that the crew rotation on Salyut 7 showed that incoming cosmonauts performed their research work better when they were spared the start-up operations needed to reactivate the space laboratory. At about the same time, Soviet officials told a U.S. Congressional delegation headed by Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) [see U.S. Space Policy/International, Oct. 10] that it was building a new space station that would be ready for launch in 1986, Defense Daily reported. Because the Soviets did not want to have two space stations in orbit at the same time, timing of the launch depended on the condition of the orbiting Salyut 7station, which was nearly doubled in size in September by the orbiting and deployment of a large new module. Nelson said the Soviets gave no details of the new station, which, if it is designed to be permanently manned, would beat the planned U.S. space station by seven or eight years. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C11; D/D, Oct 21/85, 259) October31: The Soviet Union, which had kept its space program under tight military control since it launched in 1957 the first satellite, announced creation of a civilian space agency, the NY Times reported. The agency would be responsible for the design, construction, and use of spacecraft for scientific research, remote sensing applications such as surveys of resources and crops, and joint space programs with other countries. In making the announcement, the government newspaper Izvestia identified the new agency as the Main Administration for the Creation and Use of Space Technology for the Economy and for Scientific Research, the Post said. It would be known as Glavkosmos, an acronym for the Russian terms "main" and "space." Izvestia did not specify the position of the agency in the Soviet government's table of organization but did identify the head of the agency as A. I. Dunayev. The only other publicly disclosed space-related agency in the Soviet Union was the Space Research Institute, founded in 1965 and a unit of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Western officials generally regarded that institute as performing some civilian space coordinating functions. However, in announcing Glavkosmos, Izvestia said, "It goes without saying that the effective use of space technology is of interest to many government ministries and agencies and to scientific organizations. The space program has reached such scope as to require the creation of a special coordinating agency." According to the announcement, the new agency would consider proposals for projects, work out long-term plans, and administer programs. It would also be responsible for launching satellites on vehicles expected to be supplied by the military and for collection and dissemination of satellite information. Izvestia said the agency would administer the Intercosmos program and the search and rescue satellite program, an international effort of the Soviet Union, the U.S., Canada, and France. The announcement did not make clear whether the new agency would administer any manned flights; but the emphasis seemed to be on automated space vehicles concerned with remote sensing, which until then had been part of the Cosmos series, a mixture of nearly 1700 civilian and military satellites launched since 1962. (NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13)
NASA officials confirmed a schedule calling for the next Space Shuttle orbiter to land at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Aviation Week reported, as a result of the successful hard-surface runway landing December 3 at Edwards Air Force Base by the orbiter Atlantis on mission 61-B. The landing was the first on a concrete surface since the orbiter Discovery damaged its brakes and tires while landing April 19 at KSC. NASA scheduled the orbiter Columbia on mission 61-C to land at KSC following its planned December 18 launch. Columbia was equipped with the necessary nosewheel steering system upgrades and would use steering instead of brakes as a primary control method for the KSC landing. During the December 3 landing, control inputs by mission commander Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, Jr. appeared to cause Atlantis to float slightly just before landing on the 15,000 ft. runway. The orbiter's wheels touched down approximately 2400 feet from the runway threshold, and Shaw applied only light braking during a 17,759-ft. landing roll. NASA slightly altered the Space Shuttle post-landing processing in an effort to remove Atlantis from the runway as soon as possible to allow the Air Force to reopen it for aircraft use. Normally personnel removed the orbiter's brakes in parallel with other close-out tasks before towing the vehicle back to NASA's Ames-Dryden Space Shuttle processing area at Edwards. They left on the brakes so that Atlantis could be moved to an apron area at the end and off to the side of the runway. H.W. Widick, chief of the Space Shuttle Integration Div., said a preliminary inspection of the brakes did not reveal any damage and that overall condition of the orbiter was good. (AvWk, Dec 9/85, 23)
Responding to a suggestion made by President Reagan at a June 19 press conference that the U.S. expand its sky marshal force for use on international flights, Thomas Pyle, speaking for the International Air Transport Association, said security experts found little merit in the suggestion, the NY Times reported. "We're not happy about anybody having guns up in the air," he said. "There's a distinct danger to passenger^ and a bigger danger of damage to the aircraft." Pyle did acknowledge that there might be special occasions, including cases of known threats to particular flights, when marshals would be needed. Richard Lally, security chief for the association representing U.S. airlines and for the Federal Aviation Administration from 1974 to 1982, agreed with Pyle's assessment. "It is not an answer to the problem and introduces an impression that it is. It provides for a very dangerous situation." The views expressed by Pyle and Lally reflected the consensus of security experts that the best place to head off hijackings was on the ground. (NY Times, June 20/85, A20)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
Lockheed Georgia, manufacturer of the C-5B Galaxy, resumed flight testing of the aircraft after it replaced about 12,000 fastener nuts on the plane, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Lockheed-Georgia grounded the plane after its September maiden flight when quality control inspectors found that construction crews had installed aluminum, instead of steel, nuts on the first eight planes. The mistake slowed production and temporarily halted certain aircraft flight testing. Col. Thomas Stover, acting C-5B program director for Aeronautical Systems Division, said, "It is important to note that flight safety was never an issue. The concern was for development of maintenance problems 10 to 15 years down the road." Stover explained that steel nuts were stronger and lasted longer than aluminum nuts and that, although there were about 3.7 million nuts for each C-5B, only 35,000 had to be steel. Lockheed-Georgia spokesman Dick Martin said workers installed the wrong nuts because some engineering drawings, used by supervisors and assembly line workers, were not specific about nut type. He said about 35% of the nuts had to be replaced on the first aircraft. The Air Force had scheduled the first C-5B for delivery by January 1, and Lockheed-Georgia still expected to deliver the aircraft on time because the company had been four weeks ahead of schedule before the delay caused by the replacement. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 6/85, 4) Simulation Technology
NASA announced that the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) had that day named 114 elementary and secondary school teacher nominees in the NASA Teacher in Space Project. Selection followed the review of more than 10,000 applications [see Space Transportation System/ Civilian in Space Program, Feb. 21]. Dr. William Pierce, CCSSO executive director, said after announcing the names that "It is a great pleasure for the Council to be involved in this historic project. The calibre of the applications from teachers throughout the country has been truly impressive. If their applications are any indication, we can be proud of the quality of teaching that occurs in the classrooms of the elementary and secondary school teachers who applied for this unique educational opportunity." NASA would host the 114 nominees at a national workshop, June 22-27, in Washington, D.C., during which NASA would discuss current developments in the space program and provide information and training on NASA educational materials available for the classroom. At the workshop a national review panel would interview the applicants to determine the 10 semifinalists. (NASA Release 85-67)
NASA indicated it might remove squirrel monkeys from an April 30 Space Shuttle flight because the species carried a herpes virus known to cause cancer in some subhuman primates, the NY Times reported. Research had shown the virus could not survive in high-order primates, including humans, and NASA officials emphasized it was not one of the forms known to cause a variety of ailments in humans. The agency had spent more than a year trying to assess the risk possibilities to astronauts. (NYT, Feb 14/85, B8)
A Federal grand jury today indicted General Dynamics Corp., three of its current executives, and its former executive vice president, James Beggs, currently Administrator of NASA, for allegedly seeking to defraud the Defense Department in connection with producing two prototypes of the DIVAD, an anti-aircraft gun for the Army, Time magazine reported. The seven-count, 33-page indictment stated that between January 1978 and August 1981, while General Dynamics was working on a $41 million program to build the prototypes, it made false statements to the government and was guilty of fraud. The indictment charged the company with illegally billing $7.5 million of its expenses to other government accounts, of which $3.2 million was paid. Along with Beggs, the indictment also named Ralph Hawes, division general manager; David McPherson, program director; and James Hansen, assistant director. Beggs, who took a leave of absence from NASA, denied the charge, saying, "I have not been involved in any criminal wrongdoing ... I do not intend to leave, and this is not the first step to a resignation." A General Dynamics spokesman said, "The issue is a highly sophisticated regulatory and accounting matter, which should be resolved in a civil forum, not in a criminal case." (Time, Dec 16/85, 46) The Navy anticipated a series of NROSS satellites with enough launches to keep an operating satellite in orbit unless sensor or other changes made faster launches desirable. NROSS-1's expected lifetime would be three years; an NROSS-2 would depend on needed oceanographic data. The system would help battle group commanders predict ocean conditions for antisubmarine warfare operations, force placement, and plan use of advanced weapon systems. {A/D, Jan 10/85, 50)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. personnel fitted the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) wide-field/planetary camera (WFPC) into the Hubble Space Telescope, the JPL Universe reported. They then removed and returned it to JPL for modifications and testing. "Everything went fine," Dave Rodgers, JPL's WFPC project manager, said. "There were no problems with any of our equipment." The WFPC consisted of two complete camera systems with different focal lengths. There were four cameras in each system, all sharing the same housing and electronics. The wide-field camera would obtain a wide perspective of a region in the sky, while the planetary camera would make high-resolution studies of individual objects. "It's called a planetary camera, but you can use it for any object that you want to study in detail," Rodgers explained. Besides planets in earth's solar system, the planetary camera would study galaxies and star-like objects such as quasars. Astronomers could also use the camera system to search for clues suggesting the presence of other planets orbiting nearby stars. Because the space telescope would be above the earth's obscuring atmosphere, it would be able to detect objects 100 times dimmer than those visible from earth with about 10 times greater resolution. The orbiting observatory was a major part of NASA's astronomy effort through the end of the century. Space Shuttle crew would service and replace in orbit the space telescope instruments, keeping the telescope operating for at least 15 years. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1)
In work done under a three-year grant in cooperation with Wichita State University (WSU) and aircraft and component manufacturers, Lewis Research Center (LeRC) developed the Electro-Impulse Deicing System (EIDI), which creates an electromechanical impluse at the leading edge of an aircraft's wing to produce a minute flexing of the metal skin that serves to shatter, debond, and remove ice buildup, the Lewis News reported. At a LeRC symposium, more than 100 representatives from various companies and other government agencies met to review the results of the cooperative program to develop a technology base for EIDI. Cessna Aircraft Co. planned to apply for Federal Aviation Administration certification for their model 206 aircraft with the EIDI system. Although several methods of deicing or anti-icing were available, all had undesirable energy requirements. The electro-magnetic impulse method, first suggested in 1937 by Rudolf Goldschmidt, a German national residing in London after World War II, offered a promising alternative. During the 1950s and 1960s, industry used electro-impulse methods for metals forming in various industrial processes. In the 1970s, the USSR pursued further research including some aircraft applications. However, for various reasons the development stopped short of full implementation; the system still lacked a well developed underlying technology and known design parameters. Early EIDI system research offered promise of ice removal with low energy requirements, minimal maintenance (no moving parts), greater reliability, and a weight and cost competitive with existing methods. In mid-1982, LeRC funded a six-month grant to WSU to work with two small plane makers and an aircraft electrical system manufacturer to do a feasibility study that resulted in a successful icing tunnel demonstration in October/November 1982. LeRC then organized a consortium of companies for full development of the method for the whole range of civil aircraft, each company agreeing to contribute some services or equipment to the project in return for eligibility to submit its own products for deicing design and tests by the EIDI method. Engine aircraft candidates for the EIDI system included commercial transport turbofans, business jet turbofans, commuter transport turboprops, and commercial transport propfans. (LeRC News, July 26/85, 2)
Hans Mark, former NASA deputy administrator, Ames Research Center director, and Secretary of the Air Force, on April 9, during part of an MIT dinner lecture series, disparaged government attempts to commercialize space, the Space Commerce Bulletin reported. "Now that I'm out of government, I can say that I found nothing funnier than bureaucrats wringing their hands in town around here about how to commercialize something where most of them, myself included, don't have the slightest idea on how to make investments, how to judge markets, how to do all those things that are important for commercialization," Mark said. He characterized commercial space efforts as being politically popular but backed with little substance, with much of his criticism directed at private sector remote sensing and expendable launch vehicle operations. He said he didn't believe either technology would be a commercial success in the U.S., and he predicted private Space Shuttle operation would never work. Mark considered true commercial space activity to be technology transfer programs and government-industry relations as set up in the 1950s to build hardware for government programs. He added, however, that government couldn't take credit for technology transfer as being space commercialization because that was not what "intellectuals think commercialization means and we need to do other things. So we need to hire 50 people in NASA headquarters to do commercialization." Regarding the impact of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) on commercial space, Mark said, "There's no doubt in my mind that important commercial ventures will follow from SDI simply because of the nature of the contractor systems that we use. We will build high-intensity lasers and the first commercial application of those lasers will surely be in welding or in something like that . . . That's what I like to call the commercialization of space," Mark concluded. (Space Commerce Bulletin, Apr 26/85, 1)
Aerospace Daily reported that NASA would submit to Congress that week the space station automation and robotics study, "Advancing Automation and Robotics Technology for the Space Station and for the U.S. Economy," which appropriations legislation enacted in 1984 had directed NASA to prepare by April 1. NASA Administrator James Beggs approved the report compiled by the advanced technology advisory committee and augmented by the work of an automation and robotics panel, SRI International, and aerospace contractors. The report consisted of two volumes, an executive overview, which outlined major findings and contained proposed goals for automation and robotics applications in relation to the initial space station, and a technical report, which outlined the potential of automation and robotics technologies and would serve a major focus of definition and preliminary design (Phase B) space station contractor efforts. Under an agreement with the Senate Appropriations Committee the previous April, NASA had funded and managed several studies in automation and robotics that had included industry case studies of advanced automation and robotics. From these the committee determined what should be incorporated in space station initial operational capability and what the design should be so that these elements could be incorporated at a later date. The firms and functional areas studied were: General Electric Co., space manufacturing concepts; TRW, satellite servicing; Hughes, subsystem and mission ground support; Boeing, man/machine interface; and Martin Marietta, automation technology for assembly of the facility. Although NASA believed a commitment to the efforts outlined in the committee report would increase space station efficiency and result in significant cost savings, a breakdown of actual costs would not be available until NASA contractors completed the overall plan for implementation of the automation and robotics systems in initial space station studies. The report did recommend that automation and robotics be a key element of the basis space station program and that the initial space station design take into account evolution and growth in robotics. Examples of proposed goals for automation and robotics applications for the initial space station included a mobile remote manipulator with collision avoidance capability and dexterous manipulator systems that could inspect and exchange orbital replaceable units. (A/D, Mar 21/85, 1)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced it was using sophisticated electronic equipment to identify pilots who were illegally using air-traffic control radio frequencies to harass nonstriking United Airlines pilots. The FAA had already initiated enforcement action against the pilots responsible for such incidents near Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and the Seattle-Tacoma Airport. The equipment also identified other flight crew members who had engaged in such harrassment, and additional enforcement actions were likely. The equipment was a tracking device that helped pinpoint the source of otherwise unidentified radio transmissions, of which more than 50, either jamming a radio frequency by pressing a microphone button or verbal abuse over the radio, had occurred since the strike began on May 17. FAA Administrator Donald Engen said he would not tolerate misuse of the air-traffic control frequencies, which could lead to suspension or revocation of a pilot's license and possibly criminal penalties of up to 10 years imprisonment or a fine of $10,000. (FAA Release 24-85)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) was developing a liquid droplet radiator intended to solve the problem of dissipating heat that builds up inside a spacecraft, allowing a livable temperature for astronauts. Heat removal was currently accomplished through a heavy, bulky, rigid metal heat transfer system, which added considerable weight to the spacecraft. The LeRC system would use the surface of a liquid coolant to radiate away excess heat and save as much as 90% of the current hardware weight. The system entailed exposing a moving stream of hot droplets, the diameter of a human hair, directly into space, allowing the heat to radiate from the droplets' surface. In the process, a generator would eject the droplets into a collector where they would rejoin to form a liquid; the system would then recirculate and reuse this coolant. Selection or development of a heat transfer fluid with proper vapor pressure and a sufficiently long life was essential to the project. Also crucial to system feasibility was development of a micromachining capability to produce holes with 0.002-in. diameters for use in the liquid droplet generator. "This is a very advanced concept," Alden Presler, LeRC program manager, said. "The technology we're developing here at Lewis will result in a very lightweight and compact piece of hardware." (NASA Release 85-53)
NASA Administrator James Beggs confirmed this week that NASA cancelled a mission to send an unmanned spacecraft to comet Wild 2, citing budgetary constraints, the Washington Post reported. "However, the comet rendezvous proposal is a very promising candidate for a new start" in FY 88, Beggs said. NASA had expected the mission from FY 87 to 1992 to cost $400 million, which was within the budgetary limits NASA established in 1981 for new planetary missions. The NASA budget the Reagan Administration was drafting eliminated the mission. Delaying a decision on a comet rendezvous by even one year meant the spacecraft could not fly to Wild 2, the favorite candidate of space scientists because it was a bright, fresh comet. Discovered in 1978, the comet would make its third and fourth appearances in 1990 and 1996. In order to rendezvous with the comet when it passed near the earth, NASA in 1986 would have to begin work on the mission to have the spacecraft ready by 1991 for launch from the Space Shuttle. The announcement followed NASA decisions in 1980 and 1981 not to attempt a mission to fly by Halley's Comet. "Once again, the United States is passing up an opportunity to initiate the exploration of the comets, which contain the most unblemished record of the origins of our solar system," the Postquoted Dr. Laurel Wilkening, dean of the graduate school at the University of Arizona and vice chairman of President Reagan's Commission on Space. "The decision is a major setback for the U.S. planetary exploration program," he concluded. Space scientists were also upset because NASA's science advisory groups recommended that a comet rendezvous be the next new misson in planetary exploration [see Astronomy, Oct. 8], Scientists pushed for a mission to Wild 2 because the spacecraft could travel with the comet for 850 days, observing it before its long dust tail formed and obscured the comet's nucleus or damaged the spacecraft. It would have been NASA's most ambitious mission to explore the solar system. The next comet that NASA could approach would be Tempel 2, which would pass by earth in 1998. Such a mission, also costing $400 million, required a NASA decision by the middle of 1986. (W Post, Oct 17/85, A21)
Cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Viktor Savinykh, after completing a docking operation, boarded the Salyut 7 orbital station to discover cold and darkness, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. The electricity supply system had broken down, water was frozen, and a crust of ice covered the instrument panels. It took a week and a half of intensive work by the cosmonauts to eliminate the defects and restore electricity and life support systems. Mission planners sent an automatic cargo ferry that delivered instruments, fuel, water, and food supplies. After restoring the station, the crew continued with planned research. In a report on a Pravda article on the same topic, the Washington Post said the failure of two batteries had paralyzed the Salyut 7 station after the previous three-man crew mothballed the station in October 1984 following a record 238 days in orbit. A NY Times article noted Pravda mentioned the risky docking took 50 hours, during which the cosmonauts had to rely on visual clues instead of the automatic electronic radar pulses exchanged between the Salyut and their Soyuz T-13 spacecraft. "They've snatched it back from the brink of death," the NY Times quoted James Oberg, an American expert on the Soviet space program, saying. "It's a major coup." Later the cosmonauts made a five-hour space walk in which they replaced two of the ship's solar panels. The excursion gave them a chance to test new semirigid space suits, which were shown on Soviet TV. (FBIS Moscow World Service in English, Aug 5/85; W Post, Aug 6/85, A12; NYT, Aug 7/85, D19)
NASA was still evaluating data submitted by four companies in response to its request for responses on the possibility of opening a second source for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motors (SRM), Aerospace Daily reported. Those responding were Hercules, Aerojet Strategic Propulsion, United Technologies' Chemical Systems Division, and Atlantic Research Corp. NASA also had a proposal from Morton Thiokol, the current sole-source producer, and would not make a final decision until later in the month. In April Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, told the House appropriations HUD and independent agencies subcommittee that he expected to "have a review of the assessment sometime in the early part of May" and that in the interim NASA would proceed with the next buy of SRMs from Morton Thiokol. Agency officials expected it would take about four years to qualify a second source and "get them up to speed." NASA Administrator James Beggs would make the final decision on whether to open a second source for SRMs. A NASA official said he thought there was "a good possibility" that Beggs would have the needed information to make "a decision by the end of this month." {A/D, June 6/85, 1)
NASA announced it signed with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Department of Defense (DOD) a memorandum of agreement to conduct a two-year study of the possible benefits to the nation of the continued development of tilt-rotor aircraft. In particular, the study would assess the broader implications of V-22 aircraft development, including the potential for other versions and sizes, both civil and military; civil certification issues; civil production impact on the defense industrial base; and any indirect technology spin-offs. Tilt-rotor aircraft combined the vertical take-off-and-landing ability of the helicopter with the relatively higher cruising speed and longer range of fixed-wing aircraft. A small proof-of-concept aircraft, the XV-15, was tested successfully, leading to a larger tilt-rotor aircraft, the V-22 Osprey, which DOD was developing. DOD expected the V-22 to bring the tilt-rotor configuration closer to maturity, enabling lower risk development of other versions and sizes, for both military and civilian use. The FAA would certify any civil versions of a U.S. tilt-rotor aircraft and would assess its impact on the national airspace system, airport and heliport development, and other air service needs. NASA acquired a high level of expertise in tilt-rotor technology during development and flight testing of the XV-15, and the agency also had a charter to study use of NASA-developed technology and to assess future research needs. (NASA Release 85-144)
Gen. Lawrence Skantze, commander of the Air Force Systems Command, declared that the U.S. military space program was about to begin a new era in which military space systems competed against terrestrial systems to determine which could better handle military situations, Defense Daily reported. Three developments had created the military space program, reaching what Skantze called a "critical mass." These were the establishments of the Unified Space Command that provided for the first time an advocate for U.S. space activities; the Project Forecast II technology study, which would propose among other things "quantum leaps in space capabilities;" and the growing momentum of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). "This 'critical mass,' merging with the proven combat enhancement roles of space systems and a tight defense budget, would thrust the military into a new era of force structure decision," Skantze said. "A limited budget and its allocation process will place space systems in direct competition with terrestrial systems for resources and solutions to military problems," he commented. Space systems would have to demonstrate that the benefits they provided were worth more than the terrestrial force addition that would have to be foregone for the space system, Skantze pointed out. In the past, "space systems have often competed for R&D dollars with terrestrial systems that have traditionally done the same or similar jobs," he explained. "At times we have the luxury of being able to afford both. These times are gone. Given the more sophisticated treat, and the corresponding increased complexity and cost of all aerospace systems, tradeoffs among different mission areas are now essential. "In an era when fielding a single military satellite can cost up to $.5 billion, we need to carefully consider what we are willing to give up to get a space system," he asserted. Regarding the outlook for a shift to space systems, Skantze said that "future tradeoffs of space systems will be tough for several reasons. One is that right now, space systems are fewer in number, more costly, and subject to different logistics concepts than terrestrial systems. While multiyear contracting can reduce cost, we haven't been able to take advantage of economic order quantities the way we have for missiles, bombs, or even planes. Development and production costs for spacecraft will continue to exceed the flyaway cost of a B-1B or F-15—even with on-orbit satellite repair on the horizon. "While the Shuttle offers that possibility," he added, "we still have to build space systems reliable, redundant and survivable. For two to ten years at a time, military spacecraft must survive in-space radiation or combat, regulating their own systems or responding to remote controls. Ultra-high reliability is costly, but we can't yet afford squadron-level maintenance of military satellites on-orbit. For now, we're working on new maintenance concepts and better materials, propellants, and hardening to reduce some of the cost of space systems. However, they will remain expensive military alternatives until we find a new way of doing business." A second reason making tradeoffs between space and terrestrial systems difficult was that "the payoffs are different, and hard to compare," since space systems were "force multipliers," that is, they made weapon systems more capable, Skantze said. And a final reason that made tradeoffs difficult, he said, was "that a decision for a space system can be all or nothing," meaning the number of fighter wings could be pared and still provide an effective force to some extent, "while the Unified Space Command cannot cut back on satellite numbers and still operate an effective system. The investment question can boil down to doing it all or just not doing it," he commented. (D/D, Dec 18/85, 241)
NASA Administrator James Beggs met with planetary science experts to discuss a plan to develop a spacecraft capable of flying in formation with a comet known as Wild-2 and dropping a probe down onto its surface in hopes of bringing back samples, the Washington Times reported. Space scientists said NASA wanted to launch the $400 million mission in the early 1990s. NASA hoped to get about $30 million in start-up money earmarked for the project in the agency's FY 87 budget. The mission would be an important space first, because none of the previous spacecraft launched toward Halley's Comet would fly alongside that comet, launch a probe, or return to earth after rendezvous. (W Times, Aug 2/ 85, 10 A)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that M. Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, and Ing. Heise, executive vice president and president of the Space Systems Group of Messerschmidt/Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno, signed a contract for the development of the European Retrievable Carrier, EURECA, a payload carrier intended for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle. MBB/Erno would serve as EURECA prime contractor with support from some 24 European industrial firms. The approximately $95 million contract called for delivery of the EURECA flight unit to NASA by the end of 1987 for launch from the Space Shuttle in March 1988 and recovery, by the Space Shuttle, six months later. The first EURECA payload, developed by European national institutes and space agencies, would consist primarily of experiments in the microgravity sciences (life and material sciences) and a limited number of experiments in space science and technology. Work on the payload would proceed in parallel with the development of the carrier, and plans called for delivery of all payload elements to MBB/Erno by spring 1987 for integration onboard EURECA before shipment to the U.S. The EURECA payload carrier incorporated the more attractive features of Spacelab and in addition provided for relatively long duration flights (up to eight months), higher power and mass capability for the payload, and lower costs compared with Spacelab and many conventional satellites because the system occupied only about 2.5 m of the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay. ESA also envisioned EURECA's eventual use in association with the proposed U.S. space station, with the EURECA operating either in a free-flying mode (co-orbiting with the space station or in polar orbit) or as a man-tended, semipermanent payload carrier with modified docking facilities. (ESA release July 1/85)
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate confirmed on November 18 Dr. William Graham to be NASA deputy administrator; Graham, who was a founder and executive of R&D Associates, was nominated by President Reagan on September 12. Graham had served for three years as chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament and previously served as a member of the President-elect's transition team. Before founding R&D Associates in 1971, Graham spent six years with the Rand Corp. and before that three years active duty at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory, Kirtland Air Force Base, as a project officer directing a group conducting experimental and theoretical research on strategic system survivability. Graham had been a consultant to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and served on many international and national boards and advisory groups including the National Academy of Science/National Research Council Committee on Undersea Warfare, the Air Force Science Advisory Board Task Force on Manned Strategic System Vulnerability, the U.S.-United Kingdom Joint Working Group on Atomic Weapons, the Defense Nuclear Agency Scientific Advisory Group on Effects, and the Defense Science Board System Vulnerability Task Force and Associated Task Forces. His memberships in professional and honorary organizations included Tau Beta Pi, the American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics, the New York Academy of Science, the Council on Foreign Relations, the board of directors of the Committee on the Present Danger, the Defense Preparedness Association, the Ethics and Public Policy Center, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1959 Graham received a B.S. degree in physics from the California Institute of Technology and in 1961 an M.S. degree in engineering science and in 1963 a Ph.D. in electrical engineering, both from Stanford University. (NASA Release 85-155)
NASA Administrator James Beggs announced that 21 teams submitted proposals to establish centers for the commercial development of space, the objective of which would be to stimulate high-technology research in the microgravity environment of space. NASA expected this research to lead eventually to development of new products that either had commercial potential or would contribute to possible commercial ventures. The research areas proposed by the teams included semiconductor crystal growth, remote sensing, communications technology, and biotechnology. A panel of technical, managerial, and financial experts would review over the next 45 to 60 days the proposals to identify winning proposals. NASA would fund, beginning around mid-September 1985, between three and six of the centers for up to $1 million per year each for a period not to exceed five years. (NASA Release 85-98)
President Reagan's FY 86 budget for NASA sought $7.9 billion-just under what it would take to sustain the agency's programs at current levels, the Washington Post reported. At a press conference [see NASA/ Budget, Feb. 4], NASA Administrator James Beggs had acknowledged the $230-million budget request for the space station was $50 million less than the agency had sought to keep the project on schedule. (W Post, Feb 6/85, A17)
In a speech today before the National Space Club, President Reagan urged a greater U.S. effort in the commercial development of space and announced establishment of a 14-member National Space Commission, which he said would "devise an aggressive space agenda to carry America into the 21 st century," the NY Times reported. He said Thomas Paine, head of a consulting company on high-technology enterprises and former NASA administrator and president and chief operating office of the Northrup Corp., would lead the commission. Other commission members were Laurel Wilkening, NASA scientist who would be vice chairman; Jeanne Kirkpatrick, former U.S. ambassador to the U.N.; Brig. Gen. Charles Yeager, retired; Neil Armstrong, former astronaut who headed Computer Technology Aviation; Kathryn Sullivan, first American woman to walk in space; Luis Alvarez, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory physicist; Paul Coleman, Space Research Association president and professor of geophysics and space at the University of California, Los Angeles; George Field, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory senior physicist; Lt. Gen. William Fitch, retired, former Marine Corp. deputy chief of staff for aviation; Charles Herzfeld, vice president and director of research and technology at ITT; J. L. Kerrebrock, head of the department of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Gerard O'Neill, president of Geostar Corp.; and David Wfebb, a consultant for space development. President Reagan said the commission would develop long-term goals for civilian space enterprises, but he did not elaborate on the type of commercial space ventures he had in mind. He said only that, "Before the end of the century, many billions of dollars of commercial activity will be taking place in and because of space" and that the U.S. must use the incentives of individual freedom and the profit motive to encourage these commercial uses. (NYT, Mar 30/85, 1 A)
NASA announced that live classroom lessons and scientific demonstrations, which would be broadcast live around the country, would be filmed for use in educational products which were just some of the activities planned by Christa McAuliffe, the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Project, for Space Shuttle mission 51—L. The first live lesson, entitled "The Ultimate Field Trip," would allow students to compare daily life on the Space Shuttle with that on earth. McAuliffe would take viewers on a tour of the orbiter, explaining crew members' roles, showing the location of computers and controls, and explaining experiments being conducted on the mission. She would also demonstrate how daily life in space was different from that on earth in the preparation of food, movement, exercise, personal hygiene, sleep, and the use of leisure time. The second lesson, called "Where We've Been, Where We're Going," would help the audience understand why people use and explore space by demonstrating the advantages of manufacturing in the microgravity environment, explaining technological advances that evolved from the space program, and projecting the future of humans in space. Also during the flight, McAuliffe would participate in activities that would be filmed and later used in educational products. Possible activities included demonstrating earth magnetism by photographing and observing the lines of magnetic force in three dimensions in a microgravity environment; demonstrating Newton's first, second, and third laws in a microgravity environment; discussing why products might or might not effervesce in a microgravity environment; encouraging creative works from students that reflected their interpretation of the space program/experience; explaining the use of simple machines/tools and the similarities and differences between their uses in space and on earth; showing the effect of microgravity on plant growth, growth of plants without soil (hydroponics), and capillary action; and demonstrating chromatographic separation of pigments in a microgravity environment. In addition, McAuliffe would assist mission specialists conducting three Shuttle Student Involvement Project experiments that would fly onboard the Space Shuttle. The experiments dealt with using a semipermeable membrane to direct crystal growth, studying chicken embryo development in space, and the effect of weightlessness on grain formation and strength in metals. (NASA Release 85-139)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced the Wallops Flight Facility would celebrate its 40th anniversary on June 29. The events planned were in recognition of the scientific and technological achievements at Wallops, which had conducted rocketborne experiments since July 4, 1945, when researchers first launched a 17-foot Tiamat. Since that original flight, Wallops had launched approximately 13,000 rocket-propelled research vehicles and conducted thousands of aeronautical and aircraft tests to obtain information on aircraft and spacecraft flight characteristics and to increase knowledge of the upper atmosphere and the nearspace environment. This research led to major contributions to the U.S.'s aeronautical and space programs. The breakthroughs to supersonic flight by aircraft and to hypersonic flight by rocket systems were largely attributed to fundamental aerodynamic research conducted at Wallops by means of aerodynamic models propelled by multiple-stage rocket systems. Using sounding rockets Wallops personnel developed the technologies for measuring atmospheric structure and the space environment, such as temperature, pressure and density, micrometeorite densities, electric fields, energetic particles, and radiation levels. These measurements formed the basis for developing design criteria for scientific satellites and manned spacecraft. Wallops's researchers also pursued technology development for the manned space program, such as manned capsule-escape techniques and maximum dynamic pressure tests for the Mercury Program. Most recently Wallops was known as a center for the NASA suborbital program. Sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft conducted space science and aeronautical research missions. The island obtained its name from John Wallops, appointed deputy surveyor of Virginia in the 17th century by Col. Edmund Scarburgh. Wallops received a Crown Patent to the island in 1672. At present, the facility, in addition to the island, included the mainland area in back of the island and the main base (formerly the Chincoteague Naval Air Station) about seven miles northwest. In addition to an open house, the day's anniversary events would include an Air Force F—15 aerial demonstration and demonstrations in crash/fire/ rescue, space sciences, model rocketry, and radio controlled model airplanes. (GSFC Release 85-16) Office of Inspector General
Members of the U.S. House Science and Technology space science and applications subcommittee questioned Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, office of space flight, on the agency's decision not to request funding for a 5th orbiter in its FY 86 budget, Aerospace Daily reported. Moore restated the agency's position that a four-orbiter fleet was adequate to meet traffic demand for the next five years or so, pointing out a recent decline in commercial and military traffic. NASA had requested $2.1 billion for 14 FY 86 Space Shuttle flights; Moore said NASA planned 17 missions in FY 87, 19 in FY 88, and projected 24 per year after that. Subcommittee chairman Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who had indicated strong support for a fifth orbiter, questioned Moore on the likelihood of increased launch traffic demand, potential schedule impacts of an accident, and the possibility of stretching out orbiter fabrication over a seven-to-eight-year period. Moore responded that NASA's program included adequate funding for structural spares procurement and maintenance of a viable base for initiating orbiter production over the next several years, pointing out that any funds for orbiter construction over a seven-to-eight-year period would be an add-on to NASA's runout budget and could be in competition with other items. He had also remarked on increasingly pessimistic market projections, even considering upcoming yearly launches of 18 to 20 communications satellites. Earlier, NASA Administrator James Beggs, in response to questions on NASA's exploring possibilities of private-sector purchase of a 5th orbiter, had said that no Space Shuttle privitization proposals submitted to NASA would result in a cost savings to the government. (A/D, Feb 22/85, 1)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51 —J landed just after 10 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, ending a four-day flight operated under secrecy rules imposed by the Department of Defense (DOD), the Washington Post reported. "Of course, I can't say anything about our mission," said flight commander Karol Bobko, an Air Force colonel and one of five military men on the mission, "but I can say Atlantis performed superbly its first time in space. I've flown Challenger, Atlantis, and Discovery now, and I think that NASA really has quite a fleet of orbiters and that we have a great national asset here," he added. NASA ground operations manager Fritz Widick said Atlantis was in "excellent condition" at the end of the 1.7 million-mile flight, although engineers were inspecting an underside area of the left wing to see if tile-insulation damage might have exposed its aluminum mainframe to reentry heat. Such heat might have discolored a region along the portside engine pod under the Space Shuttle's tail. Widick said Atlantis's brakes came through the 190 mph landing on the lake-bed with only "minor damage" to one of four brake assemblies on the main landing gear. Bobko appeared to apply minimum braking after landing into a stiff headwind that brought Atlantis to a stop on the center line halfway down the 15,000-foot desert runway. Fewer than a dozen reporters and about two dozen NASA employees were present for the landing, an event that usually drew hundreds of spectators, the NY Times reported. The military gave just 24 hours notice of when the mission would end and had barred members of the public from watching. (W Post, Oct 8/85, A3; NYT, Oct 8/85, C3) Air Force Maj. Ronald Rand said the Department of Defense (DOD) approved dissemination of information about the payload because it was experimental and not designed to carry out an operational mission. He said there were two payloads: an assembly of six space physics experiments that would remain in the Space Shuttle's open cargo bay and an experimental airplanedetecting experiment. "In light of the mounting Congressional and public interest in this historic first manned polar orbit and first west coast shuttle mission, we've made an exception to our policy with the understanding that we'll continue to protect performance data and results of these two experiments," Rand said. "This doesn't mean we've changed our policy of classifying DOD payloads." Flying aboard Discovery, which was scheduled for launch March 20, 1986, would be Comdr. Robert Crippen of the Navy; pilot Guy Gardner; astronauts Jerry Ross, Dale Gardner, and Richard Mullane; Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward Aldridge; Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson; and a DOD specialist to tend the cargo. (NYT, Oct 11/85, A6)
Vice President George Bush announced that Sharon Christa McAuliffe would be the teacher to go into space in January 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. McAuliffe, a social studies teacher at Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire, was the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Program that was announced by President Reagan in August 1984. Her backup was Barbara Morgan of McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho. McAuliffe proposed that, while in space, she would gather information for a personal journal, "just as the pioneer travelers of the Conestoga wagon days kept personal journals. My journal would be a trilogy. I would like to begin it at the point of selection through the training program. The second part would cover the actual flight. Part three would cover my thoughts and reactions after my return," McAuliffe said. Vice President Bush, in his announcement of the selection at a White House ceremony in the Roosevelt Room, where McAuliffe was accompanied by the other nine finalists selected from among 11,416 applicants, said, "We're here today to announce the first private citizen passenger in the history of spaceflight . . . We're honoring all [the teacher applicants] today, and we're doing something else because the finalists here with me and the more than a hundred semifinalists will all in the months ahead serve as a link between NASA and the nation's school system." McAuliffe, a teacher of 15 years and the mother of two children, would work a year for NASA. She and Morgan would report in September to Johnson Space Center for 114 hours of training over four months. The Washington Post reported that a top NASA official said McAuliffe was an early favorite of the 20-member selection panel. The official said "the judges thought McAuliffe appeared to be a good team player and—vital to her image-making duties—stood out as a good communicator," the Post reported. (NASA Release 85-107; Admin of Ronald Reagan, July 19/85, 913; W Post, July 22/85, A1)
NASA announced selection of 150 research proposals from small business high-technology firms under a program established by the Small Business Innovation Development Act of 1982 (PL 97-219) to stimulate technological innovation in the private sector, strengthen the role of small businesses in meeting NASA's research and development needs, and contribute to the growth and strength of the nation's economy. NASA selected proposals on the basis of their technical merit from the 1,164 submitted and expected to award contracts in four to eight weeks. Contractors funded under the program would conduct work in two phases: first, a six-month fixed-price effort to explore the feasibility of the small business-proposed innovations and, if the results warranted, a second phase effort of up to two years in duration to proceed further with the technological innovation. Commercial firms or government agency programs would fund any work beyond the second phase. The selections resulted from NASA'S third solicitation for Phase I proposals in areas of research and development of interest to the agency. NASA's FY 85 budget included approximately $7.5 million for Phase I, managed by the Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release 85136)
NASA announced that Gerald Griffin, director of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), would leave the agency January 14, 1986, to become president of the Houston Chamber of Commerce. Robert Goetz, deputy director of JSC, would become acting director upon Griffin's departure. Griffin had been JSC's director since August 1982 and had served with NASA for more than 20 years in a number of key positions at three NASA centers and in Washington, D.C. Griffin served in the U.S. Air Force and worked in the aerospace industry before joining NASA in 1964. "It was a tough decision to leave NASA," Griffin said, but "I'll depart with the comfort that the NASA team of government, industry, and university people will continue their outstanding job in space activities for this country." William Graham, acting NASA administrator, said, "As one of NASA's key senior executives, Gerry has had a long distinguished career. He has received many honors and awards in recognition of the contributions he has made both to aeronautics and space. We shall all miss him very much and wish him great success as he moves on to new accomplishments." (NASA Release 85-172) Kennedy Space Center
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power said the USSR was continuing in 1984 deployment of new nuclear and conventional military weapons systems, including test firings of fifth-generation ICBMs, launchings of new classes of submarines, and installing new strategic bombers, the Washington Times reported. The book detailed several significant developments by the Soviet military, the article said, including continued test firings of the SS-24 and SS-25 intercontinental ballistic missiles, launch of two units of new Delta IV-class of strategic ballistic missile submarines to be fitted with the SS-NX-23 submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) then being flight tested, and completion of sea trials of a third 25,000-ton Typhoon-class strategic ballistic missile submarine to join the two Typhoon units already operational and fitted with 20 SS-N-20 SLBMs. The book also said the Soviets had developed a heavy-lift launch vehicle capable of putting 150-ton payloads into orbit as part of an "extremely high priority" military-related space program. The Soviet version of the U.S. Space Shuttle and manned Space Station would benefit from this heavy booster. Major emphasis in their space program was on long-duration manned missions for military research. The USSR continued research on ground- and space-based, antisatellite high-energy lasers. "The Soviets currently have the world's only deployed antisatellite weapons system that can attack satellites in near-earth orbit," the book said. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	385 L„lfllENTIQNAll.y 8LANK The Soviets also continued upgrading detection and tracking systems for ballistic missile defense and development of new early-warning and air-surveillance radars. Their work on a new, large phased-array radar at Krasnoyarsk violated the ABM treaty, the book stated, and "in addition, the Soviets are actively engaged in extensive research on advanced defenses against ballistic missiles." {W Times, Apr 1/85, 1A)
ESA announced it signed three contracts with Arianespace, two for future launches—ECS-4 scheduled for the second quarter of 1986 and Hipparcos scheduled for June 1988—and one for technical assistance for satellite launches on the first flight of Ariane 4. ECS—4 would replace ECS-3, lost as a result of the launch failure September 12 of Ariane V15. ECS-4 was in production at that time, and ESA accelerated its completion. Arianespace was providing the earliest possible launch slot in accordance with the relaunch conditions in the ECS-3 launch contract. Hipparcos would provide measurements of the positions, annual proper motions, and parallaxes of some 100,000 stars. From its position in geostationary orbit, the satellite systematically and repeatedly throughout its two-and-a-half-year lifetime would scan the whole sky, providing measurements that would serve as a reference system of unprecedented precision, important in studies of earth's motion, the solar system, and our galaxy, and forming a basis for future ground and space astrometry. Under the third contract, the first flight of Ariane 4, part of ESA's Ariane 4 development program, would be carried out under ESA's responsibility. The launch, scheduled to take place during the third quarter of 1986, was designed to demonstrate the operational capability of Europe's most powerful launcher. ESA was supplying part of the payload, Meteosat P2, a refurbished spacecraft from the preoperational series, designed to bridge a possible gap between Meteosat 2 and the first of the operational meteorological spacecraft, MOP-1, scheduled for launch in late 1987. Additional payload elements would be Amsat Phase lll-C, the second unit of the third generation of the amateur radio "Oscar" series, and a telecommunications satellite yet to be selected. (ESA release Dec 10/85) FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
NASA announced today that an American journalist would fly on a Space Shuttle mission in late 1986 as the second in a series of communicators to be selected as part of the agency's Space Flight Participant Program. The first candidate selected under this program was Christa McAuliffe, a classroom teacher scheduled to fly in January 1986. In today's announcement NASA said it would select the journalist, like the teacher candidate, after a nationwide competition conducted by professionals representing a broad spectrum of individuals in the candidates' field. The competition would be limited to full-time working media representatives (U.S. citizens) with five or more years' experience covering or commenting on the news for U.S.-based audio, video, or print media. Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly and effectively to mass audiences in both broadcast and print media would be the basis for evaluation of applications, although it was not necessary for the candidate to have worked professionally in both. The selection process would first require identification of eight candidates from each of five regions in the U.S.; from the 40 regional nominees, a National Selection Panel would recommend five for final consideration by the NASA Space Flight Participant Evaluation Committee composed of seven senior NASA officials. The five semifinalists would undergo medical examinations and receive briefings on the spaceflight experience at the Johnson Space Center. Based on results of the physicals and subsequent interviews, the evaluation committee would recommend a primary and backup candidate to the NASA Administrator who would approve the final selection. The Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communication in cooperation with the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication and a Journalism Advisory Committee comprised of representatives from 16 professional journalism organizations including the American Newspaper Publishers Association, Radio Television News Directors Association, American Society of Newspaper Editors, National Association of Broadcasters, Society of Professional Journalists/Sigma Delta Chi, and the National Newspaper Association would administer the competition. (NASA Release 85-147)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pioneered the concept of a satellite system for mobile users and, because a U.S. mobile satellite industry was emerging, was turning its attention to developing technologies critical for future systems, the JPL Universe reported. Similar to cellular phones popular in urban areas, the mobile satellite system (MSS) would provide voice and data communications for the entire North American continent, employing one or two satellites in geosynchronous orbit to relay communications instead of depending on ground-based, line-of-sight relay towers that celluar phones used. There were four categories of MSS users: people who needed uninterrupted communications while they traveled over wide geographical areas, for example interstate truckers; those responding to unpredictable events such as medical emergencies or natural disasters; people working at planned but temporary installations such as oil or gas drilling facilities, mining camps, or archeological excavations; and those in very remote areas. The new technologies JPL was developing included mechanically steerable low-profile and electronically steerable medium-gain vehicle antennas, digital speech compression, digital modems, and multiple-access techniques for integrated voice and data. NASA was working with industry and, through a joint endeavor agreement, would exchange a Space Shuttle deployment for 15% of the channel capacity for two years to test the system. “But first," said Dr. Firouz Naderi, JPL's mobile satellite experiment project manager, "we must further develop the technology and try to squeeze as many channels as we can from a very narrow frequency allocation. That is the biggest obstacle we face." Also, JPL must design sophisticated multi-beam antennas that service "spot areas" and create techniques so frequencies could be reused to provide the most efficient use of the limited spectrum. Recently JPL sponsored a two-day briefing on the state of the industry. Attending were more than 250 representatives of 120 organizations including the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which would regulate the MSS; 11 of 12 candidate companies that petitioned the FCC for the right to operate the system; communications equipment manufacturers such as General Electric, Harris, and Motorola; Canadian government and industry representatives; banking officials; and potential users of the system. At the briefing, the FCC said it hoped by the middle of 1986 to assign a frequency to the mobile satellite industry as well as license an operator to be in charge of the system. NASA scheduled for launch in 1990 the first generation satellite with a 5 to 7 m antenna. During the program's second phase, NASA would launch from the Space Shuttle a 20m (65 ft.) antenna. NASA then planned for the program's final phase to construct on the proposed space station a 50m (180 ft.) antenna for deployment into geosynchronous orbit. (JPL Universe, Nov 29/ 85, 1) During November. Quoting from the Congressional Record, NASA reported remarks of Rep. Don Fuqua, (D-Fla.) chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, who introduced the Federal Science and Technology Revitalization Act of 1985. The act ". . . would establish an alternative personnel management system for scientific and technical people in the federal government," Fuqua said. "This is something I have been interested in for a long time, and I am hopeful that the proposal I am introducing will be able to help improve the quality of government-operated federal laboratories by encouraging the recruiting and retention of highly qualified scientific and technical individuals." Major provisions of the bill would permit agencies to include scientific and technical personnel in the new personnel management systems; simplify job evaluation and remove covered positions from the classification requirements of 5 U.S.C., Chapter 51; provide flexibility to develop a salary structure that ensured a competitive position in the labor market and that reflected the hiring and pay policies needed to attract, retain, and motivate a highly qualified scientific and technical work force; increase base pay on performance, not longevity; allow waiver of the pay cap for up to 5% of specially qualified scientific and technical personnel; provide for performance and special awards and remove the pay cap for lump-sum awards; and create a senior scientific and technical personnel service. In May 1983 the Federal Laboratory Review Panel of the White House Science Council chaired by David Packard reported that federal laboratories had several serious deficiencies and, consequently, a number of them did not meet the quality and productivity standards that might be expected, Fuqua explained. The panel reported that salaries at federal laboratories were noncompetitive with the private sector at entry and senior levels and that federal laboratories had to deal with a personnel management system that was cumbersome and had little flexibility. As a result, there existed what the panel referred to as an alarming "inability of many federal laboratories—especially those under civil service constraints—to attract, retain, and motivate qualified scientists and engineers." The panel concluded that administrative and legislative actions should be initiated to create, at government-operated laboratories, a scientific-technical personnel system that was independent of current civil service personnel systems, Fuqua continued. This "bill is the legislative attempt to deal with these very real problems," Fuqua said. "My own experience ... is that the requirements for NASA and Department of Agriculture labs may be very different, but attracting and retaining quality personnel is absolutely essential for the space program and for emerging fields in agriculture." (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 9)
NASA announced that John O'Brien, currently NASA deputy general counsel, was appointed effective August 4 NASA general counsel, succeeding S. Neil Hosenball who was retiring. O'Brien began his career in 1962 with NASA at the Launch Operations Center, later Kennedy Space Center (KSC), during the Mercury Program. He then served as chief counsel of the KSC and assistant general counsel for procurement matters at NASA Headquarters. He received an A.B. degree from Niagara University and his J.D. degree from Georgetown University. After joining NASA, O'Brien was designated a Princeton Fellow in Public Affairs at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, and in 1976 received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal. (NASA Release 85-108)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced today the 10 finalists in the NASA Teacher in Space Project. The finalists would travel July 7 to Johnson Space Center for medical examinations and initial spaceflight suitability testing. The NASA Spaceflight Participant Committee would then interview the teachers in Washington, D.C., submitting results of the examinations and interviews to NASA Administrator James Beggs who would select the primary and backup candidate. NASA had tentatively scheduled the teacher for a January 1986 Space Shuttle flight. Finalists were Kathleen Beres, Kenwood High School, Baltimore, Maryland; Robert Foerster, Cumberland Elementary School, West Lafayette, Indiana; Judith Garcia, Thomas Jefferson School for Science and Technology, Alexandria, Virginia; Peggy Lathlaen, Westwood Elementary School, Friendswood, Texas; David Marquart, Boise High School, Boise, Idaho; Sharon Christa McAuliffe, Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire; Michael Metcalf, Hazen Union School, Hardwick, Vermont; Richard Methia, New Bedford High School, New Bedford, Massachusetts; Barbara Morgan, McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho; and Niki Wenger, Ven-dervender Junior High School, Parkersburg, West Virginia. (NASA Release 85-99)
NASA announced that Thomas DeCair was appointed effective July 3 associate administrator for external relations. In this position, DeCair would be responsible for policy level management, direction, and coordination of the agency's relationships with public and private organizations both domestic and international. This included the news media, other federal agencies, state and local governments, industry, and private individuals. He would also serve as the principal advisor to the NASA administrator and other senior officials on matters pertaining to NASA's external relations activities. DeCair came to NASA from the U.S. Department of Justice where he served since February 1981 as director of public affairs and special assistant to the Attorney General. DeCair was staff assistant in the White House Press Office and then assistant press secretary to Presidents Nixon and Ford after he graduated from Hope College, Holland, Michigan, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa as a junior and received his B.A. degree magna cum laude. (NASA Release 85-102) Review Boards
Already far ahead of their work schedule, astronauts aboard Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 began preparing tools they would use in an attempt to revive the U.S. Navy Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Mission planners had hoped the satellite repairs could be made during an August 30 spacewalk, but they added another spacewalk for August 31 because ground tests showed that the Space Shuttle crippled robot arm could not work fast enough to complete the repair job in one day. "It appears we are faced with a two-EVA (extravehicular activity) plan," flight director Bill Reeves said. He blamed a failed circuit that prevented Discovery's robot arm from operating in an automatic mode. Reeves noted that ground tests showed that the robot arm, when operated manually, would need about 75% more time to maneuver the Syncom 3 satellite and that it would take two 6-and-a-half hour spacewalks to complete the repair. Mission specialists Dr. James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher spent about four hours August 28 checking out electronic gear they would use to repair the satellite. Mission specialist John Lounge would work the robot arm from inside the cockpit, while van Hoften and Fisher worked outside on the satellite. The robot arm would play a crucial role, holding van Hoften in place while he worked on the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay. Lounge would also use the robot arm to help van Hoften turn the satellite so Fisher, standing in foot restraints inside the bay, could remove a panel and disengage a timing lever, then plug two electrical cables into the panel and, in effect, jump start the satellite. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A3)
NASA announced that Acting Administrator William Graham confirmed the appointment for an indefinite period of Philip Culbertson, associate administrator for space station, to the position of NASA general manager. In that capacity he would assist Graham and have specific responsibility for the Offices of Space Science and Applications, Commercial Programs, Space Flight, Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space Station, and Space Tracking and Data Systems. Culbertson had held his current position since August 1, 1984, coinciding with the establishment of the Office of Space Station. Since November 1981 he had been associate deputy administrator, serving as senior staff advisor to the administrator and the deputy administrator and directing the formulation of policy, strategy, and planning for the space station. From 1979 to 1981 he served as assistant for the Space Transportation System (STS), providing continuous assessment of STS development, acquisition, and operations status and otherwise advising the administrator and deputy administrator on STS matters requiring policy decisions. His earlier NASA assignments included the positions of deputy associate administrator for STS/technical, assistant administrator for planning and program integration, director of advanced manned missions, and manager of the institutional assessment conducted in 1977. He also served as the NASA representative in the 1979 antisatellite treaty negotiations and in 1976 and 1977 was detailed to the Executive Office for a five-month period as Executive Director of the President's Committee on Science and Technology. Culbertson received a B.S. in aeronautical engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology and served as a commissioned officer in the U.S. Navy, after which he spent four years as a research associate at the University of Michigan, where he received his M.S. degree in aeronautical engineering. (NASA anno., Dec 6/85)
Brig. Gen. Donald Kutyna, director of Air Force space systems and C\ told the Senate Armed Services Committee the previous week that two-thirds of the FY 86 space budget was earmarked for the military, Defense Daily reported. The Air Force would receive about 48% of the national space budget, NASA 33%, and other Defense Department activities (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency [DARPA], Navy, and Army) the remaining 18%. Kutyna added that Air Force space activities represented about three-quarters of the total Defense Department space program, with the Defense agencies, mainly DARPA, coming in second. He noted the Air Force budget for FY 86 was $10.95 billion, with "no change percentage-wise" from FY 85 and "very little change among the elements." Maj. Gen. Carl Beer, deputy chief of staff for plans for the Air Force Space Command, reported to the same committee approval of the Air Force space plan, which was divided into support and operational missions, including the launch, orbit transfer, and on-orbit control of spacecraft and payloads, and the operations necessary "to secure free passage in space and deny the enemy the use of space" when necessary. Beer confirmed that the requirement for a space-based radar system was established for the Air Force and Navy and the two would meet in the near future to get an R&D program underway. (D/D, Mar 25/85, 129)
NASA announced selection of 13 new astronaut candidates, six pilots and seven mission specialists, who would report to the Johnson Space Center in late summer to begin a one-year period of training and evaluation. Upon successful completion of the training, they would be eligible for assignment to Space Shuttle flights. The candidates would join 90 current astronauts. Including the new group, NASA had named 157 astronauts since the beginning of the program. In making the latest selections, NASA considered 33 civilians from the selection rosters developed during the 1984 selection process and 133 nominees from the military services. Those selected as pilot candidates were LCdr. Michael Baker (USN), Maj. Robert Caban (USMC), Capt. Brian Duffy (USAF), Stephen Oswald (civilian), and LCdr. Stephen Thorne (USN). Mission specialist candidates were Jerome Apt (PhD—civilian), Capt. Charles Gemar (US Army), Linda Godwin (PhD— civilian), Richard Hieb (civilian), Tamara Gernigan (civilian), Capt. Carl Meade (USAF), and Lt. Pierre Thuot (USN). (NASA Release 85-84)
NASA launched at 12:02 p.m. EDT today from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger mission 51 —B carrying seven astronauts, Spacelab 3, 24 rats, and two squirrel monkeys for the most intensive science mission to date, the Washington Post reported. Launched 17 days after Discovery left the same launch pad, the Challenger flight bested the previous "turnaround" record of 34 days. Challenger carried the oldest crew ever to fly in space. Marine Col. Robert Overmyer, commander, was 49; Frederick Gregory, pilot, and Taylor Wang, payload specialist, were 44; Don Lind, mission specialist, was 54; Lodewijk van den Berg, payload specialist, was 53; William Thornton, mission specialist, was 55; and Norman Thagard, mission specialist, 41. The crew called the flight one by scientists for science. "This mission marks the first time that scientists who designed their own experiments will be executing those experiments in space," said Lind, who had been waiting 16 years for the flight. The five scientists would work in around-the-clock shifts on the 15 experiments inside the European-built Spacelab. Before liftoff NASA decided not to have the crew launch two Get-Away Special satellites, one a student experiment and the other a Pentago payload, because a nine-volt battery had failed on the last Space Shuttle flight. Ground tests showed that three other batteries from the same batch failed after 18 hours in vacuum. The satellites would return to the ground with the Space Shuttle. The crew successfully deployed a satellite intended to calibrate air traffic control radars on the ground, but encountered difficulties when trying to deploy a U.S. Navy satellite that would locate drifting weather buoys. The satellite would not move from the cargo bay despite repeated signals to trigger deployment. Later the crew discovered they had no fresh water from their galley faucet and had to bypass the faucet and reconnect themselves to their water supply using an all-purpose hose carried for such emergencies. Other problems ranged from an overheated hydraulic system power unit to a urine collection device that one crew member said sprayed water "all over the place." The monkeys and rats appeared to be doing well. Four of the rats had surgical implants in their hearts to record changes in heartbeat and blood flow. The others were testing cages and equipment for future animal experiments. The monkeys were on a shakedown flight to determine how they tolerated living in orbit. If they didn't get nervous or frightened in space, later flights would carry squirrel monkeys with surgical implants to test for space sickness and heart changes. (W Post, Apr 28/85, A18, Apr 29/85, A3, Apr 30/ 85, A7)
The Congressional Record reported the remarks of Cong. Frank Annunzio (D-lll.) during a U.S. House session on May 22. ". . . Today I am introducing legislation to strike medals in commemoration of the Young Astronaut Program. The medals would be sold by the Young Astronaut Council to raise money to help fund the program. ". . . The Young Astronaut Program is designed to use the excitement of the United States space program to increase student interest and skills in math and science through a comprehensive program in elementary and junior high schools. ". . . This September, the council will launch its 'Decade of Discovery.' Already more than 20,000 schools have responded to the program. The council estimates every elementary and junior high school in the nation will be signed up for the program by the beginning of the next school year. ". . . To assist the council, and commemorate the'Decade of Discovery,' the Young Astronaut Program Medal Act will authorize the United States Mint to strike up to 750,000 gold, silver, and bronze medals for the council to sell to raise money for this exciting educational endeavor. The council will pay the mint the cost of manufacture plus a 10 percent surcharge. "... I urge my colleagues to join with me in cosponsoring this worthwhile legislation." (CR-House, May 22/85, H3585)
NASA announced it had selected six industry teams for negotiations leading to 21-month fixed-price contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements for a permanently manned space station. Four NASA centers previously did this work. The responsible centers and the industry teams selected for negotiations were: Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) with Boeing Aerospace Co., Seattle, and Martin Marietta Aerospace, Denver; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) with RCA Astro Electronics, Princeton, New Jersey, and General Electric Co., Space Systems Division, Philadelphia; and Lewis Research Center (LeRC) with Rockwell Internatl., Rocketdyne Division, Canoga Park, California, and TRW Federal Systems Division, Redondo Beach, Calif. In addition, NASA would negotiate with Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Sunnyvale, California; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, California; and Rockwell Internatl., Space Station Systems Division, Downey California, the proposers for work to be performed under the management of Johnson Space Center (JSC). Negotiators would present a report to the NASA Administrator who would then award one or more contracts. Although negotiations would determine values of the contracts, the September 14, 1984, Request for Proposal (RFP) indicated that the approximate value of contracts could be $24 million at MSFC, $27 million at JSC, $10 million at GSFC, and $6 million at LeRC. In addition to Phase B work, NASA required the contractors to study how those elements of the space station would change depending on whether the station was man-tended rather than permanently manned and to pay particular attention to the recommendations of the NASA advanced technology advisory committee that was identifying automation and robotic technologies that could be used in the space station. Following completion of the contracts, NASA planned to move into final design and development (Phase C/D) of the space station. A major objective of the space station program was to involve international partners as builders, users, and operators of the space station. The European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan had indicated interest in participating. They would provide their own funding and award definition and preliminary design contracts in coordination with NASA activities. NASA, through JSC management, would retain responsibility for overall program definition and for systems engineering and integration throughout the program. (NASA Release 85-38)
As five military officers on the Space Shuttle Atlantis orbited earth on the secret 51 —J mission, a debate was growing in the U.S. over how much secrecy was necessary in the civilian-run space program and what the military's role in it should be, the NY Times reported. Proponents of an expanded role for the Defense Department (DOD) said the U.S. needed to counter a growing Soviet threat in space. They pointed out that the USSR launched four to five times as many spacecraft a year as the U.S., with the majority of missions devoted to military objectives, and that Soviet military officers had logged years in space, while the U.S. military had logged days. Critics of an expanded DOD role said the U.S. already had an advantage in military space technology. They said U.S. systems worked better and lasted longer, pointing out the USSR was still trying to perfect a vehicle similar to the Space Shuttle. The critics also argued that the U.S. military's assertions about the Soviet Union were often veiled excuses to try to edge civilians out of the astronaut corps and to classify the most mundane Space Shuttle payloads. This goal of secrecy, they said, was not heightened security but was intended to protect DOD's plans and programs from public scrutiny. The debate was likely to become more vocal, the Times said, as the military expanded its manned space activity when secret military missions would account for 25 to 30% of all Space Shuttle flights in the next decade. Carl Sagan, professor of astronomy and space sciences at Cornell University, said there was a "fundamental tension" between open scientific inquiry and "the necessarily closed world of military activities ... As military programs expand," he said, "there's a huge deflection of resources, financial and intellectual, from peaceful uses into the production of weapons." Daniel Graham, a retired Army lieutenant general who formerly headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, disagreed, saying the military had been at the forefront of U.S. space exploration since its earliest days. "The myth since the Eisenhower Administration is that there's a distinction between military and civilian matters in space," he said. "That's a pretense that a lot of people in NASA would like to believe, that all their activities are sweetness and light," he insisted. However, even military proponents saw emerging tensions in the manned space program, the Times reported. William Gregory, editor of Aviation Week & Technology said in an editorial, "The original legislation creating [NASA] specified a civilian space program, separate from the military . . . That line is being crossed now not so much as a formal policy change as out of simple economic necessity. The shuttle needs the military as a customer to spread the system's overhead costs." Some critics feared that NASA's charter for free and open dissemination of scientific information was eroding as the military's role grew. Scientists ineffectually protested last year when NASA announced that its Defense Department Affairs Division would review and possibly censor images from a large camera and radar carried on a civilian Space Shuttle mission. "There's a real question of how the decision was made to move the space agency from being open to substantially closed," the Times quoted Morton Halperin, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What's at stake is the public's right to participate in the process of making government policy." (NY Times, Oct 6/85, A1)
NASA Administrator James Beggs told Congress that the new version of the Centaur rocket designed for Space Shuttle-launched planetary missions would cost about $110 million more ($90 million for NASA; $20 million for the Air Force) than expected [see NASA/Budget, Feb. 28], the Washington Post reported. Wider and shorter than the old-model Centaur to fit in the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, the new rocket would launch in 1986 two spacecraft toward Jupiter. An even shorter version starting in 1987 would launch from the Space Shuttle two classified missions for the Air Force. Beggs told the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications that "We underestimated the job of integrating the Centaur into the shuttle and General Dynamics underestimated the cost of changing the configuration of the rocket." The new estimates raised Centaur program costs from $755 million to $865 million. (W Post, May 24/85, A16)
President Reagan announced today his intention to nominate William Graham to be NASA deputy administrator to succeed Hans Michael Mark, the Administration of Ronald Reagan reported. Graham, with R&D Associates since 1971, had served there as director of computing operations, division manager, corporate program manager, and most recently senior associate. Before joining R&D Associates, he was a member of the technical staff, physics department, at the Rand Corp.; project officer of the Air Force Weapons Laboratory; and a member of the technical staff of the Hughes Aircraft Corp. research laboratory. Since 1982, Graham had served as acting chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. He had also been a member of the Defense Nuclear Agency Scientific Advisory Group on Effects, a consultant to the Defense Nuclear Agency, and consultant to the Office of the Secretary of Defense. Graham received his B.S. degree from the California Institute of Technology and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Stanford University. (Admin, of Ronald Reagan, Sept 13/85, 1073)
The Coca-Cola Co. had developed the first container capable of dispensing carbonated beverages in weightlessness, and NASA officials said Coca-Cola could be aboard Space Shuttle flights as early as July, the Washington Post reported. Coca-Cola President Donald Keough said that including carbonated soft drinks on a Space Shuttle flight reflected NASA's interest in providing home-like comforts for the astronauts. Because liquids did not pour in weightlessness, astronauts had to sip drinks from straws inserted into plastic containers that collapsed as they were emptied. However, gas in carbonated drinks expanded in weightlessness and low atmospheric pressure and therefore could escape from plastic containers. A company spokesman said Coca-Cola had solved the problem with a steel supercan equipped with a drinking spout, a screw to adjust beverage flow, and a safety lock to prevent leaks. (WPost, May 9/85, A8)
Ames Research Center (ARC) announced that Dr. David Black would become chief scientist for the office of space station at NASA Headquarters, leaving a position he held as research scientist in the theoretical studies branch at ARC since 1972. In his new job, Black would ensure that the space station would accomodate the needs of the scientists who would use it, advising Phillip Culbertson, associate administrator for space station, about steps to make the space station an accessible research facility for scientists from many disciplines. Black's appointment coincided with selection of contractors who would spend 21 months working out details of space station design [see Mar. 14]. Since other countries intended to cooperate with NASA in the space station project, Black would work with the agencies representing the interests of European and Japanese scientists to coordinate their plans with those of NASA. Black had been studying scientists' needs for the space station since April 1984, when he had joined the task force on scientific uses of the space station. That committee brought together 30 scientists from various universities and represented the disciplines that were interested in using the space station. Also, Black was serving on a National Academy of Sciences study group called "space sciences, 1995-2015," which was attempting to identify the future directions for research in the space sciences, thus identifying which technologies would be needed to support future research. (ARC Release 85-14)
NASA announced that Loren Shriver, pilot of Space Shuttle mission 51-C, would command mission 61-1 scheduled for launch from KSC no earlier than July 15, 1986. The pilot would be Bryan O'Connor, also scheduled to fly as pilot on mission 61-B in November 1985. Mission specialists would be William Fisher, also scheduled as a mission specialist on 51-1 in August 1985; Mark Lee, making his initial flight; and Sally Ride, who flew June 1983 on STS-7 as the first U.S. woman in space and then again October 1984 on 41-G. (JSC Release 85-027)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) were pursuing a 10-year program scheduled for completion in 1991 to improve Space Shuttle engine performance, reduce operational costs, and develop advanced engine technology for future space travel. Although the Space Shuttle propulsion system had performed well for a number of space missions, it incorporated state-of-the-art technology at the time of its development some 15 years before, so NASA believed the engine's operational life and performance levels could be improved. According to Stanley Marsik, LeRC's Space Shuttle main engine technology program manager, "The current engine represents the first generation of reusable engines. In a way, the first reusable space engine can be compared with the Model-T automobile. Now that we have experienced numerous flights with this engine, we have learned how to improve its life and performance. We now are working towards advancing the technologies necessary to support those improvements." In the age of reusable Space Shuttle engines, demands would increase for higher performance with lighter weight components, resulting in higher operating pressures and temperatures and increased mechanical vibrations and fuel flow turbulence. The system also severely taxed engine components such as turbine blades, bearings, seals, fuel ducting, and combustion chambers. Engineers were studying new high-temperature, high-strength metal alloys and other advanced materials such as new protective coatings and combustion processes. Researchers using advanced computer modeling techniques studied loads on turbine blades and fuel flow, and examined the use of hydrostatic ball bearings where a film of gas would separate the bearing from metal surfaces, resulting in no metal-to-metal contact. Engineers were developing new methods of measuring wear and deterioration, so parts would be replaced only when necessary, and studying ways to monitor engine health by means of a series of computer-connected diagnostic sensors on the engine to signal deviations from normal performance and to facilitate more economical on-the-ground maintenance. The two centers had formed ten disciplinary groups to work with some 130 different technology elements of engine design. Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Internatl., engine manufacturer, and other NASA contractors and several universities were supporting the program. (NASA Release 85-122)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced it had proposed a regulation requiring that all new transponders installed in aircraft after January 1, 1992, be compatible with the new Mode S, ground-based radar beacon system to give controllers more accurate aircraft position and identification information. In October 1984, the FAA ordered 137 Mode S ground stations from joint manufacturers Westinghouse/SDC-Burroughs and scheduled the first Mode S for delivery in the spring of 1987 to the FAA Technical Center in Atlantic City, In addition to position and identification information, the Mode S had a "selective" address capability, which gave the system its name and provided a channel for automatically transmitting weather and other data between air-traffic control facilities and aircraft in flight. The FAA already required that airplanes operating above 12,500 feet or in designated airport terminal control areas be equipped with a less sophisticated transponder. When triggered by the sweep of ground radar, this equipment sent back a signal that gave controllers a clean and enhanced target on their radar displays and also told them the aircraft's identity and altitude. A limitation of the current radar beacon system, which Mode S would replace, was that ground equipment interrogated simultaneously all aircraft in a given area, often resulting in overlapping and garbled signals on radar displays. Mode S eliminated this problem by addressing each aircraft on an individual or selective basis. The purpose of the proposed rule was to promote early installation of Mode S transponders, although existing transponders would not be obsolete; pilots could continue to fly with that equipment after January 1, 1992, until it needed replacement. (FAA Release 48-85)
NASA was accelerating design of an unmanned U.S. space mission that would rendezvous with a comet and possibly drop a penetrator to return data directly from the comet's surface, Av Wk reported. NASA officials believed that this first U.S. comet-rendezvous mission using the new Mariner Mk. 2 spacecraft would be a high-priority item in the FY 87 budget. NASA planners would probably select the Comet Kopff or Comet Wild-2 as mission target; FY 87 new-start funding could make a 1991 launch possible. Unlike Halley's Comet flybys, the U.S. spacecraft in a rendezvous mission would spend many months flying in formation with a comet. Mission concept proposed rendezvous well before closest approach to the sun, so the spacecraft could observe the comet while it was in its asteroidal stage and before solar wind would blow large amounts of dust off its surface. The spacecraft would remain in formation during the comet's active phase and possibly the post-solar-encounter phase. GSFC and ARC were examining comet-penetrator concept systems that would return compositional data using a gamma-ray spectrometer. (AvWk, Jan 7/85, 18)
As the lead center for Spacelab 2, MSFC hosted the two-day conference in which numerous science teams shared early data from the mission. The teams represented the science disciplines of solar physics, atmospheric physics, plasma physics, life sciences, technology research, infrared astronomy, and high-energy astrophysics. Among those attending the conference were many of the principal and co-investigators for the 13 experiments, all the payload and mission specialists, some invited members from NASA Headquarters who supported mission work, and a number of MSFC science and engineering team members. Some results thus far, according to Urban, confirmed what scientists had earlier predicted but could not measure, while other results yielded some surprises. For example, the superfluid helium experiment confirmed theoretical predictions of wave behavior of very thin films of super-cooled helium in microgravity. But the infrared telescope surprised researchers when it indicated that the "Shuttle glow" phenomenon observed on past flights was weak in the short infrared wavelength region, where the researchers expected it to be strong. The solar physics experiment also gathered much data, according to Urban. He cited in particular the experiment called SOUP, the Solar Optical Universal POlarimeter, which studied the visible surface of the sun. "We were able to obtain long sequences of high-resolution photos of the solar surface," he said. "We now have the means to study the growth and fading of various solar features like sunspots over long periods of time." An example of the special qualities of Spacelab 2 was the Vehicle Charging and Potential Experiment, VCAP, in which a beam of charged particles from an electron generator passed from the arbiter's payload bay through the ionosphere. "For the first time," Urban pointed out, "we had an interactive experiment with the VCAP in which we could observe the experiment remotely—from the Plasma Diagnostics Package, another experiment we allowed to free-fly and sense environmental conditions. Together the diagnostics package and VCAP found some highly interesting correlations between the man-made electron beam simulations of the ionosphere and naturally occuring auroras. The information will help us understand better how such auroras are formed from beams of charged particles from the sun." (Marshall Star, Nov 20/85, 1)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press briefing, noted that the fourth Space Shuttle orbiter, Atlantis, would join the fleet in the spring to fly its first mission in 1985 and that, despite being well into the Space Shuttle's operational phase, NASA would continue to improve performance, procure space parts, and enhance reliability. In support of Presidential efforts to cut government spending, NASA would slow space station definition and development efforts, cancel the advanced composite structures program in aeronautics, and not initiate any new projects in the space science and applications program. (NASA release Feb. 4/ 85, NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/85)
NASA announced its graphics and visual communications system had won the Presidential Design Award, presented January 30 by President Reagan. The National Endowment for the Arts sponsored the award to recognize excellence in federal design and had selected the NASA project, along with 12 others, from among 91 Federal Design Achievement Award winners. The Presidential Design Awards jury chairman, architect I.M. Pei, said in his jury report, ". . . Especially noteworthy is the visual-communications system developed by NASA whose posters, publications, and logotype generally maintain a high standard of design, which truly captures the spirit and vitality of the space program." (NASA Release 85-16) During January: NASA announced it had conferred its Space Act Awards on four Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory personnel for the invention of a medical device based on space and aeronautics technology. The invention, a programmable implantable medication system (PIMS), was a computerized pump intended for implanting in the human body to dispense medicine automatically to treat disease such as diabetes, cancer, and cardiovascular problems. A nonhypodermic device introduced medication to a reservoir located in the PIMS device so that its tiny battery-powered pump could send the medicine into the body via a tube in minute doses precisely timed by one of two clocks within the PIMS. A small computer in the PIMS analyzed its performance and operated an alarm if the device was malfunctioning or about to run out of fluid. NASA technologies employed in the PIMS development were space microcircuitry, titanium welding, and the pump and fluid-handling systems used on the Viking spacecraft and space-program techniques of quality control. Award recipients were Robert Fischell, Wade Radford, Albert Sadilek, and Arthur Hogrefe. (NASA anno Jan 85, 14)
NASA Administrator James Beggs today took an indefinite leave of absence from the agency to fight fraud charges against him [see NASA/ Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], the Washington Post reported. With White House approval, associate administrator Philip Culbertson became general manager. Although Beggs had refused to resign, White House spokesman Larry Speakes said that President Reagan, "while reluctantly acceding to his request for a leave of absence," asked Beggs to assist in an "orderly transition of his responsibilities to his colleagues at NASA to facilitate continuity of management at this critically important agency. Mr. Beggs has agreed to do so." Speakes added that the space program "has been revitalized" under Begg's leadership and "this important record must continue." Putting Culbertson in charge of day-to-day operations put Begg's stamp on the transition, the Post said. Culbertson was a 20-year NASA veteran, well-known to the House and Senate committees that dealt with the agency, and responsible for planning the agency's next big project, construction of an $8 billion permanent space station. William Graham, a former planning analyst at the Rand Corp. and chairman for the previous three years of the White House Advisory Commission on Arms Control and Disarmament, had been with NASA eight working days. Reagan appointed Graham acting administrator, so that Graham could create the job of general manager and name Culbertson to the post. "Whoever is running the space agency in 1986 has to know where the space station stands, what money it needs and who to talk to to keep it on track," said a congressional aide who dealt with NASA. "That's why Phil Culbertson is getting the job of running the agency day-to-day. He knows the issues." In his statement, Beggs reiterated that he is innocent of the fraud charges resulting from a Justice Department investigation. "I have concluded there was nothing I did then that I would not do again," Begg's statement said. "I have not been involved in any criminal wrongdoing or, in fact, of wrongdoing of any kind. I am totally confident I will be exonerated." (W Post, Dec 5/85, A3)
In response to numerous comments regarding the appropriateness of Sen. Jake Gam's (R-Utah) flight on the Space Shuttle, Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) wrote in a letter to the Washington Times that Garn had as good a background in aviation as any member of Congress and his was a long, deep, and sincere interest. "Of all the members of this body that I know, he is the least motivated by any desire for publicity. "Why is it wrong for a member of Congress, the body that is responsible for authorizing and funding the whole space program, to engage in flight if for no other reason than to get a better idea of how the whole operation works?" Sen. Goldwater concluded that he would defend the desirability of Sen. Garn's flight, as he would be able "to give the rest of us in Congress who vote the money a better idea of how the whole operation is going." (W Times, Mar 20/85, 7A)
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B today launched satellites for Mexico and Australia, the Washington Post reported. The crew launched Mexico's Morelos B in the morning, just hours after liftoff. Morelos B was a Hughes 376 satellite, a standard design used by many foreign national and private companies, Kennedy Space Center's Spaceport News said. It would provide telephone, TV, and wire services to Mexico through a total of 22 transponders. A PAM-D payload assist module then boosted the satellite to geosynchronous orbit 22,300 miles above earth. The satellite would drift, unused, until it reached it final stationary position in 1989. Mexican officials chose to store Morelos B in orbit because launch cost for the satellite could increase to four times the amount that Mexico paid to NASA for today's deployment. Payload specialist Rudolfo Neri Vela, the first Mexican astronaut, was onboard to observe satellite deployment. In June 1985 crew in the orbiter Discovery deployed the first Morelos satellite. At 8:20 p.m. the Australian satellite AUSSAT 2 spun out of the Atlantis's cargo bay. "We got a good deploy," said mission specialist Sherwood Spring, who supervised the satellite's spring ejection. "It looked like it might have gone a second early," he added. AUSSAT2, also a Hughes 376 satellite, was the second of three operations satellites for the government-owned Australian National Satellite System. It had eleven 12-watt transponders and four 30-watt transponders to provide domestic communications to Australia's 15-million population. Australia would also use the satellite to improve maritime and air traffic control communications, relay digital data for business purposes, provide standard telephone communications, and direct satellite to home TV broadcasts. A PAM-D would also boost the satellite to geosynchronous orbit. In August 1985 the Discovery crew deployed the first AUSSAT. Mission commander Brewster Shaw had tested all systems aboard Atlantis and reported that one of four videotape recorders was not working. Mission control gave him permission to take apart an electronic cabinet to look for a wiring flaw, but Shaw said he could not see anything that was obviously wrong. Later, following directions from the ground, Shaw cycled a circuit breaker and reported, "Bingo. That seems to get power to VTR1." (IV Post, Nov 28/85, A28; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
General Dynamics would delay for more than two weeks the delivery of the first Space Shuttle/Centaur upper stage to the company's facility at Cape Canaveral Air Force Base, adding an increased schedule risk to already tight timing for launch in May 1986 of the Galileo and Ulysses missions on trajectories toward Jupiter, Aviation Week reported. Martin Winkler, General Dynamics Space Shuttle/Centaur program manager, said the stage remained in San Diego to complete acceptance testing and also to conduct some tests that were to have been done in Florida. Winkler said that keeping the stage in San Diego to complete assembly and testing would not affect the testing and processing schedule in Florida, since it would be delivered in time for the scheduled mating with the Centaur integrated support structure (CISS). Winkler said the schedule called for completion of acceptance testing by September 11 and that there were no unresolved flight safety issues, although it was possible some might come up during future safety reviews and subsystem qualification testing. Problems fixed prior to shipment included a mislocated forward bearing bracket that held each of the 12 springs on the stage, installation difficulties resulting from a minor tooling problem, and strut reengineering required for installation of a component in the tank. The CISS, which was then in Florida for the first Space Shuttle/Centaur stage, was flight hardware and was a complete system with only some small parts yet to be delivered by mid-September. NASA had scheduled a major test for September 16, when the assembly would rotate with all of the installations in place to assure clearances. A November milestone would be four tanking tests. The second Space Shuttle/Centaur was on schedule; contract date for delivery of the second stage and second CISS was the end of December. General Dynamics estimated it would deliver the second Space Shuttle/Centaur on November 22 and the second CISS on October 29. (AvWk, Sept 9/85, 24)
NASA announced that the third phase of the active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE) magnetotail probe, a U.S., West German, and United Kingdom scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, was underway. Gilber Ousley, AMPTE project manager of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said that the first AMPTE magnetotail release of barium occurred March 21 at 4:20 a.m., EST and that the release conditions had been well within established criteria. The German ion release module spacecraft immediately detected a magnetic field change as expected. The satellite would make one additional release of barium and two of lithium (the tracers) into the earth's magnetotail. The U.S. satellite would analyze the charged-particle space environment around the magnetotail to determine the effects on the environment of the injected elements. Ousley also said that all ground stations except the one in Argentina reported clear weather and that the observatory at Kitt Peak, Arizona, reported visual sighting with the naked eye for about 20 minutes. The airborne NASA Convair 990 and Argentine Boeing 707 observation aircraft had recorded the event. The first phase of the AMPTE project had consisted of lithium releases September 11 and 20, 1984, into solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Lima, Peru. Results of the experiment indicated that the artificial comet was "eroded" by the solar wind much faster than previously anticipated. The only scheduled AMPTE experiment remaining after the March-April releases was formation July 13 or 14, 1985, of another artificial comet on the opposite flank of the magnetosphere from the December experiment. All releases had to satisfy several criteria, including clear voice communications between the U.S. AMPTE science data center located at Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Lab and the German Space Operations Center in West Germany, where German scientists gathered to view the data. The latter sent the command for release through their center and NASA's Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the U.S. portion of AMPTE for NASA's office of space science and applications; Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab under contract to NASA had built the U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release 85-42) July II: Dr. Mario Acuna, project scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), announced that the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers (AMPTE) project, an international scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, would produce on July 18 or 20 at midnight EDT the world's second artificial comet. In the fourth and final phase of the project, a West German satellite would release at 70,000	miles above earth two barium canisters into the solar wind on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere. The release would create an artificial comet expected to be visible in the southwestern United States to the unaided eye for approximately four minutes. In the first phase of the AMPTE project, the West German satellite released September 1984 lithium into the solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere. Preliminary results of that experiment indicated that less than 1% of the solar wind gained access to the magnetosphere under the conditions in which the releases took place. In the second phase, the German satellite created on December 27, 1984, a barium cloud on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Peru. Data from the artificial comet indicated that the solar wind eroded it much faster than scientists had anticipated. Releases on March 21 and May 13, 1985, of barium and lithium into the earth's magnetotail region ended the third phase of the AMPTE experiments. Acuna said of those releases, "Although, disappointingly, no tracer ions were detected by the U.S. satellite (Charge Composition Explorer) located inside the magnetosphere, this fact is in itself a very significant result. It implies that fundamental revisions to our current models of the magnetosphere need to be made to account for these negative observations." (NASA Release 85-105)
NASA announced plans to deploy for the first time two small experimental satellites from Get Away Special (GAS) containers mounted in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger during the STS 51-B mission scheduled for launch in late April. Under the GAS program, NASA would deploy for $10,000 each the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) and the Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) in hopes of establishing an inexpensive way to deploy small satellites during routine Space Shuttle operations. Clarke Prouty, technical liaison officer for the GAS program at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said the GAS containers had been upgraded with ejection systems for the 51-B mission and that GSFC had developed a motorized door (full diameter motorized door assembly) for the can similar to the one first flown on the seventh Space Shuttle mission, which would allow the GAS payload to be exposed to space. The door assembly permitted GAS container insulation before and after satellite deployment and provided a means for keeping the satellite in the container in case of malfunction. GSFC had also adapted the spacecraft separation system used in the Delta rocket program for the GAS ejection systems. The GLOMR satellite, designed and built by Defense Systems Inc. was a data relay, communications spacecraft that was expected to remain in orbit for about a year. The NUSAT, designed, built, and tested by Weber State College, Ogden, Utah, in coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration, was an air traffic control radar system calibrator that would measure antenna patterns for ground-based radars operating in the U.S. and member countries of the International Civil Aviation Organization. NASA would first launch the NUSAT, then the GLOMR, at the end of Spacelab 3 science activities on the sixth day of the seven-day 51-B mission. Independent user ground stations would operate the satellites following deployment. The GAS program was available to anyone wishing to fly a small (for containment in 2Vi- by 5-ft area) scientific research and development experiment. The Space Shuttle had flown 29 GAS containers, including those for materials processing, life sciences, biology, seed and crystal growth, and cosmic radiation. (NASA Release 85-35)
NASA Administrator James Beggs told the U.S. House Science and Technology Committee that the agency's launch service's market position had eroded "very severely" and that he had to be "a little bit pessimistic" about NASA's ability to hold a lion's share in the future, Aerospace Daily reported. Beggs made the comment in response to a question about the need for a 5th Space Shuttle orbiter. During the previous 14 months, NASA had won five new commercial launches; The European Space Agency's (ESA) Ariane, five. Beggs said the Europeans were "coming along very aggressively" in using the Ariane 4 and 5 vehicles to improve launch capabilities and that agreement by ministers attending the ESA council meeting [see European Space Agency, Feb. 4] to further Ariane 5 development "was significant." (A/D, Feb 7/85, 1)
Astronauts Maj. Jerry Ross of the Air Force and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring of the Army today stepped outside the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B for the second construction exercise in the weightlessness of space [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Nov. 30], the NY Times reported. To TV viewers on earth, the two appeared to manipulate with ease the heavy structures they were building, although both were sweating and breathing heavily after the first 20 minutes of work. Two hours into the spacewalk, they reported that though their hands, feet, and backs were moist with sweat, they were working comfortably. The purpose of today's spacewalk was the same as previously, to test the efficiency of techniques to build a 45-foot-high aluminum tower. However, the astronauts changed the way they worked and had the assistance of astronaut Dr. Mary Cleave, who was operating the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm. She moved the men from place to place as their work required. Later in the exercise, the Washington Post reported, Ross and Spring took turns stringing cable along the four-story metal frame they had constructed, just as future crews might lay cable for a space station. They also removed parts of the tower and replaced them with other parts, simulating a space repair. NASA officials commented after the first spacewalk on November 30 that the work had proved more taxing than expected, perhaps because the astronauts' gloves, unlike the rest of their spacesuits, were not air-conditioned and could not carry away excess heat. Most of the work had entailed repeated squeezing and twisting with the hands. Ross and Spring said after the exercise that they would not want to repeat it before having a day of rest. They indicated that the activity had left their hands so numb and fatigued that they had trouble fastening the airlock of the Space Shuttle as they reentered it. NASA officials did note they were favorably surprised by the astronauts' rapid improvement in performance as they learned from successive repetitions of the exercise. (NYT, Dec 2/85, B6; W Post, Dec 2/85, A3)
