President Ronald Reagan issued an executive order through his press secretary that established a commission to investigate the Challenger accident. According to the order, the ad hoc commission would review the circumstances surrounding the accident, develop recommendations for corrective or other action0*based on the findings, and submit a final report to the president and to the NASA Administrator. (The White House Executive Order establishing the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 3/86)
As further testimony was heard by the President's Commission, NASA manager Larry Mulloy stated that objections made by Morton Thiokol engineers to halt liftoff seemed illogical, but added that had he known that all of the company's engineers held the opinion, he might have changed his mind. Other testimony given by NASA officials conceded that they argued against the idea of cold weather being detrimental to a launch, but had little data to demonstrate this, and insisted that this opposition in no way pressured Morton Thiokol management to reverse the recommendation of its engineers. (Official Transcript Proceedings Before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 26/86; NY Times, Feb 27/86; C Trib, Feb `"27/86; LA Times, Feb 27/86; W Post, Feb 27/86; P Inq, Feb 27/86; (#W Times, Feb 27/86; WSJ Feb 27/86)
Dr. Dale D. Myers became Deputy Administrator for NASA; he succeeded Dr. William R. Graham who left NASA to become Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Myers had served as an atlarge member to the NASA Advisory Council and before that as president and chief operating officer for Jacobs Engineering Group. Other achievements include positions as Undersecretary for the U.S. Department of Energy, vicepresident of Rockwell International, president of North American Aircraft, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, and vice president/program manager for both the Apollo Command/Service Module Program and the Space Shuttle Program at Rockwell International. (NASA Release 86149)'?0*October 21: Several senior staff changes were made at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to include: Robert C. Goetz, from Deputy Center Director to Technical Assistant to the Center Director; Clifford E. Charlesworth, from Director of Space Operations to Special Assistant to the Director; Henry O. Pohl, from Division Chief to Director of Engineering; William R. Kelly, from Director of Center Support to Director, Administration; Dr. Wayne R. Young was named Deputy Director for Administration; Paul J. Weitz, from Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office to Technical Assistant to the Center Director. (NASA Release 86151)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced that Andrew J. Stofan had been appointed Associate Administrator for the Space Station. He also announced a number of organizational and management structural changes for the program and transfer of its supervision from the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to Washington, D.C. The changes followed recommendations from a committee headed by former Apollo Program Manager Samuel C. Phillips that were consistent with findings from the Rogers Commission, which investigated the Challenger accident. Phillips examined the Space Station program from both a technical and management perspective and Dr. Fletcher, in turn, made changes that assured the flow of important information to'*0*proper decisionmaking levels. Another result was the procurement of a versatile computerbased information network to link NASA and contractor facilities and to provide engineering services. (NASA Release 8684; W Post Jul 1/86; NY Times, Jul 1/86; W Times, Jul 1/86; C Trib, Jul 2/86)
Al Louviere, who headed a team of engineers at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, recommended to Shuttle Program Director Arnold Aldrich that an escape system be built into orbiters. Equipped with pressure suits and an oxygen supply, astronauts could bail out of the aircraft while it was in gliding flight below 100,000 feet. Although no specific plan was given, Louviere stressed the fact that no escape system could have saved the Challenger crew. (p Inq, Jul 2/86)
Dr. William R. Graham, NASA's Acting Administrator, affirmed plans to continue NASA's Teacher in Space Program, administered by NASA's Educational Affairs Division under the direction of Robert Brown. The reason given: NASA's continuing goals were to "increase the prestige of the teaching profession, to increase the awareness in the education community of the impact of technology and science on this country's future, and to use space as a catalyst to enhance all subject areas and grade levels of our education systems." (NASA Release 8612; USA Today, Feb 14/86; NY Times, Feb 14/86; W Post Feb 14/86)
The Federal Aviation Administration has become increasingly concerned with the problem of inadequate airline maintenance. Because they maintain a 17hourperday schedule and are involved in repeated takeoffs and landings, commercial jetliners are prone to numerous mechanical breakdowns. Although "modern jets are designed to fly despite even serious defects" and although U.S. carriers employ an army of airline mechanics repairing planes in between scheduled flights, several U.S. carriers were fined by the Federal Aviation Administration last summer for a "series of maintenancerelated transgressions." The National Transportation Safety Board was considering whether a crash of a Midwest Express Airline jet in September 1985, in which 31 people were killed, was caused by poor maintenance. Some airsafety experts expressed fear that airline companies had become too cost conscious about safety; still, maintenance error ranked third behind pilot error and bad weather as a cause of fatal airline crashes. (WSJ, Jan 3/86) 0*January 6: NASA renamed two planetary missions scheduled for flight in 1988 and 1990. The mission to map the planet Venus, previously known as Venus Radar Mapper and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in April 1988 and arrival at Venus in July 1989, was renamed Magellan. The Magellan spacecraft, attached to a CentaurG upper stage, would map the entire surface of the planet Venus for the first time, using a syntheticaperture radar instrument. The spacecraft would orbit the planet about once every three hours, coming as close as 250 kilometers from the The mission to map the planet Mars, previously known as the Mars Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in August 1990 and arrival at Mars in August 1999, was renamed Mars Observer. The Observer spacecraft, adapted from an existing productionline type of Earthorbital spacecraft to reduce costs, would map the planet Mars to determine the global elemental and mineralogical character of its surface and to investigate the Martian climate, both present and past. The Magellan and Mars Observer projects were managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 861)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration signed a memorandum of agreement for a fiveyear, $24 million research project to study wind shear detection and avoidance that would cover technology assessment, present position sensor integration, hazard characterization, pilot factors in wind shear, and effects of heavy rain. For pilot training, an environment was created that could mirror wind shear in a flight situation, thus'=0*providing a safe simulation for training. Microburst is the most dangerous type of wind shear for study. It is a small, intense downdraft, often accompanied by heavy rain, which, upon striking the ground, spreads out into a circular vortex radiating an all directions and leaving little time for reaction by a pilot. Between 1965 and 1985, there were at least 26 accidents and 3 incidents involving 626 fatalities and 235 injuries where wind shear was a direct cause or contributing factor. (NASA Release 86143)
The White House accelerated its search for a permanent head of NASA to replace James M. Beggs, indicted in December on fraud charges unrelated to the agency. Beggs was on an unpaid leave of absence during the time of the Challenger accident; Deputy Administrator William R. Graham was Acting Administrator. Beggs was later acquitted of all wrong doing and the Justice Department apologized for the erroneous charges. (W Post, Feb 7/86; Bus Wk, Feb 17/86)
Representative Edward P. Bolland, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee, advised NASA that it needed to make some difficult choices in its bigticket items. The Congressman specifically asked Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher how he would choose between a new Shuttle and the Space Station, to which he responded that the two projects were inseparable. Fletcher further pointed out that a fourth Shuttle was necessary because another accident would leave the Nation with only two, crippling the space program. The subcommittee, said Bolland, was most concerned about the cost of the Space Station. (B Sun, May
NASA officials announced that James Kingsbury, engineering chief at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would retire at the end of November. He was one of the high ranking officials who had worked on Challenger's fatal rocket boosters. (USA Today, Nov 5/86)
NASA officials announced that the launch of an AtlasCentaur rocket scheduled to carry a Navy communications satellite into orbit on August 28 was postponed indefinitely. The flight was originally set for May 22, but the Delta rocket accident canceled that liftoff. The Atlas was the only remaining U.S. rocket system that had not been grounded; the delay resulted from the discovery by engineers of problems with some of the rocket's electrical parts. (W Post Jul 24/86)
The Soviet Union said that it was prepared to fill the void left by the United States and Europe for commercial space launches. Moscow revealed this fact in an announcement that also called for a World Space Organization. The Organization would oversee joint space projects that the Soviets hoped would unfold in the future. (C Trib, Jun 13/86; CSM, Jun 16/86) ''0*June 13: In a move that would greatly reduce the chances for resuming Shuttle flights by July 1987, President Ronald Reagan urged NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher to comply with all of the recommendations put forth by the Challenger commission. President Reagan also ordered Fletcher to report back to him after 30 days with details on how and when the findings would be implemented. Also, the two reportedly discussed approval of Federal funds for a replacement orbiter and the President's final decision was expected to follow after a few days. (Letter from President Reagan to James Fletcher, Jun 13/86; W Post, Jun 14/86; WSJ, Jun 16/86; W Times, Jun 16/86)
NASA officials said that resuming Space Shuttle flight by
Elizabeth Dole predicted that U.S. rocket companies would begin launching private satellites by 1989 and capture 50 percent of the international market. Her announcement came after President Ronald Reagan's confirmation that NASA would no longer handle the business. Representatives from General Dynamics Corporation and Transpace Carriers, Inc. expressed hope that they would soon announce launch contracts. Some satellite officials, however, were less enthusiastic because NASA had the goahead to launch at least some of the 44 commercial satellites, leaving the agency with limited but palpable competition. In a related matter, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that a large portion of future flights would be devoted to scientific missions and that he expected a commercial launching industry to supplement the Shuttle. (W Post, Aug 19/86; W Times, Aug 19/86; NY Times, Aug 19/86; CSM, Aug 26/86)
Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June
Leaders from the 11membernation European Space Agency (ESA) met with NASA officials to discuss their $2 billion contribution to the Space Station project and to seek a greater management role and benefits from it. One European official noted, "NASA must realize that ESA is a mature space agency that can manage manned space flight alone if necessary." Although the statement appeared to be a threat to withdraw, Richard Barnes, NASA Director of International Affairs, saw no intent on the part of Europe to pull out. Leaders from both sides, however, agreed to a joint statement saying, "While recognizing that differences currently exist, Professor Luest and Dr. Fletcher jointly concluded that these differences are not irreconcilable." (NY Times, Nov 22/86; AvWk, Nov 24/86)
James R. Thompson, of Princeton University's Plasma Physics Lab, nationally recognized propulsion expert, and former NASA propulsion engineer, was named vice chairman of the NASA task force inquiring into the Challenger accident. His appointment was in support of the Commission assigned by President Ronald Reagan to perform the investigation of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8620)' 0*March 3: NASA announced a comprehensive project to evaluate the implications of the Challenger accident on the space program. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions had been postponed, NASA announced that the Shuttle Discovery would be modified so that it could launch spacecraft with a Centaur upper stage rocket. The Challenger accident left only the Shuttle Atlantis with the capability for carrying Centaur payloads. These decisions were made by the Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. William R. Graham, on the recommendation of the Headquarters Replanning Task Force, headed by Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, set up to study program alternatives in the wake of the accident. Other matters considered by the task force included: (1) the requirements for all aspects for an orbiter to replace the Challenger as well as the lost Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) launch vehicle and its support structure attached to a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost with the Shuttle; (2) new launch schedules for the remaining three Shuttles; (3) an additional launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base; (4) the role of expendable launch vehicles for commercial use; (5) the retention of ground communications because only one TDRS, instead of two, was in orbit to link spacecraft to earth because of the accident; (6) and identification of monetary losses other than those from the destroyed equipment. In the meantime, customers who had hoped to launch their satellites from the Space Shuttle were being forced to examine other alternatives. With launch schedules certain to fall far behind and military and scientific communities getting first priority, commercial interests would have either to put their projects on the back burner or use NASA's rival, the European Space Agency's Arianespace company, for more expensive launches. With NASA's announcement that its Shuttle program would be put on hold for 1218 months, Shuttlelinked businesses were searching for other options as well. (NASA Release 8622; C Trib, Mar 3/86; B Sun, Mar 4/86; USA Today, Mar 4/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, responding to negotiations with the White House budget office earlier in the week, warned that the planned $8 billion Space Station and a new'G0*replacement Shuttle were in jeopardy of not meeting scheduled completions. He stated that the 35 percent increased budget for fiscal year 1987 was earmarked only for costs resulting from the Challenger crash and could not be benchmarked for future budgets. The strict budget, he added, could afford no new projects. In a separate statement, Fletcher agreed to remove himself from any future Shuttle booster rocket contracts. Senators called for an investigation of the contract awarded to Morton Thiokol in 1973, a decision in which Fletcher had considerable influence. (W Times, Dec 8/86; NY Times, Dec 8/86)
Speaking to NASA employees, Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an intense safety program to include reassessment of Shuttle management structure, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for aborting Shuttle flights, and recertification of all critical Shuttle parts. He noted that "the business of flying in space is a bold business," and added, "We cannot print enough money to make it totally riskfree. But we certainly are going to correct any mistakes we have made...and we're going to get going ahead just as soon as we can." When the Shuttle Program resumes, he continued, the first Shuttle would be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards Air Force Base, in California. (USA Today, Mar 26/68; W Post, Mar 26/86; WSJ, Mar 26/86; NY Times, Mar 26/86; W Times, Mar 26/86)
Another setback for Western launch capability occurred as an Ariane rocket was destroyed by ground controllers 4 minutes and 36 seconds after liftoff in French Guiana, when its third stage failed to ignite. Also lost was an Intelsat V communications satellite; it was the third time failure in the rockets had occurred for that reason. Arianespace, a French company that sold space on the rocket, was in fierce competition with NASA for multimilliondollar commercial contracts, but ceded its monopoly when forced to postpone future flights while the accident was being investigated. With the grounding of the U.S. space program, western nations were left with the Ariane rocket as the only means to place commercial satellites into space. (LA Herald, Jun 1/86; CSM, Jun 16/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an independent panel to review NASA's management practices, especially the decisionmaking process on the morning of the January 28 Challenger accident. The review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that Shuttle flights would likely resume by July 1987, with an optimum of seven launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his "highest priority." Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told members of Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would investigate the transfer of two Morton Thiokol engineers, Allan McDonald and Roger Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently' 0*objected to the Challenger launch on the morning prior to its deadly flight and later detailed their scenarios before Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow be involved with the reassignments. The subcommittee advised NASA to reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened to severely reduce NASA's budget for new space programs if the agency did not undergo some drastic changes. (Department of Housing and Urban Development Independent Agencies Appropriations for 1987, May 13/86; W Times, May 14/86; W Post, May 14/86; WSJ, May 14/86; NY Times, May 14/86; P Inq, May 14/86; C Trib, May 14/86; B Sun, May 14/86)
James R. Thompson, vice chairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, said that NASA officials could be "walking on the edge of a cliff" if they did not correct flaws in the solid rocket booster. Previous problems, he noted, simply were not taken seriously enough; he then added that NASA could say conclusively that the right solid rocket booster had caused the Shuttle accident. The task force, said Thompson, focused on four factors of the joint in the booster rocket: the tendency of the joints to rotate during liftoff; the impact of subfreezing temperatures on the orings; defects in the putty used to protect them; and slight damage to the orings during assembly. James Kingsbury, director of Science and Engineering Directorate disagreed with Thompson's findings because the rockets had performed well on 24 previous flights. (USA Today, Apr 9/86; W Post, Apr 9/86; P Inq, Apr 9/86)
Following the release of the Presidential Commission's report, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would adopt most of the recommendations. He stated, "The whole agency needs a major reexamination." He further said that he still expected the Shuttle fleet to resume operation by July 1987, that the President will opt for a replacement Shuttle, and that he remained committed to the Teacher in Space Program. Congress, however, pointed out that fiscal restraints would render it nearly impossible to make all the Committee's suggested repairs while building a new orbiter and pursuing the Space Station and the aerospace plane. (NASA Release: Statement of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, Jun 9/86; W Post, Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 10/86)
Following a speech in Washington, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge told reporters that the Space Shuttle would not fly again until early 1988. The Air Force, he said, would use the expendable launch vehicles being developed as often as possible and that NASA's goal was to have military and nonmilitary payloads on a 5050 schedule. For reasons of security, Aldridge had hoped President Ronald Reagan would authorize funds for a new orbiter, but sources revealed that the President would hold back any decisions concerning the space program until after NASA began implementing some of the recommendations from the Roger's Commission. (W Post, Jun 24/86; W Times, Jun 24/86; NY Times, Jun
Shuttle director Richard H. Truly announced NASA's interest in an improved, secondgeneration solid rocket motor design for study by the National Space Transportation System program manager. Among the requested changes were asbestosfree insulation, alternate case and propellant design, and modified burn rate for improved performance. Outside geometry and interfaces with other Space Shuttle elements would not be affected. He added, however, that the tentative schedule for launching a Shuttle in early 1988 would not be contingent upon this newly designed booster rocket. (NASA Release 8694; NY Times, Jul 21/86)
NASA announced that Aaron Cohen would be appointed as Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, and that Jesse W. Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that position to be Special Assistant to the General Manager, NASA Headquarters. Since 1962 Cohen had served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then in the Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of the Engineering and Development Directorate, and then as overall Director of Research and Engineering at the JSC. Moore came to NASA in 1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science. From there he was appointed Director of the Space Flight Division; Director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division; and Deputy Associate Administrator and acting Associate Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86138; NY Times, Oct 3/86)
Senator Albert Gore made public his order for a'I0*congressional investigation into whether NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had violated conflictofinterest rules when he awarded Morton Thiokol the Shuttle booster contract in 1973. Dr. Fletcher denied the charges, but said he would seriously consider removing himself from future booster rocket contract decisions. NY Times, Dec 19/86)
The former Soviet Union launched two veteran cosmonauts into orbit, scheduled to arrive at the Mir Space Station after two days. The launch, contrary to former Soviet practice, was both announced and televised. The launch, said James Oberg, author of several books about the Soviet space program, was done "with great propaganda benefit." In an effort to demonstrate their achievements, he stated further, "They have a greater selfconfidence in their program [and] it helps concentrate world attention on the benign part of their space program." U.S. experts acknowledged that Soviet Space Station technology was years ahead of us and that the mission might well begin man's permanent occupation of space. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), Mar 12/86; B Sun, Mar 14/86; P Inq, Mar 14/86; W Times, Mar 14/86; NY Times, Mar 14/86; W Post, Mar 14/86; C Trib, Mar 14/86)
A House Science and Technology Committee issued a report stating that Congress and the White House shared the blame for the launch schedule pressure that led to the January 28 Challenger accident. The report agreed with many of the findings laid out by the Rogers Commission, but differed by stating that the accident was not a result of poor communication through NASA management, but "poor technical decisionmaking [by them] over several years." The report concluded that NASA's management lacked the expertise needed to operate the Space Shuttle and warned the Agency not to succumb to similar pressure concerning future flights. The National Research Council, in an independent study requested by Congress, urged NASA on October 9 to limit its Shuttle flights in the 1990s to 11 or 13, not the 16 annual flights proposed by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. (Investigation of the Challenger Accident: Report of the Committee on Science and Technology, House of Representatives, Oct 29/68; W Post, Oct 8/86; Oct 10/86; W Times, Oct 8/86; NY Times, Oct 8/86)
Joseph F. Sutter was appointed chairman of the NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, an advisory group to the NASA Administrator. Sutter, in 1986, had a 41year career with the Boeing Company as an aerodynamicist, received numerous awards for development of jetpowered airliners, and was nominated to receive the Wright Memorial Trophy, to be presented in Washington, D.C. He had also been appointed to the Presidentiaal Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86154)
The Presidential Commission questioned NASA scientists regarding faulty orings as a cause of the Challenger accident. The panel learned that these seals could indeed malfunction in cold weather and also that erosion (not the result of cold0*weather) had occurred in 6 of 171 seals on previous flights. Morton Thiokol, the firm responsible for manufacturing the orings, had raised concerns about launching the Shuttle in cold weather, but NASA engineers concluded that the backup ring would function if the primary seal failed. Released NASA documents also showed concern expressed by engineers, who, three years prior to the accident, concluded that the mechanism for sealing segments of the solid rocket booster could fail and result in "loss of mission, vehicle, and crew." One risk analysis received by NASA from an outside agency estimated the chances for an accident involving the boosters as 1 in 35. NASA's safety advisory board stated in their 1985 annual report that 18 Shuttle flights per year were "very optimistic" because these launches were anything but routine. However, "the requirement to launch has not been a prerequisite," said acting NASA Administrator Dr. William R. Graham, "The prerequisite has been safety." (Official Transcript Proceedings before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 11/86; P Inq, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; B Sun, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; CSM, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; C Trib, Feb 12/86; Feb 14/86; Feb 13/86; WSJ, Feb 12/86; USA Today, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; NY Times, Feb 13/86; W Post, Feb 13/86)
In a part of NASA's strategy to return the Space Shuttle safely to flight, Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator, announced the new management and operations structure for the National Space Transportation System (NSTS or Space Shuttle program). The changes were aimed at establishing clear lines of communication in the information transfer and decision making processes. The management change, which also moved control of the operation to Washington, D.C., was directed by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly and followed recommendations made by the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology and the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. As part of the restructuring, Arnold D. Aldrich, who joined NASA in 1959, was named Director, NSTS, and Richard H. Kohrs and Robert L. Crippen were named his deputies. Truly stated that "the formation of this program management organization is one of the most positive steps NASA has taken in the last several months to strengthen the Shuttle program and return to flight status." (NASA Release 86159; W Post, Nov 6/86; NY Times, Nov 6/86)
Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, an unsuccessful bidder on Shuttle boosters, released documents it had sent to NASA some 13 years earlier stating that the multisegment booster that relied on oring seals were "burdened with design features that can detract from safe, efficient, and reliable operation." According to officials involved in the decision to choose the Utah based Thiokol design, the least expensive bid; the fact that Senator Frank Moss, then chairman of the committee that controlled NASA's budget came from Utah; and that then NASA Administrator Dr. James Fletcher was former president of the University of Utah were all salient factors. NASA calculations, however, also pointed out that Thoikol needed minimal up front Government cash and deferred major costs to the latest possible date, and that Aerojet required a good deal more money to get started. All three factors were important to the early days of the program's budget constraints. (B Sun, Mar 5/86)
Only 74 seconds after liftoff, the Space Shuttle Challenger, flight STS 51L, exploded at about 10 miles above the Earth, killing all seven crew members. It was the worst accident in the history of space exploration and the first time American fatalities occurred during space flight. Slow motion film of the launch revealed a thin flame between the left booster rocket and the Shuttle's main fuel tank, causing engineers to speculate that hydrogen from a ruptured tank ignited upon contact with air heated by the rocket motors or directly by the motors themselves. It was hoped that investigation of the debris that fell into the Atlantic Ocean could lend a better understanding of the accident. All crew tended spaceflight was halted until a thorough investigation was completed, stunting the ambitious space program that promised to bring the richest lode of scientific data ever imagined. (W Post, Jan 29/86; W Times, Jan 29/86; NY times, Jan 29/86; B Sun, Jan 29/86; P Inq Jan 29/86; C Trib, Jan 29/86)
For the first time since the January 28 accident, the Space Shuttle's main engine underwent a 11/2 second test for ignition. It was an uneventful and successful run, and NASA officials offered it as a signal that the program was gearing up for a targeted July 1987 mission. (B Sun, Jun 27/86; C Trib, Jun
The President's Commission began probing into the Space Shuttle Challenger accident as it took statements from NASA officials Dr. William R. Graham, Acting Administrator; Jesse Moore, Associate Administrator; Arnold D. Aldrich, Space Shuttle Manager; Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager; and Robert B. Sieck, Director, Shuttle Operations. As several possible reasons into the cause of the accident were explored, Moore emphasized0*that space flight would always be dangerous. (NY Times, Feb 7/86)
The Soviet Union invited foreign correspondents into its mission control center for a conference concerning orbiting cosmonauts and a live television interview with them. The Soviet Union set still another precedent when it allowed coverage of its space program by a large group of foreign press. The invitation followed a pattern of a more open Russian space agency, the televising of the recent liftoff of the cosmonauts on March 13, and the opening of the Soviet Space Research Institute to foreign visitors when the Vega spacecraft approached Halley's Comet were also first time events. (W Post, Apr 8/86; W Times, Apr 8/86)
NASA officials confirmed that the Agency had considered reproduction of the Delta rocket and was ordering at least one from McDonnell Douglas for launching an Indonesian communications satellite early in 1987. Officials at the corporation assured NASA that the grounded Delta rocket could be ready for launch in a few months because problems were worked out and the production line for the rocket was partially restarted. (W Post, Jun 27/86; WSJ, Jun 27/86)
NASA scientists halted design of additional shielding for two nuclear powered satellites. The shield, they ascertained, would help only during the first two minutes of launch and would actually become a detriment after that. The Interagency Nuclear Safety Review Panel would not give launch approval for the scientific missions until 1999, but NASA officials saw a good chance for approval of launching the radioisotope thermoelectric generator powered satellites from the Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Dec 15/86)
In response to a recent order, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher handed President Ronald Reagan a 50page report that outlined the agency's plans for implementing the Rogers Commission's recommendations. Among the items detailed were booster redesign, changes in NASA's management, review of "critical items" whose failure would lead to vehicle loss, establishment of a safety organization, improved communications, landing safety, launch abort and crew escape, flight rate, and maintenance safeguards. Fletcher also submitted a companion letter urging the President to authorize funds for replacement of the Challenger. Because of the requirements for getting the Shuttle flying again, NASA confirmed the aircraft would be grounded until at least early 1988. (Actions to Implement the Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Jul 14/86; NY Times, Jul 15/86; W `"Post, Jul 15/86; B Sun, Jul 15/86; W Times, Jul 15/86; P Inq, Jul (#15/86; C Trib, Jul 15/86)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics announced that NASA's budget should be doubled to ensure that the United States retains its lead in space programs. The Institute described the budget as "no growth" and said that it would "insure that the U.S. becomes and remains a secondclass power in space." The report called attention to advancements made by the Soviet Union, Western Europe, and Japan, and also recommended'60*attempting to develop a greater student interest in space science. (B Sun, Aug 28/86; W Times, Aug 28/86; CSM, Aug 28/86; P Inq, Aug 28/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the $10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year 1987, a 40 percent increase from fiscal year 1986. Fletcher, according to NASA officials, planned to meet with President Ronald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of years of underfunding. The increased funds could support the Civil Space Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military aeronautics research program; and the Xray Astrophysics Facility, advanced technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 billion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov
A NASA study found that the part of the booster rocket that was suspect in the Challenger accident had reached a temperature of only about 29 degrees Fahrenheit at the time of liftoff, 9 degrees cooler than the surrounding air. Both NASA and Morton Thiokol engineers, the study noted, had knowledge of0*the ring's susceptibility to damage in 50degree temperatures. A member of the President's Commission pointed out that NASA officials should have been aware of this as earlier temperatures were in the 20s and the orings would not heat up quickly. (W Post, Feb 24/86)
NASA officials provided investigators with new evidence challenging the theory that the Challenger accident was triggered by failed rocket seals caused by cold weather. They presented prelaunch photographs showing a flaw in the suspected oring on the right side booster, a possible correlation to the fact that workers assembling the booster were hampered with a misshaped rocket segment. New tests on the orings conducted at Morton Thiokol's plant demonstrated that they sealed properly to temperatures at 10 degrees below zero. Also, the Challenger, according to meteorologist Irving P. Krick, sustained wind shear of 125 to 150 miles per hour just prior to the accident, which would have been similar to "flying into a tornado." (W Post, Mar
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that the Nation was in need on a fifth orbiter, the funding for which would need to come from private financing. The claim by NASA's advisory council that the United States was approaching secondclass status in space, he acknowledged, was "on track." Fletcher'70*made a formal request on September 9, the same day that President Ronald Reagan petitioned Congress for the initial $272 million needed to begin work on a fourth Shuttle. (USA Today, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 9/86; B Sun, Sep 10/86)
Members of a House Space Subcommittee endorsed NASA's $7.7 billion budget and authorized funds for a new shuttle and President Ronald Reagan ordered that a replacement orbiter be built. The craft would take about seven years to construct, according to administration officials. The money for the project, earmarked to come from other space programs, would be allotted annually. The first payment was to be $200 million, and the rate of progress for building it depended on future financing. The President also restated his hopes for private industry to develop a capacity for launching commercial satellites. (W Times, Aug 14/86; Aug 15/86; B Sun, Aug 14/86; Aug 15/86; NY Times, Aug 15/86; C Trib, Aug 15/86; W Post, Aug 15/86; CSM, Aug 18/86)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which operates the Nation's weather satellites, announced that its polar orbiting satellite NOAA8 was apparently lost. NOAA was informed by the Air Force that its tracking instruments detected "what appeared to be pieces of the satellite" in the vicinity of NOAA8 orbit. (NY Times, Jan 7/86) 0** Dr. William R. Graham, who was appointed Acting Administrator of NASA on January 3, 1986, stated in his first interview that he was the "acting administrator in every sense of the word" and that he felt very comfortable in his new position. He apparently made that statement to put to rest suggestions that the Agency would really be run by NASA Associate Administrator Philip E. Culberston while Graham learned the ropes. Graham was promoted to his new position, from the post of Deputy Administrator of NASA, when NASA Administrator James E. Beggs took a leave of absence to prepare his defense for a trial. Beggs had been charged with defrauding the Federal Government when he served as a top executive of General Dynamics NASA's acting administrator received his master's and doctoral degrees in engineering from Stanford University. He began his professional career at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico and then moved to the Rand Corporation in California. In 1971, he founded R&D Associates, a think tank in Marina Del Rey, California. He was a consultant to the Secretary of Defense and had served on an advisory committee on undersea warfare and human assisted strategic Air Force systems and on nuclear weapons panels. Prior to his appointment as Deputy Administrator of NASA in November 1985, Graham headed, for three years, President Reagan's advisory committee on arms control and The then 48yearold native Texan expressed great optimism in his assessment of the future of NASA and of space exploration in general. He said that "the agency in the coming decade would broaden mankind's understanding of Earth's environment, expand the reach of manned exploration, and extend scientific vision to the far edges of the universe." Stating that space exploration was limited only by "imagination," Graham promised to pursue vigorously President Reagan's mandate to make space more accessible to the ordinary citizen and free enterprise. (W Times, Jan 6/86; 7/86)
NASA announced that Lieutenant General Forrest S. McCartney, on assignment from the Air Force, would take over as Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, beginning October 1. McCartney succeeded Richard Smith, who retired on July 31. The press opined that the move would give the military greater control of the space program. McCartney's past Air Force assignments include positions as satellite controller, as project officer in the Titan 3 program, in the Directorate of Space at USAF Headquarters, as monitor for satellite communications programs, and director of range engineering at USAF Eastern Test Range. (NASA Release 86117; W Post, Aug 21/86; NY Times, Aug
NASA officials announced that the redesign of booster rocket seals would render them failsafe. The new design would not use putty to protect the seals from heat; would include an outside cover to protect the seals from rain and ice, with a possible heating element built in; use a clip to prevent rotation; and provide a backup seal for each joint of the booster. (P Inq, Apr 14/86)
Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer was appointed Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Office of Commercial Programs, where he would be responsible for advancing the interests and participation of the private sector in the U.S. Space Program. He previously had cofounded businesses in the private sector and had served at the White House. (NASA Release 8679)
Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a Senate subcommittee and testified that the $7.7 billion budget for NASA was "barely adequate" and could further delay Shuttle flights while possibly stripping the private sector of some 25,000 jobs. He also said that the currently designed Space Station was intended to be built using four Shuttles. With only three Shuttles, the Station would need to go back to the drawing board. The Senate appeared to be looking at a civilian sponsored space program for commercial launches as a way to reduce costs. (W Post, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
NASA officials concluded, and reported to the President's Commission, that the orings in Challenger's right solidrocket motor were indeed the cause of the January 28 accident. They were still unable to cite a reason for failure of the seals, but hoped that tests over the next 10 days would give some clue. NASA also noted that the putty used to protect these seals might shed some light. (WSJ, Mar 24/86; CSM, Mar 24/86)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
Astronaut Sally K. Ride was named Special Assistant to the Administrator for strategic planning, where she would be responsible for reviewing NASA's goals and objectives for near'40*tolongterm planning. Ride was a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle flights and a member of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86114)
