A NASA report, titled "Space Science Operations Management Concepts Study," was submitted to the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. The report, prepared by a 60member study team of personnel from NASA Headquarters, field centers, other Federal agencies, and university officials, examined options for the management of Space Station science. (NASA Note to Editors, Oct 1/1987)
NASA announced that a more detailed examination of the results of the December 23 cold weather testfiring of the redesigned booster rocket revealed that an outer ring which anchors the booster's nozzle came apart during the test. The nozzle steers the Space Shuttle during the first two minutes of flight. The setback forced NASA to cancel the June 2, 1987, launch of the Space Shuttle. NASA officials said they were confident the launch would be delayed about three months, since the critical elements of the booster rocket, the redesigned field joints, functioned perfectly during the test. (B Sun, Dec 30/87; NY Times, Dec 30/87; WSJ, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87; W Times, Dec 30/87)
Dr. Robert Watson, NASA Chief Scientist for the Airborne Antarctic Ozone project, reported that, midpoint of the project, both aircraft involved were performing very well and that mission scientists were very pleased with the quality of data being returned by the instruments. The Antarctic Ozone Project employed two NASA aircraft, a modified flying laboratory DC8, and an advanced highaltitude ER2. The goal of the project was to study the cause and nature of the ozone layer depletion. (Untitled release from NASA Headquarters, Sept 17, 1987; NY Times, Sept
A report sent to President Ronald Reagan by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle would have an escape hatch. But a decision on the rocket assist system necessary to eject the crew safely in emergency had not yet been made. The escape hatch was one of many significant changes made in the Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch in June 1988. Twentyone major changes were made in the Shuttle's main engines alone, in order to increase operating life, safety, and reliability. These and other changes listed in the NASA report to the White House reflected recommendations made by the Rogers Commission, following their H&investigation of the Challenger accident. (C Trib, July 2/87; LA Times, July 1/87; NY Times, July 1/87) During June: General Dynamics Corporation said that it would build 18 rockets over the next 5 years to launch communicationsh)0*0*0*satellites. According to a company spokesman, General Dynamics would spend $100 million to start production of the AtlasCentaur rocket. General Dynamics became the third U.S. company, together with McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, to attempt to move into launch vehicles production after the Challenger accident. (WSJ, June 16/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
Astronomer Carl Sagan told the Senate Commerce committee that a U.S. Mars mission would be the best cure for USA's "sagging" space program. According to Sagan, some 20,000 U.S. scientists have written to Congress urging a Mars mission. He recommended that NASA consider a possible joint mission with the Soviet Union, which had stepped up efforts to land on Mars. (NY Times, Feb 20/87; USA Today, Feb 20/87)
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and European Space Agency (ESA) Director General Reimar Luest announced that the Space Shuttle would be used for the launch of the joint NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the Sun in October 1990. At the same time, they announced that the launch, also from the Space Shuttle, of the Galileo mission to Jupiter had been moved up to October/November 1989. Since the distance to the Sun is considerably shorter than to Jupiter, the Ulysses spacecraft would begin to transmit data in 1994, a year earlier than the Galileo spacecraft. (NASA Release 8751) 0*0*0*April 6: NASA selected Boeing Computer Services Company, Seattle, Washington, for negotiating a technical and management information system contract in support of the Space Station program. (NASA Release 8752)
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
NASA officials declared that Space Station deployment, scheduled for 1994, could be delayed up to two years or the Station could be scaled down. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher said that the cost of the Space Station, once estimated at $8 billion, was now estimated at between $13 and $14.5 billion. Fletcher, who said that the United States was lagging behind the Soviet Union in human space flight, predicted that a U.S. crewtended Space Station would help the country catch up to the Soviets. Testifying before the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Dr. Fletcher stressed that the Space Station program retained high priority with the Reagan administration. (LA Times, Feb 4/87; USA `"Today, Feb 4/87; NY Times, Feb 5/8)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
NASA released a long awaited report of a task force, headed by Dr. Sally K. Ride, set up to assess NASA's future space policy in the wake of the Challenger disaster. The 63page report, delivered to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher the preceding week, urged that the United States build a permanent outpost on the Moon as the first step toward the ultimate goal of "exploring, prospecting, and settling Mars." Ride emphasized, however, that while settling Mars should be "our eventual goal," it should not be "our next goal." She recommended a strategy of "natural progression which leads step by step, in orderly, unhurried way, inexorably toward Mars." (LA Times, Aug 18/87; NY Times, Aug 18/87; W Post, Aug 18/87; W Times, Aug 18/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Chairman ofh)0*0*0*France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales JacquesLouis Lions signed a memorandum of understanding for a joint satellite oceanographic mission. The mission, called TOPEX/POSEIDON, which would chart ocean topography and observe ocean circulation on a global scale, was scheduled for a late 1991 launch. The TOPEX/POSEIDON mission would be part of the international World Climate Research Program. (NASA Release 8741)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Canadian Science Minister Frank Oberle approved the agreement on Canadian participation in the U.S. Space Station program. The terms of the preliminary agreement were spelled out in a memorandum of understanding worked out by negotiators from NASA and the Canadian Ministry of State for Science and Technology. The agreement called for cooperation between the two nations in the detailed design, development, operation, and use of the Space Station. The agreement would then be submitted for approval to the governments of the two countries. (NASA Release 87182; NY Times, Dec 12/87)
NASA announced formation of a group of scientists to examine potential Space Station activities, with the aim ofh)0*0*0*reducing the time between experiment concept development and publishable results. Chaired by Dr. David C. Black, NASA Headquarters Space Station chief scientist, the group was made up of scientists and researchers from NASA, the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, universities, and the private sector. (NASA Release 8727)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers announced that James T. Rose had been selected as Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, effective October 5, 1987. He would be responsible for NASA's commercial programs, the use of space by the U.S. private sector, the use of NASA technology by private industry, and NASA's support of innovative research by small business firms. James T. Rose joined NASA in 1957 as a research engineer for the Vanguard Program experiments. In 1962 he became head of the Manned Spacecraft Center's Mission Planning Office for the Gemini flights. From 1964 to 1974, Rose held a series of key positions at the McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. He returned to NASA in 1974 as Director, Space Shuttle Engineering, in the Office of Space Flight. From 1976 to 1986, he was Director of McDonnell Douglas' Space Manufacturing Initiatives. In June 1987, he again returned to NASA to become the Director of Space in NASA's Office of H&Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 87145; Huntsville Times, Oct 1/87)
NASA announced that 5 civilians and 10 military officers were selected as new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. Of the 15, 7 were chosen as pilot astronaut candidates and 8 as mission specialist candidates. The elite group also included the first Black woman, Dr. Mae C. Jemison, to be chosen for the program. (NASA Release 8793; NY Times, June 6/87; LA Times, June 6/87; H Chron, June 6/87)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced NASA planned to develop an advanced solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8747)
Willis H. Shapley was selected for NASA's newly established position of Associate Deputy Administrator (Policy), effective March 9, 1987. Shapley held the third ranking position, created in response to the reorganization recommended by the NASA Management Study Group. Shapley began Government service in 1942 with the Bureau of the Budget, Executive Office of the President, where he specialized in research and development, national defense, and space programs. From 1965 to 1975, he was NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator. In July 1975 he was the senior NASA representative in the Soviet Union during the joint USUSSR ApolloSoyuz space mission. Shapley retired from NASA in 1975 to become a consultant to a number of private institutions and Government agencies, including NASA. (NASA Release 8724)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the promotion of Dr. John M. Klineberg, Deputy Director of Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, since July 1979, to Director of the Center, effective immediately. Dr. Klineberg went to Lewis from NASA Headquarters, where he had served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. An internationally recognized expert in the field of transonic flow, he first joined NASA in 1970 at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 8786)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced thath)0*0*0*Isaac T. Gillam, NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, would retire effective September 1, 1987, and that Lawrence Herbolsheimer, Deputy Assistant Administrator in the Office of Commercial Programs, would serve as the Acting Assistant Gillam had served in a number of positions at NASA. In June 1978 he was appointed director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center in Edwards, California. Prior to that appointment, he was Dryden's Deputy Director and Director of Shuttle Operations. He subsequently served at NASA Headquarters as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and then moved on to head the Office of Commercial Programs. (NASA Release 87126)
In an effort to reduce reliance on the U.S. Space Shuttle, NASA would rely more heavily on untended rockets, declared Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. He said that the primary goal was to "accelerate the deployment of the Nation's backlog of spacescience missions." NASA hoped to launch as many as five satellites and space probes by untended rockets by 1992. WSJ, May 18/87)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, in Columbia, Maryland, for negotiations on a contract for continuation of maintenance and operations of the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN). The DSN provides tracking and data acquisition for planetary spaceflight missions and for NASA's crewtended and untended space programs. The fiveyear contract, with an option for an additional five years, was expected to begin April 2, 1987. (NASA Release 879)h)0*0*0*February 5: Jesse W. Moore resigned from NASA, effective February 8, 1987. Moore joined NASA in 1966. Among the varied positions he held included Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science (19781979); Director of Space Flight Division (19791981); Director of the Earth and Planetary Exploration Division (19811983); Acting Associate Administrator of Space Flight (April 1984August 1984); and Associate Administrator of Space Flight (August 1984January 1986). He was named Director of the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston, Texas, in January 1986, and in October 1986 he moved to Headquarters as a Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Policy and Planning. (NASA Release 8710; NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87)
The Soviet newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya reported that two Soviet cosmonauts grew taller while in space. According to the paper, cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko grew fourtenths of an inch taller during his record ten and a half months in space, and his crewmate Alexander Alexandrov grew sixtenths of an inch. The gain in height was because of lack of gravity in space. (NY Times, Dec During December: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher reviewed Agency activities during 1987 and declared that "NASA is on the road to recovery." He believed, "the United States can maintain a leadership role in space,...but only if the Nation stays truly committed to the space program." (NASA Release 87184) Industry officials said that the U.S. aerospace industry recorded the most profitable year in its history in 1987. (P Inq, Dec 17/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehicle, Soyuz TM2, toward a rendezvous with the orbiting Mir space station. This was the first crewtended Soviet space launch since July 1986 and only the second launch in the Russian human space program to be shown live on Soviet television. Western experts speculated that the two astronauts would aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin link up operations with the Mir space station on February 7. NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C Trib, Feb
The Pentagon released a Defense Intelligence Agency study which claimed that the Soviet Union had spent $80 billion on military space programs during the last decade. As a result, the Soviet Union was dramatically expanding its ability to boost payloads into space. The study said the Soviet Union operated about 50 types of space systems for military and civilian uses, had successfully tested a heavylift booster rocket in may 1987, and routinely launched five times as many rockets each year as the United States. (P Inq, Nov 15/87)
Dr. Lew Allen, Director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), announced that construction of JPL's new Microdevices Laboratory would start January 21, 1987. On the same day, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Dr. Marvin Goldberger, President of the California Institute of Technology, signed a memorandum of understanding for a Center for Space Microelectronics Technology to be established at JPL. The Center would be the successor to the Advanced Microelectronics Program established at JPL in 1983 and headed by Dr. Carl Kukkonen. The Center for Space Microelectronics Technology will be governed by a Board of Governors chaired by Dr. Lew Allen. Dr. Carl Kukkonen was named Center Director. (NASA Release 873; StarNews, Jan 20/87; The Foothill Leader, Jan 21/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain and strengthen the existing Space Shuttle processing arrangement at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, with Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida. The decision was recommended by a senior review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. The group was chaired by Roy S. Estess, Deputy Director, National Space Technology Laboratories, Mississippi, and included representatives from NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 8726)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Dr. Lew Allen selected a Virginia site for a Space Station Program office. The 110,000 square feet of leased space in Reston, Virginia, would house NASA's Space Station Program director and some 400 JPL and NASA personnel. Initial occupancy was planned for summer 1987. (NASA Release 8749)
Appearing before the Los Angeles World Affairs Council, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that building the Space Station was critical to the United States regaining initiative in space. "It is no longer a question of whether we should have longterm goals in space," Fletcher said. "The question is can we afford not to lead." (LA Times, Nov 7/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and General Kabbaj, the Inspector of the Royal Moroccan Air Force, signed an agreement permitting the United States the use of Morocco's Ben Guerir Air Force Base for emergency landing of the Space Shuttle. The facility would be ready for such an emergency in February 1988. (NASA Release 876)
NASA officials, who met in Moscow with their Soviet counterparts December 713 to discuss cooperation in space, said the Soviet Union planned to launch a spacecraft to Mars in 1992. In addition, the Soviets asked the United States to modify an American spacecraft to help relay data from another Soviet mission to Mars set for launching in 1994. (CSM, Dec 21/87; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 19/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher issued a statement in response to Senator William Proxmire's request in Congress to abolish the Space Station program. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the Space Station proposal has been repeatedly debated in Congress and each time has received bipartisan congressional support. He stressed that by abolishing the Space Shuttle program, the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new scientific and technological advances and would "provide infrastructure for future exploration of the solar system by manned spacecraft." (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in Response to Senator Proxmire's Statement Asking for Abolishment of the Space Station, August 27, 1987)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
In a major organizational shift, NASA announced the adoption of new postChallenger era commercial activity policies. The released decision memoranda, covering the new policies, were signed by Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers. The new policies resulted from the report of the Commercialization of Space Reviewh)0*0*0*Task Force and covered such general activities as joint endeavor agreements, microgravity research, secondary payloads on the Space Shuttle, expendable launch vehicles, and commercial activities. According to the new policies, the Office of Commercial Programs would henceforth determine, in coordination with concerned Headquarters offices, whether NASA should participate in any proposed joint program. Responsibility for programs utilizing the microgravity environment was transferred from the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology to the Office of Space Science and Applications. Secondary payload space would be carefully allocated by the Deputy Administrator and implemented by the Office of Space Flight to accomplish specific NASA objectives. To encourage and facilitate as much as possible the private domestic access to space, NASA's Office of Space Flight would contract private industry for launch of Expendable Launch Vehicles. Finally, the Office of Commercial Programs would, to the fullest extent possible, facilitate the utilization of space for commercial purposes. (NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Responsibility for Programs Utilizing the Microgravity Environment, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Secondary STS Payloads, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV's) Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; LA Times, June 13/87)
