A localized electrical fire occurred on board the Magellan spacecraft during a power systems check at the Kennedy Space Center's (KSC) Spacecraft Encapsulation Facility (SAEF2). The fire, which occurred while a technician worked within the spacecraft, was quickly extinguished without injuries and with only minor damage to Magellan. The KSC fire department also responded but was not required to enter the SAEF2 clean room environment. The incident was being investigated by NASA. (NASA Releases 88141 and 88153).
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received the International Technology Institute's (ITI) William F. Rockwell, Jr. Medal at the International Congress on Technology and Technology Exchange banquet, in Pittsburgh. The Rockwell Medal, awarded annually to a maximum of three individuals from different continents, recognizes contributions toward the generation, transfer, and application of technology for the betterment of mankind. (NASA Release 88139)'%0*October 20: Two of the three cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station took a fourhour spacewalk to replace a faulty component on an xray telescope attached to the station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, on a yearlong endurance mission aboard Mir, wore a new spacesuit design intended to increase flexibility. C Trib, Oct 21/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Hiroyuki Osawa, President of the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), recently signed an agreement to allow NASA to directly receive data from Japan's Earth Resources Satellite (ERS1). The0*agreement would allow NASA to have access to realtime data from Japan's ERS1 synthetic aperture radar and optical sensor. NASA would receive the data at a ground station at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Data from the ground station would be provided to NASDA. Japan's ERS1 was scheduled to be launched by NASDA on the H1 launch vehicle in early 1992. (NASA Release 8812)
President Ronald Reagan signed a report to Congress creating a joint Department of Defense (DoD) and NASA program for the development of the Advanced Launch System (ALS). The ALS was intended to provide a launch system that would meet longterm national launch needs; would be flexible, robust, reliable, and responsive; and would drastically cut costs in all elements of the space launch system. The management plan created a joint program office headed by an Air Force program manager and a NASA deputy program manager. DoD would manage the systems engineering and integration, vehicle, logistics, and payload module. NASA would manage liquid engine systems and focused technology efforts. DoD would accept full funding responsibility for the program, with any unique civil requirements not addressed by the ALS baseline being funded by NASA. (NASA Release 885)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinners had been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of Space Science. From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment as Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88138)
This date marked 5 years since the Pioneer 10 spacecraft had left the solar system on its trajectory toward interstellar space. Pioneer 10the most distant humanmade object in existencewas now 4,175,500,000 miles from the Sun, almost 450*times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Radio signals, moving at the speed of light, took 12 hours and 26 minutes to travel from Earth to spacecraft and back, the longest time of any radio communication in history. The spacecraft, launched in 1972, continued to operate extremely well as it collected and transmitted data back to Earth. Its primary mission, originally scheduled for 21 months, was to assess the feasibility of passage through the Asteroid Belt and provide the first closeup examination of Jupiter and its moons. Pioneer 10 accomplished all of its original goals by December 1973. At that point, the mission was indefinitely extended. Scientists reprogrammed the probe to explore the Sun's atmosphere and to look for a tenth planet and gravity waves in the far outer solar system and beyond. Recent improvements in the NASA ground stations were expected to allow communications with Pioneer 10 to continue until the range approached six billion miles, more than twice the prelaunch estimates. Project Manager Richard O. Fimmel expected that NASA would be able to track Pioneer 10 until the power source limited communications, which was expected to occur toward the end of the Both Pioneer 10 and its sister spacecraft, Pioneer 11, carried an easily interpreted graphic message in the event that they encountered any intelligent life forms on their journey. Scientists believed Pioneer 10 and 11 would travel among the stars virtually forever because the vacuum of interstellar space is so empty that the risk of any type of collision would be negligible. (ARC Release
After several delays, the Soviet Union successfully completed an automated orbital flight test of the Space Shuttle Buran. The untended Soviet orbiterwhich is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiterswas launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198foot Energia rocket with two strapon boosters in a configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlike the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's engines for ascent to orbit. According to Soviet sources, the Soviet shuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landinga capability the U.S. Shuttles lack. After completing two orbits, Buran landed successfully on a 2.7mile runway at the Baikonur facility, ending the 31/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agency hailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude to crewtended Shuttle flights. In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBISSOV88222,''0*Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A; AP, Nov 15/88; UPI, Nov 15/88; NY Times, Nov 16/88; WSJ, Nov 16/88; W Post, Nov 16/88; LA Times, Nov 15/88; W Times, Nov 16/88; B Sun, Nov 16/88; P Inq, Nov 16/88; C Trib, Nov
The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive "Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21st century. The release of the space policy had been delayed for several days because of a dispute among NASA, the President's Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of the commercial space initiative. The most controversial component of the initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), an orbiting, Shuttletended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by some members of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward the permanently crewtended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a "minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council's recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF from Space Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response to the Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statement recommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and a reconfiguration of the facility as a crewtended laboratory. A draft of the 39page commercial space initiative included a report by the National Security Council on national security implications of commercializing space, and legislative and administrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Among other key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicle industry and the establishment of limits on the amount of thirdparty liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. President Reagan also announced a program to develop the technologies needed to conduct humanassisted exploration of the solar system, including a mission to Mars. The program, labeled Project Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year 1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the Moon and Mars. (Presidential Directive on National Space Policy: Fact Sheet, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; NY Times, Jan 24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88)
An experimental jetliner being developed by McDonnell Douglas Corporation debuted in a 1hour flight from the Douglas Aircraft Facility in Long Beach, California. The aircraft, with one unducted fan (UDF) engine and one ordinary jet engine, was a forerunner of the planned MD91 and MD92 passenger jets that McDonnell Douglas was actively marketing to airlines. The UDF engine, developed by GE, had demonstrated significant reductions in fuel consumption over conventional jet engines. McDonnell Douglas' MD91 and MD92 airliners were being developed to meet the expected demand among airlines for alternative, fuelefficient aircraft during the latter 1990s. "This is as big a jump in technology as going from propellers to jets," said Walt Orlowski, program manager for the experimental aircraft. "We are at the forefront of aviation technology." (LA Times, Feb 3/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the Moon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./U.S.S.R. humanassisted missions. "Going to the Moon together would give the two leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for further cooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission to Mars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crewtended mission. Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year0*in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted the notion that American space leadership was lost. Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budget request for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr 14/88; NASA Release 8852)
The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher voiced alarm over the House of Representative's resolution for funding of NASA's fiscal year 1989 budget. Speaking in Washington before a symposium on "Science Education: A Challenge for Excellence in America's Future," Dr. Fletcher issued his toughest warning yet about the consequences of reducing the NASA funding levels proposed by the Administration. The Administrator warned that "the civil space program will be stopped in its tracks" if the House funding figure of $10.2 billioncut by over $1 billion from the Administration proposalwere to be passed. More specifically, Dr. Fletcher predicted the reduced budget would kill the Space Station program and lead to the abrogation of several international commitments in space science and applications. (NASA Release 8860).
President Ronald Reagan christened the planned international Space Station "Freedom," to symbolize the values shared by the U.S. and its allies. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the name "Freedom" was recommended by NASA officials and representatives of Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency, project participants. (WH Release, Jul 18/88; UPI, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88)
NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the new Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, effective immediately. Abbey had been Special Assistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November 1987. He began his NASA career in 1967 as Technical Assistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program. He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Director of Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight Crew Operations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and service awards. (NASA Release 8836)
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
NASA Administrator Dr. Fletcher appointed Kenneth S. Pedersen to be Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective immediately. Pedersen would be responsible for congressional, intergovernmental, international, and industry relations, educational activities and relations with educational institutions, and the NASA History Office. (NASA Release 88160)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on the agency's proposed 1989 budget. He stressed that 1989 would be a crucial year for NASA, a year that would "make or break" the Nation's space program. The proposed budget included funds to increase the rate of Shuttle flights in 1989 in order to "fly off" the backlog of vital defense and science missions. A build up of funding for Space Station hardware development was also requested. Dr. Fletcher testified that the requested additional funds for the Space Station were the minimum necessary to avoid the disbandment of development teams and the indefinite deferral or cancellation of that program. He also warned that if funds for advanced technology were not approved, the necessary technological foundation for future achievements would not be built, and the goal of longterm U.S. space leadership would "become an idle dream." (1989 NASA Authorization Hearings Before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 8831; AP, Mar 22/88; W Times Mar 23/88; LA Times Mar 23/88)
The NASA Administrator appointed Ivan Bekey to be Special Assistant for System Engineering and Planning Integration, Office of Exploration. Bekey would be responsible for overall systems engineering for Office of Exploration studies and formulation of top level architecture. In the previous year, he served as Director of Program Planning for the Office of Policy and Planning. For the preceding six years, he was the Director of Advanced Programs, Office of Space Flight. He was also NASA coordinator for the National Commission on Space. Bekey joined NASA in 1978. (NASA Special Announcement on 066088)
Engineers at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah concluded that a design flaw had led to the failure of a previously untested Space Shuttle booster part during a fullscale test firing December 23. NASA officials delayed the flight schedule after they discovered that a portion of the booster's nozzle assembly, which guides the vehicle, had fallen apart during testing, a month Engineers finished taking the booster motor apart and recovered all six missing pieces of the failed nozzle part. Known as the outer boot ring, the failed part anchored the booster's nozzle to a flexible rubbery "boot" that allowed the nozzle to swivel. One purpose of the boot ring was to shield the metal and rubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intense heat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster's nozzle was deliberately moved to the maximum seven degreessome three degrees beyond what would be required during a normal Shuttle flight. NASA was looking into the possibility that the extreme steering might have caused the boot ring to come apart or A group of officials at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, developers of the original design test requirements for an extreme swiveling of the nozzle, studied whether the maneuver should be repeated in future tests of whatever design is adopted, or whether a less severe maneuver would be an adequate test under the more stringent, postChallenger standards. The test failure would probably force a delay of 6 to 10 weeks in the resumption of Space Shuttle flights, delaying the STS26 flight of Discovery to no earlier than August 1988. (NASA Release 87190; UPI, Jan 4/88; W Post, Jan 5/88; NY Times, Jan 6/88) 0*January 11: Speaking at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics supported Aerospace Sciences Conference, Ross M. Jones, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, presented a proposal to launch very small, low cost scientific probes to various destinations in the solar system by using Earthorbiting electromagnetic launchers or railguns. Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong electromagnetic forces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities, were being developed by the U.S. military for use both on the ground and in space. (NASA Release 884; M News, Jan 11/88; W Times, Jan 11/88; LA Times, Jan 11/88; LA Star News, Jan 12/88)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
