Shuttle program director Robert Crippen said that a Space Shuttle rescue of the errant satellite sent up earlier this month by Martin Marietta appeared possible. He could not say whether the Intelsat communications satellite would be lifted into a higher orbit or if the Shuttle would bring it back to Earth, but noted that either approach would require about one year for planning. (W Post, March 24/90)
NASA released a call for proposals to lease a commercially developed and owned space module, the Commercial Middeck Augmentation Module, which would ride in the payload bay of the Space Shuttle and add about 50 lockers to the orbiter's capacity. The need for greater capacity resulted from NASA's Commercial Development of Space Program, which was designed to enlarge research opportunities for private use by conducting experiments in materials processing, protein crystal growth, `"biotechnology, and fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 9046; Sp News, Mar 1218/90) During March: A NASA study released to the Senate disclosed that designs for the planned Space Station Freedom needed significant changes that would drive up the initial cost. The study found an elaborate program of preventative maintenance that would require about 2,200 hours each year for space walks by astronauts and0*begin before the station was even completed. Possible solutions included use of advanced robots for maintenance, newly designed spacesuits to ease space walks, and a redesign of Space Station parts that would make them easier to repair. (NY Times, Mar 19/90; Mar 20/90; Mar 28/90; Mar 29/90)
The Senate, in a rush to agree on the 1991 spending plan, compromised on a $1.9 billion allocation for NASA's Space Station. Said Senator Barbara Mikulski, "The space program has been increased by 13 percent so it's not as if we gouged them." W Post, Oct 17/90; AvWk, Oct 22/90)
The Langley Research Center in Virginia selected Mason and Hanger Services, Inc. for negotiation of a 5year, $97.9 million contract to support all aspects of supply, transportation and equipment management; general and specialized administrative services; different aspects of the security program; and support of the scientific and technical information program. The Television Development Division of NASA Headquarters awarded the Imaging Systems Laboratory of Florida Atlantic University a one to fiveyear contract with a potential value of $3 million for research and development in advanced video systems for space and terrestrial applications. (NASA Release C90cc; 90131A) ' 0*
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the completion of the merger of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and the Office of Exploration; the two offices were merged into the Office of Aeronautics, Exploration, and Technology. Arnold D. Aldrich was named to head the new NASA office, which was intended to combine the analysis of exploration mission alternatives with innovative technologies, two closely related efforts that Truly felt should proceed under a strong central management. Truly also announced the establishment of the Office of Legislative Affairs, effective March 18, 1990. Headed by Martin P. Kress, this NASA office would be responsible for legislative matters and the coordination of budgetary and policy matters with Congress. (NASA Release 9032; 9033) During February: Daniel Brandenstein, NASA's chief astronaut, returned from a tour of Soviet space facilities and said the original untended Russian shuttle, maiden voyage in 1988, would never fly again. He also reported that the Soviets planned to launch a second untended space shuttle in 1991 and automatically dock it with Mir. The station's crew planned to run some tests. Again untended, it would undock and reenter the atmosphere. (UPI, Feb 21/90)
After five delays because of the Shuttle Commander's' 0*head cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather, Atlantis (STS36) lifted off under dark skies from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to deliver a 37,300pound classified military satellite into orbit. The postponements tacked on an additional $2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Truly reiterated NASA's policy that meeting launch schedules was secondary to safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its $500 million military payload the following day at an orbit inclined 62 degrees north of the equator, allowing it to fly over every major populated and industrialized center in the Soviet Union. An even higher inclination orbit would have been preferred. A polar orbit was considered ideal for a recon naissance satellite, but the Shuttle base at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, from where such an orbit could have been safely achieved, was not operational; the weight of the larger satellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle. Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California on March 4. No problems were reported during the brief 41/2 day mission, the Space Shuttle's 34th mission and the 6th mission dedicated solely to the military.W Post, Mar 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 5/90; Feb 28/90; NY Times, March 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; P Inq, Mar 5/90))
The White House began looking at other ideas for astronaut expeditions to the Moon and Mars besides those presented by NASA. The unprecedented move stemmed from NASA's cost and time estimate, $400 billion over 30 years for the project. A panel representing 54 aerospace companies had met in the previous week, and the National Research Council planned to review its own efforts to seek innovative ideas later in the week. NASA joined the search for sources of outside ideas as well. Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Director for Aeronautics, called the move "highly appropriate" and added, "A lot of our ideas are good, but we certainly haven't covered the waterfront." NY Times, Jan 15/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
would have to return to the hanger for repairs. NASA officials were not sure when the craft would be launched but announced that only eight of the nine planned flights for the year would be flown. (NY Times, June 7/90; W Times, Jun 8/90)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope for the first time had observed a faint object, a quasar billions of light years from Earth. Officials hoped that study of the image, known to astronomers as UM675, would give clues as to the chemicals present soon after the universe was born. (W Times, Nov 5/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly told a panel created by President George Bush that the Agency was facing serious problems, but not what most people believed them to be. The two obstacles standing in front of the Agency, he said, were "Governmentwide practices" that encumbered connections between programs and resources and the public's misunderstanding of the proposed Space Station Freedom. The Space Station's design flaws, he added, were either solved or close to a solution, "yet public understanding is to the contrary." In a related matter, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA planned to spend $1.9 billion over the next five years on its seven centers of excellence in the area of highperformance computing. The Centers would focus on training college and graduatelevel students, thereby educating the next generation of scientists in the field. Truly, who spoke at a conference on supercomputing in September noted, "NASA needs highperformance computing. Some of our missions depend on it." (W Post, Sep 14/90; Fed CoWk, Sep 10/90)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Ross as Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. John W. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held several managerial positions in the private sector. Lawerence Ross, who joined NASA in 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as Deputy Director of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has been given several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970. After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near San Francisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director of LeRc. Townsend began government service in 1947 and held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 9049; 9050; 9051; 9055)
NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly announced the establishment of a Space Commerce Steering Group, composed of NASA officials, that would provide an overview of commercial space technology applications. The goal of the Group was to provide coordination of potential commercial capabilities; NASA's Office of Commercial Programs would remain the primary action agent. Truly maintained that NASA "must ensure that [its] technology is transferred to the private sector. The taxpayer's investment in NASA is an investment in the international competitiveness of U.S. industry." (NASA Release 90112)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
Space Shuttle mission specialist Colonel Richard M. Mullane announced his retirement from NASA, effective July 1, 1990. He flew two Shuttle flights in 1984 and 1988 and was scheduled to fly aboard the Atlantis later in February. (NASA Release 9028)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
The Federal Aviation Administration signed a memoranda of understanding with NASA to jointly research problems in aviation. Areas to be investigated were environmental compatibility, human factors, severe weather, integration of cockpit and air traffic operations, airworthiness, and noise. (NASA Release 90131)
