The press reported hearings of the Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation at which NASA Administrator Richard Truly defended NASA against charges by the General Accounting Office (GAO) that it understated the cost of the planned Space Station and its operations through 2027 by at least $34 billion. Truly questioned GAO figures and stated it was time to begin building the station rather than submit it to further study or audit. (W Post, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; WSJ, May 2/91; B Sun, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91; Plain Dealer, May 5/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the creation of a new Systems Analysis and Concepts Office at NASA Headquarters, in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. James D. Bain, who served as executive secretary of that committee, was appointed Director of the new office. (NASA Release 91-74; SP News, May 20-26/91)
The media reported engineers were studying a possible problem connected with a $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) to be launched by Shuttle Atlantis. The problem involved the motor that deployed a boom carrying a six-foot-wide antenna. The main TDRS antennas are folded for launch, but once the satellite is in orbit, the antenna booms rotate outward and the antennas open up like umbrellas. On June 24, NASA manager of the project Nicholas Chrissotimos, stated that the problem was resolved. (UPI, Jun 21/91; AP, Jun 22/91; C Trin, Jun 25/91)
NASA's Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Experiments Program Manager Dean Olmstead expressed NASA's pleasure that the U.S. Army had joined NASA to conduct various ACTS experiments. ACTS forms the center of NASA's satellite communications research and development efforts. (PR Newswire, Aug 20/91)
A space journal reported that Vice President Dan Quayle had asked David Thompson, former NASA engineer and current chairman, president, and chief executive officer of Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, to take the post of NASA Deputy Administrator. Thompson was considering the matter. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91)
An article in Florida Today referred to former NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's proposal that some 100 top Shuttle program managers around the country be moved to Kennedy Space Center under a consolidation plan NASA was considering. The recommendations were to be discussed at a December 9-10 meeting with NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (Fla Today, Nov 15/91)
The General Accounting Office (GAO) report on NASA indicated it needed to improve contract oversight to reduce cost overruns and schedule delays. According to the GAO, one in every three NASA contracts experienced cost overruns and two in five experienced delays. The conclusion was based on audits at Marshall, Kennedy, Goddard, and Johnson field centers based on a statistical sample of 317 active or administratively closed-out contracts between 1984 and 1989. (Htsavl Tms, Dec 23/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
The report of the committee appointed by the Bush Administration, headed by Norman R. Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, produced favorable comments from industry, according to the New York Times. Industrialists believe that the report showed greater realism about the space program, with its emphasis on unmanned flights and request for larger funding for NASA. In contrast to this complimentary review, Alcestis Oberg in Space News maintained that the Augustine panel's recommendations were irrelevant and a new agency was needed to pursue moon and Mars initiatives. (NY Times, Feb 7/91; SP News, Feb 4-10/91)
NASA announced that the Italian Space Agency (ASI) would design and develop two Mini Pressurized Logistics Modules for Space Station Freedom under a memorandum of understanding signed with NASA in Washington. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly signed on behalf of NASA and Luciano Guerriero, President of ASI, signed on its behalf. The two agencies also agreed to work toward expanding their relationship, including the provision of a Mini Laboratory. (NASA Release 91-200)
Pamela Clark, a former NASA employee who teaches chemistry, wrote an article criticizing the lack of support from upper management of the space program. She urged Congress to adequately finance a civilian space program that would recognize America's position of world leadership. (H Chron, Mar 19/91)
Representative Lamar Smith, Republican, Texas, wrote NASA Administrator Richard Truly expressing concern that NASA's Comet rocket program may keep new firms from entering the commercial space industry. Truly's office was preparing a reply. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
NASA announced that astronaut Mary L. Cleave would become Deputy Project Manager for Sea Viewing Wide Field Sensors at the NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Her work would involve supervising a joint NASA and commercial project to learn about the biological mass in the ocean by studying the chlorophyll content to determine how much plankton is produced. (NASA Release 91-68; H Chron, May 3/91)
NASA announced that a 15-member delegation of Soviet space officials, headed by Oleg N. Shishkin, Minister of General Machine Building, would be visiting NASA headquarters and space centers July 9-16. (NASA Release 91-105)
Parade Magazine contained a feature article on Barbara Morgan, who following the death of Christa McAuliffe in the Challenger disaster, was her designated successor as NASA's teacher in space. NASA Administrator Richard Truly was quoted as saying that after NASA's annual review of the subject, it was determined that it was not yet appropriate to send another teacher on the Shuttle although it was only a matter of time. Morgan stated she recognized the risks of space flight but was nevertheless eager to go ahead with a flight mission. (Parade, Jul 14/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
NASA announced that Pennsylvania State University's Center for Cell Research, State College, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had begun a new space program to enable U.S. industry to enhance the purification and processing of cells, subcellular particles, proteins, growth factors, and other biological products. (NASA Release 91-172)
The House of Representatives rejected President Bush's proposed budget, allowing only a 4.2 percent increase in the space program to keep pace with inflation, instead of the recommended 12 percent increase. (UPI, Apr 18/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91)
NASA officials George Rodney, the agency's top safety official, and Robert Crippen, head of the Shuttle program, said a special investigating team would spend the summer reviewing the way NASA approved Shuttle components for flight. (W Post, May 31/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement following action by the House of Representatives to continue the development of Space Station Freedom. Truly commended the bipartisan vote in the House, expressed his confidence that Freedom would win support in the Senate, and expressed his commitment to shape the final NASA FY 1992 budget in a way that balanced the various research and project areas. (NASA Release 91-88)
The media reported that President Bush had informed two senators, Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, both on the Senate space subcommittee, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly that he would actively campaign to reverse the congressional panel's decision to scuttle the Space Station. (AP, May 23/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91)
The Soviet Union used the name of Yuri Gagarin, the first human in space 30 years ago, to boost its emerging commercial space program. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at an opening ceremony in Moscow said Soviet space science and technology were open to international cooperation and called for joint space research with the United States, European countries, China, India, Japan, and others. (AP, Apr 11/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that based on a recent policy review, NASA's Space Flight Participant Program would be kept in abeyance until 1992. NASA previously had indicated that when the program resumed, first priority would be given to a teacher in space in fulfillment of space education plans. (NASA Release 91-50; UPI, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 6/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the ceremony that would take place on April 25 on the occasion of the rolling out of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour. The ceremony was scheduled for Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, where the orbiter was assembled by Rockwell International Corporation's Space System Division. Truly praised the efforts of all those in NASA and industry who had cooperated on the program. Part of the ceremony would involve the presentation to NASA by Robert Duce, Dean of the University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography, of Endeavour's first "payload," a sternpost remnant recovered from the orbiter's namesake, the first ship commanded by British explorer Captain James Cook in 1768-71. During the ceremony Truly announced the creation of the NASA Endeavour Teacher Fellowship Program  with the gifts donated to NASA by the public for the replacement orbiter. The program would award scholarships to American undergraduates studying to be teachers. (NASA Release 91-62; UPI, Apr 24/91; NASA Release 91-64)
The Washington Times carried an article on Baikonur, the rocket workers' town in the Soviet Union founded by the military in the same year as the Cosmodrome, 1955. No permanent residents were registered in Baikonur, known as Leninsk, but the city had 100,000 inhabitants crammed into a 4.5 square mile area. Tables of Soviet "space firsts" and "space endurance records" were included. Another article in the same issue described Soviet efforts to sell or rent space gear, including parts of the orbiting Mir Space Station, to ease the financial situation of the space program.
The NASA Advisory Council of 25 leaders in industry, government, and academia sent a letter to Vice President Dan Quayle commending NASA Administrator Truly's quick action in implementing the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program. (NASA Release N91-10)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of 26 Space Grant State Consortia as a result of Phase II competition. Recipients receive four-year, $150,000-per-year grants to initiate new programs. States receiving such grants were Alaska, Delaware, District of Columbia, Indiana, Kansas, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oregon, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin. Twelve states with limited aerospace activity would receive similar grants to enhance aerospace research and infrastructure. They were Arkansas, Connecticut, Idaho, Louisiana, Maine, Montana, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, South Carolina, and West Virginia. Both grants require partial matching nonfederal funds and would be used in part to sponsor fellowship programs for undergraduate and graduate students. (NASA Release 91-19)
NASA officials announced that its X-29 experimental aircraft flew five times on January 25, setting a new record for daily flights from the Ames-Dryden test center. The second of two X-29s built by NASA, it was conducting high angle of attack test studies and military utility in a joint project with the Air Force. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 14/91)
In response to the House-Senate Conference report on the FY 1992 budget, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA was very grateful for the funding for Space Station Freedom. However, it was disappointed that the total NASA appropriation did not keep up with inflation. (NASA Release 91-158)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced two key appointments: Arnold D. Aldrich to be Associate Administrator for the new Office of Space Systems Development and Richard H. Petersen to become Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 91-161; AP, Oct 3/91; Daily Press, Oct 4/91; W Post, Oct 10/91)
A Business Week article on attempts to make the commercial space-launch business profitable, quoted NASA Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson Jr. He stressed the need for "real, nongovernmental customers" in order to make the program a success. The article summarized the work of various commercial firms and mentioned a number of instances of unsuccessful rocket launches. (Bus Wk, Aug 12/91)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce as Deputy Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. He had served as Director of Aerospace Technology at Lewis since 1984. (NASA Release 91-65)
AP reported that astronaut John Blaha, commander of the Atlantis mission, said he used the post-flight news conference to express his views on the space program and the importance of the Space Station, after reading criticism of the latter. (AP, Aug 21/91)
Concurrently, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Michael D. Griffin for the new position of Associate Administrator for Exploration. (NASA Release 91-139; SP News, Aug 26-Sep 8/91)
The media reported the concern of Soviet cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station that the station and the space program in general might be sold because of Russia's economic plight. The role of the new Soviet republics with regard to space was also undetermined. Subsequently, Yuri Semyonov, general designer of the Energia team that managed Mir, said according to Tass, that the Space Station would remain the property of his collective. (NY Times, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 7/91; P Inq, Sep 8/91; B Sun, Sep 8/91; AP, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91)
Florida Today reported that Forrest McCartney, who had headed Kennedy Space Center since 1986 would be retiring in about a year. Subsequently, the media reported that McCartney had been asked to step aside early by top NASA managers. (Fla Today, Oct 23/91; UPI, Oct 25/91; AP, Oct 26/91; W Times, Oct 27/91; O Sen Star, Oct 30/91)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
Magellan project manager Tony Spear at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the spacecraft had completed its objective for the primary phase of the Venus mission more than one month before the end of the first 243-day mapping cycle. Magellan mapped 70 percent of the planet by April 3, and would have mapped 84 percent by May 15. The mission was to be extended to allow Magellan to map the remaining 14 percent, including the south pole. Toward the latter part of its mission it will also acquire gravity data. Magellan's findings, as described in Science magazine, indicated Venus was volcanic and geologically active. (NASA Release 91-49; AP, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; AP, Apr 5/91; NASA Release 91-53)
James T. Rose, Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, announced his plan to leave NASA. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that John G. Mannix would take his place. (NASA Release 91-179)
AP reported, as quoted in the Washington Times, that the Soviet cosmonauts were waiting to return home, puzzled by home conditions. Their return was postponed after the republic of Kazakhstan claimed ownership of the territory on which they were supposed to land. Furthermore, the Soviet space program was experiencing financial and administrative difficulties. (AP, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Robert L. Crippen as the new Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, effective January 1, 1992. Crippen is to replace Forrest S. McCartney. (NASA Release 91-180; AP, Oct 31/91; UPI, Oct 31/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with senior NASA officials in Washington to discuss Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson's interim viewpoints on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices. Thompson's final recommendations and a proposed implementation plan were to follow in early November. (NASA Release 91-169)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced, following a senior management meeting, that NASA would conduct a thorough review of the recent discovery that a fuel sensor removed from Space Shuttle Columbia last fall was cracked. However, Truly indicated that the sensor problem on Columbia had been corrected and the Shuttle was now tentatively scheduled for launch on June 1. (NASA Release 91-79; AP, May 25/91; UPI, May 25/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the planned creation of the Office of Management Systems and Facilities. Benita A. Cooper was to be the Associate Administrator for this office which was to enhance total quality management. (NASA Release 91-160)
Dr. Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, announced that the Space Studies Board has long opposed justifying Space Station Freedom solely on scientific merit. However, the Board recognizes, and NASA concurs, that "there are national considerations for building a Space Station other than scientific research." Congress and NASA decided to build the Station in an evolutionary way so that ultimately it would meet the principal scientific research requirements intended. The Station represents a significant part of the long-term goals for the civil space program set by the President. NASA was confident that this was the time to proceed. (NASA Editors' Note N91-17)
A Soyuz rocket blasted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the Mir Space Station carrying an Austrian electronic engineer and the first cosmonaut from the Republic of Kazakhstan, where Baikonur is located. The joint Soviet-Austrian mission was part of a Soviet effort to help pay for the space program with joint international flights. Tass reported the rocket docked with Mir on October 4. On October 10, two Soviet cosmonauts and the first Austrian in space returned to Earth, according to Tass. (AP, Oct 2/91; UPI, Oct 2/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; AP, Oct 4/91; AP, Oct 10/91)
NASA's scaled-back design for Space Station Freedom was to be considered at a National Space Council meeting at the White House. The National Space Council members include members of the Cabinet, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, the White House Chief of Staff, the presidential science adviser, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (W Post, Mar 18/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly and Secretary of Energy James D. Watkins signed an interagency agreement on cooperation in areas relating to space isotope power. The agreement updated an earlier 1965 pact and delineated authorities of NASA and DOE on research, technology development, design, production, delivery, spacecraft integration, and launch support for radioisotope power systems. (NASA Release 91-119)
Encore Computer Corporation filed an agency protest of a $191 million award by NASA Johnson Space Center to IBM Corporation for a mainframe requirements contract. NASA officials were to meet with Encore representatives over the disagreement, which involved pricing information submitted. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 10/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, the Soviet space program was facing a difficult future. The main elements of the Soviet space program were concentrated in three republics: Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. Rockets were built primarily in Ukraine, control centers and instrument manufacturing plants were mainly in Russia, and the principal launch facility, the Baikonur Cosmodrome, was in Kazakhstan. Marcia S. Smith, the Soviet space expert on the staff of the Congressional Research Service, said those three republics agreed in early October they could operate by themselves. However, the economic situation became worse, causing increasing criticism. Nevertheless, communications satellites were essential to produce foreign investments and maintain a link with the outside world. Space research had technological spinoffs in areas such as computers, transportation, communications, and propulsion. Therefore, U.S. experts did not believe the former Soviet states would allow the space program to die. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
The Washington Post discussed the success of NASA engineers in fixing the computer software "bug" that caused spacecraft Magellan, after its arrival at Venus, to lose contact with Earth. Magellan mission director James Scott of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California confirmed that the problem was solved and possible similar flaws in other space programs were being eliminated. (W Post, Aug 18/91)
The media covered the unveiling of the Shuttle Endeavour at some length, including its new features outlined by NASA Administrator Richard Truly: "The latest avionics navigation equipment, the finest mechanical systems, a new drag chute, and equipment for longer duration flights." Endeavour has more fuel cells, which generate electricity, allowing it to stay in orbit as long as 28 days. (P Inq, Apr 26/91; W Times, Apr 26/91; NY Times, Apr 26/91; W Post, Apr 26/91; USA Today, Apr 26/91; WSJ, Apr 26/91; B Sun, Apr 26/91; Daily News, Apr 26/91; H Chron, Apr 26/91; AP, Apr 26/91; UPI, Apr 26/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter from Norman R. Augustine, former chairman of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, assessing NASA's efforts over the preceding nine months to implement the committee's recommendations. The letter recognized that NASA took "many significant actions" but "much is yet to be accomplished." (NASA Editors' Note N91-60; UPI, Sep 16/91)
NASA announced crew assignments for the International Microgravity flight, scheduled for February 1992 and the Spacelab D-2 mission, the second German Spacelab flight, scheduled for February 1993. Lt. Col. David C. Hilmers was to be mission specialist on the microgravity flight and Lt. Col. Jerry L. Ross was to serve as Payload Commander on the spacelab flight. (NASA Release 91-57)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly held a press conference during his visit to Marshall Space Flight Center for its Honors Day. Truly commended the work on Space Station design performed at Marshall and defended the Hubble Space Telescope, a Marshall-managed project. Fred Wojtalik, manager of Marshall's Hubble Space Telescope, was given NASA's Distinguished Service Medal. (Htsvl Tms, Mar 29/91)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of H. Lee Beach Jr. as Deputy Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-198)
NASA administrator Richard H. Truly announced additional actions to implement the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. Truly briefed the National Space Council on January 11 on the status of NASA's review. NASA decided as follows: Space science would remain NASA's priority and NASA would implement the existing strategic plan, as recommended by the advisory committee. In response to the committee's recommendation, NASA planned to form a special task force with the Department of Defense to assess over the next two months development of an evolutionary heavy-lift launch vehicle. Space Station Freedom restructuring activities, centering on life sciences on microgravity research and applications, conducted in concert with international partners, would be extended to incorporate the committee's recommendations. NASA would move with the Office of Personnel Management to structure a personnel management system that recognizes NASA's special needs to attract and retain top-flight scientists, engineers, and other specialists.
NASA announced it was seeking applications from new astronaut candidates with a cut-off date of July 1, 1991. The next class of candidates was scheduled for July 1992. Two types of positions were available: mission specialist for those with significant scientific backgrounds and pilot for those with extensive piloting experience in jet aircraft. (NASA Release 91-67; H Chron, May 3/91)
NASA also announced that President George Bush would join NASA Administrator Richard Truly in a back-to-school special program for elementary students on NASA Select Television. (NASA Release 91-146)
James C. Fletcher, who twice served as NASA Administrator (April 1971 - May 1977, May 1986 - April 1989), died of cancer. (AP, Dec 23/91; W Post, Dec 24/91; NY Times, Dec 24/91; W Times, Dec 24/91)
According to AP, the Hubble Space Telescope presents astrophysicists with a mystery: the existence of hydrogen clouds in space that should have dissipated billions of years ago. According to Ed Weiler, NASA's space telescope program manager, this was Hubble's most significant finding to date. (AP, Oct 23/91)
AP reported that The Save Our Wetlands environmental group had filed suit against NASA to stop the testing of an advanced solid fuel rocket motor for Space Shuttles on the Mississippi Gulf Coast. The group also asked that the Environmental Protection Agency make NASA comply with clean air and water laws. NASA officials maintained that NASA received the needed state and federal permits to test the boosters. (AP, May 29/91)
James R. Thompson, NASA Deputy Administrator, was quoted as praising NASA's preeminence in space and aeronautics technology but admitting its recent difficulties. In view of these, Thompson indicated he thought NASA should slow its push for the Space Station and instead adapt the Space Shuttle to fly longer missions to demonstrate why a Space Station would be valuable.  (Birmingham News, Aug 29/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA would ask Congress to increase its budget by 13 percent in the next fiscal year, emphasizing projects with short-term ecological benefits and helping schools and teachers to encourage students with an aptitude for mathematics and science. Truly added that manned space flights would be downgraded in importance compared with unmanned programs and pure scientific research, particularly research that would benefit the life sciences and development of a new rocket engine. (SF Chron, Jan 25/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced a nationwide search for a senior official to direct NASA's activities to send people to the Moon and to explore Mars. This announcement represented an implementation of a recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program to create a new Office of Exploration under an Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 91-24)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced plans to create a new Office of Space Flight Development. This would allow the existing Office of Space Flight to concentrate on the safety and efficiency of space flight. (NASA Release 91-148)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
According to the press, two members of the House subcommittee that oversees NASA spending, Chairman Bob Traxler, Democrat of Michigan, and ranking minority member Bill Green, Republican of New York, asked NASA Administrator Richard Truly why NASA did not buy a Mir Space Station or other technology from the Soviet Union. NASA replied that the U.S. aerospace industry would not like it. (AP, Oct 25/91; B Sun, Oct 26/91; LA Times, Oct 27/91)
The speech of Lennard A. Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, at a September 19 meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, was published in Washington Technology. Fisk first dealt with the causes and effects of negative publicity about NASA and went on to defend NASA's accomplishments and the rationale for NASA's existence as being an absolute rather than a relative one, which made developing a consensus harder. He concluded that "The adventure of space is a vital part of our society. The space program needs to be perceived as the best this country has to offer." (Washington Technology, Oct 10/91)
Time published an interview with NASA Administrator Richard Truly in which various questions were asked about the Space Station. Truly justified proposed expenditures by stressing the payoff in such areas as environmental control, life-support research, power generation, and health care technologies as well as the discoveries themselves. He also stated that Mission to Planet Earth was poorly understood but promised "unbelievable benefits." (Time, Jul 1/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly gave an interview to Space News about NASA's role in promoting space education and the agency's future plans. One of the difficulties is attracting greater numbers of women and minorities. He discussed NASA's plan to establish a new office of human resources and the need for more people schooled in Earth sciences.  In an editorial in the same issue, the publication commended NASA for its attention to education in high-technology fields and efforts to recruit women and minorities. It also pointed out the number of laid off workers in the aerospace industry as a result of the sharp downturn in the defense industry as potential employees in the space field. (Space News, Feb 4-10/91)
An editorial deplored efforts of the Virginia congressional delegation to block NASA's possible closing of its Reston, Virginia, office. The editorial stated that to cut space program costs, which suffer from a bloated management structure, streamlining must occur and the Reston office was a good place to begin. (Space News, Jan 7-20/91)
NASA held a news briefing designed to show that Space Station Freedom was back on track. NASA Administrator Richard Truly indicated that the final design of the station would be streamlined in weight and electrical power and would rely on robots for repairs. (USA Today, Dec 6/91; W Post, Dec 6/91; W Times, Dec 6/91; AP, Dec 6/91)
NASA's next Shuttle mission is to be that of Atlantis, scheduled for launch in July to release a giant Tracking and Data Relay Satellite intended to link Shuttles and other low-orbiting spacecraft with the ground. Conrad Nagel, the NASA manager responsible for the launch preparation, raised the possibility that Atlantis might be launched earlier than July 25. (Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 15/91)
NASA officials reported that a quality inspector had discovered a cracked hinge in a fuel line door of Shuttle Discovery. The effect of the finding on Discovery's tentative launch date of March 9 was unknown. (UPI, Feb 19/91; AP, Feb 19/91; B Sun, Feb 20/91; W Post, Feb 20/91; NY Times, Feb 20/91; WSJ, Feb 20/91; USA Today, Feb 20/91; W Times, Feb 20/91; UPI, Feb 20/91)
NASA announced that the Aviation Safety Reporting System ASRS), which it manages for the Federal Aviation Administration, had prevented many air accidents and saved lives over the past 15 years. ASRS also identified safety issues for the aviation community and released research papers on aviation safety. FAA and NASA celebrated the 15-year anniversary of the program. (NASA Release 91-112; Inside DOT, Jul 25/91)
According to the Cleveland Plain Dealer, the Ohio EPA ordered an investigation and cleanup of contamination at NASA's Lewis Research Center. NASA officials stated voluntary cleanup efforts were underway and Peter W. McCallum, NASA's chief of environmental safety said most of the sites had been cleaned up or soon would be; he was confident no contamination was leaving NASA's property. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Jul 3/91)
An editorial commended NASA for considering a plan to decrease the risk of space experiments by using a larger number of small satellites, with smaller numbers of instruments. This would increase flexibility in the space program, making it more efficient and possibly cheaper. (SF Chron, Aug 16/91)
NASA Project Scientist Steve Saunders stated that Magellan scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were studying the surface features on Venus caused by wind. Soviet landers and the US Pioneer probes measured wind speeds near Venus at two to four miles per hour, or about the speed needed to move sand grains. The Magellan images indicated wind streaks. Project Manager Tony Spear said that a new strategy to protect Magellan from the heat of direct sunlight has successfully cooled the spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-63)
The media reported on Administration efforts to have the elimination of funding for the Space Station reversed in the House of Representatives. In this connection, the New York Times carried a major editorial urging that the Space Station not be funded. In response to that editorial, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter of support for the Space Station from Thomas Stafford, Chairman of the Synthesis Group, to Representative George Brown, Chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. (USA Today, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; NASA Release N91-42; WSJ, Jun 6/91; CSM, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
An internal memorandum signed by four NASA officials as well as interviews with staff at the Reston, Virginia, facility indicated a strong opinion that moving the headquarters now would disrupt development of the $30 billion Space Station. At a recent meeting three-quarters of NASA staff were said to oppose a move. Despite this fact, NASA Assistant Administrator William B. Lenoir was said to have decided to recommend moving the headquarters. (H Chron, Apr 13/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
Business, county, and NASA officials met in Reston, Virginia, to announce a new hotline for anyone who wanted to keep the NASA Space Station Program in Reston. The Coalition for Space Station Continuity set up the hotline, following reports that the Texas Congressional delegation urged that NASA move to Houston. (McLean/Great Falls Connection, Apr 18/91)
An editorial in Florida Today referred to NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's comment about NASA giving serious consideration to consolidating Shuttle operations at Kennedy Space Center. He estimated this would cut Shuttle costs 25 percent. Such a move would also result in consolidating Shuttle management, as recommended in the Advisory Committee report. (Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
The Cleveland Plain Dealer reported that NASA's Lewis Research Center on December 13 refused to sign cleanup orders for nine sites within the Brook Park complex that were contaminated with hazardous materials. NASA officials indicated they wished to continue talks with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and that signing the orders would mean waiving their right to appeal. Moreover, they complained the agreement did not limit the sum the Ohio EPA could charge for overseeing the cleanup. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Dec 14/91)
A space publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard Truly would forgo attendance at the 1991 Paris Air Show in order to remain in Washington to keep close watch on the congressional fight to keep the Space Station appropriation in the budget. In an editorial in the same journal, it was stated that maintaining the Space Station "at the cost of nearly everything else NASA does would be a major mistake." Subsequently, an editorial in the San Jose Mercury News expressed similar concern that NASA's other important programs would be sacrificed for the sake of the Space Station. (SP News, Jun 10-16/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 11/91)
A space publication printed an adapted version of Senator Dale Bumpers' (Democrat from Arkansas) speech when he introduced legislation in July to cut funding on the NASA Space Station drastically. He favored solving U.S. problems on the ground, not in space. The same issue carried remarks of Senator Jim Sasser (Democrat from Tennessee) that the Space Station was something the United States could not afford. Furthermore, the magazine carried an interview with Jim Beggs, chairman of Spacehab Inc. and former NASA administrator, concerning his organization's relationship to NASA. (SP News, Sep 9-15/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
Ceremonies connected with NASA Administrator Richard Truly's presentation to Rockwell International Space Systems Division, Palmdale, of the 1990 George M. Low Trophy to a contractor for outstanding achievement in quality and productivity improvement were featured at some length. About half the Palmdale work force were scheduled to be laid off after Endeavour's completion; the remaining 450 workers beginning in July would modernize the Shuttle Columbia. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 5/91)
Washington Technology carried two articles on NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS). The first discussed the possibility of the EOS instrument payload being divided among three launch vehicles while still maintaining its "simultaneity." The second quoted NASA officials Lennard Fisk and Shelby Tilford as addressing the EOS Engineering Review Panel in La Jolla, California. They said NASA had devised a restructured plan to remove several of the EOS satellite sensors and replace them with "ballast" of thousands of pounds of lead to maintain payload balance. (Washington Technology, Aug 8/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly presented the Minority Contractor of the Year Award to Consolidated Industries, Inc., of Huntsville, Alabama, and the Minority Subcontractor of the Year Award to Network Solutions, Inc., of Herndon, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-157)
The New York Times reported that Soviet space officials told the White House that the Soviet civilian space program might collapse unless it made large sales to the West. Soviet economic problems were the major cause as well as parliamentary attacks on the space program as wasteful. (NY Times, Sep 3/91; UPI, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 4/91; Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Assistant Administrator for the Office of Procurement. The highest ranking woman career executive in Air Force contracting, she served previously as Principal Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff for Contracting, Headquarters Air Force Systems Command, Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-94)
NASA's Earth Observing System faced possible funding cuts as a result of questioning by Representative Ralph Hall, chairman of the House Space Subcommittee, and his colleagues. Concerns exist also within NASA regarding program costs. Tension reportedly existed between NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, over the amount of the data system to be centered at Goddard as opposed to other NASA sites. Some congressional members questioned NASA's accountability and deplored rivalry between NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly briefed members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on the President's 1992 budget request of $15.7 billion for NASA, a 13.6 percent increase from the 1991 budget. Programs emphasized were the New Launch System to be developed with the Department of Defense; LIFESAT, a reusable biosatellite; Mission to Planet Earth, which shows commitment to the ecology; and a 17 percent increase for NASA's educational activities. (NASA Release 91-21)
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology approved a $14.27 billion space program for the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly 6 percent over 1991 but $488 million less than President Bush had requested. Included was $1.9 billion for the Space Station with $128.9 million to be added when the National Academy of Sciences comments on NASA's plans to reduce the size of the station. The committee specified that NASA spend $25 million of the Space Station money on developing a return emergency vehicle for Space Station astronauts. It also called for spending $30 million to develop advanced propulsion systems, including the first new Shuttle engine in more than 20 years. Closer scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union and continuation of the Landsat earth-monitoring program were also specified. (AP, Apr 24/91)
A trade publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly had asked Vice President Dan Quayle to signal strong support to Congress for the X-30 National Aerospace Plane (NASP) program. NASA feared a major cut in funding of the NASP would significantly delay the program. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
NASA managers were described as divided over whether Discovery could be safely launched on March 9 or needed to be taken off the launch pad and repaired. (UPI, Feb 27/91)
In a letter to the editor, Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, and John N. Bahcall, Professor of Natural Science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, declared that "There is strong national support for both a vigorous manned space program and a strong science program." Believing that both were essential, they pointed out that to maintain its space leadership position, the United States must continue such programs as the Advanced X-Ray Astrophysical Facility, missions to a comet and to Saturn, and the Earth Observing System. (W Post, Jun 27/91)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly spoke on the opening day of the Space Exploration '91 convention in Houston, sponsored by the NASA Alumni League. He said that recent successes by unmanned missions were paving the way for future space initiatives. He also stressed the need for belt tightening over the next several years. (H Post, Oct 30/91; H Chron, Oct 30/91)
The media reported that the National Space Council decided that the new Landsat satellite to study environmental changes on earth and military movements, Landsat VII, would be funded by NASA and the Defense Department. Landsat VII was to resemble Landsat VI, which was scheduled for launch in late 1992. NASA Administrator Richard Truly testified at a congressional hearing on the subject November 26. (WSJ, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; W Times, Nov 27/91)
The wire services reported that NASA managers reaffirmed their previous decision to resume routine Florida Shuttle landings. This occurred prior to the start of a two-day review to clear Atlantis for blastoff around July 23. (UPI, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 12/91)
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Ray J. Arnold as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs. He replaced Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer, who became Deputy Assistant Administrator for Policy and Interagency Coordination. (NASA Release 91-39)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released an internal agency report on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices, prepared by former Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson. Thompson focused on three thrusts: building on NASA field organizations as Centers of Excellence in specific areas of science, technology, and development; a reminder to "stick to basics" in engineering disciplines, and program management and realignments of certain NASA Headquarters office responsibilities to achieve more efficient program execution. (NASA Release 91-190; AP, Nov 15/91)
NASA announced that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel would present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly on March 22. (NASA editors' note N91-19)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
NASA announced a number of contract arrangements. A contract extension was awarded to Vitro Corporation of Silver Spring, Maryland, to continue safety and support services at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. NASA further selected Nichols Research Corporation, Huntsville, Alabama, and BDM International, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to compete for a support contract for the Earth Observing System Program Office in Washington. In addition, NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, contracted with Johnson Controls, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida to provide maintenance and operational services at Johnson. (NASA Releases C91-dd, C91ee, C91ff)
According to Reuters, as reported by the Orlando Sentinel Star, Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency, said at a news conference at the Paris Air Show that plans to launch a European Space Shuttle were proceeding despite cost overruns and technical problems. (O Sen Star, Jun 19/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was scheduled to teach ninth grade geometry students at George Washington Junior High School, Alexandria, Virginia, on February 22. Selected as an "All-Star" engineer by the National Engineers Week 1991 committee, Truly was to share his engineering and aerospace knowledge with students. Astronauts Mary Cleave and Bonnie Dunbar were among the more than 10,000 engineers participating in the teaching program. (NASA Release N91-13)
The media quoted Aviation Week and Space Journal magazine as saying that a $70 million cost overrun had doubled the price of two NASA spacecraft being developed to study the interaction between the Earth and the sun. The craft were being built for use in the 17-nation International Solar Terrestrial Physics Program. NASA officials reportedly confirmed the cost increases. (AP, Nov 10/91; W Times, Nov 11/91; Fla Today, Nov 11/91; B Sun, Nov 11/91)
NASA announced the resignation for personal reasons of Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson Jr., an internationally recognized propulsion expert, who served more than 25 years in NASA. (NASA Release 91-149; AP, Sep 17/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; Decatur Daily, Sep 18/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 18/91; Birmingham News, Sep 18/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Sep 19/91; AvWk, Sep 23/91)
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
In a commentary on the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, released in December 1990, Alston Chase pointed out that the report stressed that among NASA's major problems were that it "has grown too large and is trying to accomplish very complex tasks in which there is little margin for error." As an example of NASA's growth, the report cited that Viking involved some 13,000 people, whereas Apollo involved 180,000. (W Times, Jan 8/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a message to all NASA staff on the fifth anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. He cited the important lessons learned, the stress on flight safety, and the successful Shuttle missions since that time. (NASA Release N91-8)
UPI reported that NASA managers reviewed plans to resume routine Shuttle landings at the Kennedy Space Center. The unpredictability of Florida's coastal weather was at issue but it was felt that improvements NASA made in the Shuttle fleet were such that routine landings could now occur. (UPI, Jun 19/91)
A Christian Science Monitor editorial commended NASA's work with regard to the Magellan spacecraft's survey of the surface of Venus. However, the editorial deplored the indecision and delays in the U.S. space program resulting from Congressional ambivalence and stressed the need for the administration to achieve a sustainable program. (CSM, Jun 6/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of General Spence M. Armstrong, USAF (Retired) for the newly established position of Associate Administrator for Human Resources and Education. (NASA Release 91-138)
A policy paper by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington think tank, said defense and national security should be top priority for the US space program. Exploration of the moon and Mars should occur as a result of "market incentives" or interest of research organizations. Environmental research should be the province of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or the Department of Energy. If NASA's functions could be performed by other agencies, it should be closed. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA officials told UPI that a 1993 Shuttle flight would end with a fully automatic, hands-off landing to test untried systems that might be needed if pilots were not up to the task after a long-duration mission (UPI, Nov 19/91)
NASA announced that in conjunction with the Federal Aviation Administration it would sponsor an international government/industry workshop on aircraft icing. The workshop is to be held at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, which has the Lewis Icing Research Tunnel, the world's largest refrigerated icing tunnel. (NASA Note to Editors N91-75)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement between the United States and Canada to participate in a five-year RADARSAT Earth-observation satellite mission. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was one of the United States signers. RADARSAT was scheduled for launch in June 1994 using an expendable launch vehicle provided by NASA. RADARSAT would collect valuable economic and scientific data on ice and ocean surveillance and natural resource management, including surveillance of natural disasters. (NASA Release 91-34)
According to the press, Senate budget leaders expressed concern over NASA's ability to launch the GOES-NEXT weather satellite in time to meet weather monitoring needs. They urged that the National Weather Service buy a $100 million backup satellite, possibly obtaining one from Japan. NASA Administrator Richard Truly said NASA accepted responsibility for the delays and cost overruns in the construction of the new satellites. (W Post, Jul 11/91; NY Times, Jul 11/91; C Trin, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91)
Nationally syndicated economics columnist Warren Brookes questioned the administration's efforts to rescue NASA's Space Station and the new space program represented by the National Aerospace Plane. Brookes stated that possibly national security concerns justified both these programs but their economic justification was dubious. (W Times, May 29/91)
The media reported that 14 major scientific organizations were joining forces to warn of the "excessive cost" of the planned $30 million Space Station that would "threaten the vitality" of essential scientific research programs and imperil U.S. leadership in world technology. The organizations urged a "balanced" space program but did not call for the Space Station to be killed. (LA Times, Jul 9/91; P Inq, Jul 10/91; W Post, Jul 10/91; NY Times, Jul 10/91; Science, Jul 19/91)
Soviet space program experts announced that the 40-ton Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 would break up and fall to earth in February. Tass, the official Soviet press agency, implied Soviet officials had lost control of the station when it said the authorities would issue a "timely warning" to all countries on whose territory station "parts are likely to fall." Salyut 7 was launched in 1982 and last inhabited in 1986, holding up to six astronauts. The Soviet Union had planned to send a rescue mission with the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran but the Shuttle was delayed. (NY Times, Jan 1/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Paul H. Holloway as Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-171)
Vice President Dan Quayle, speaking as chairman of the National Space Council, said the U.S. would not buy or build more Space Shuttle orbiters. It is to continue to use the four existing orbiters into the next century but planned to develop a new family of rockets to replace the current fleet of unmanned vehicles. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said he helped devise the policy's wording and was "totally in support" of it.(P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; B Sun, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; USA Today, Jul 25/91; WSJ, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; Washington Technology, Jul 25/91; Htsvl Tms, Jul 26/91; Peninsula Times Tribune, Jul 30/91 quoting San Diego Tribune; B Sun, Jul 31/91)
A feature article dealt with NASA's management overhaul, which it described as nearly complete and based on recommendations of Congress, the Augustine panel, and the most recent report of former Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson. (W Post, Nov 25/91)
