President Bush kicked-off International Space Year (ISY), a year-long worldwide celebration of space cooperation and discovery. During the year, 29 space agencies and ministries from around the world, 10 international organizations, and the United Nations planned to celebrate the spirit of discovery and work together to promote a new era of global cooperation and to increase knowledge of planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-13)
Facing a tight budget, National Aerospace Plane officials proposed extra steps to slow the program aimed at building two runway-to-orbit research planes. The program's goal was to make the first flight of an x-30 aerospace plane by late 1999. The revised program director Robert Barthelemy presented the revised schedule to top Air Force and NASA officials in a quarterly technical review at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. Congress approved $250 million for the program for the 1992 year after slashing nearly $100 million from the Bush adminstration's $303.8 million request. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
A House panel raised legal questions about the National Space Council's handling of a proposal to restructure space program management. Representative Howard Wolpe of Michigan, chairman of the House Science subcommittee on investigations and oversight, charged in a letter to president Bush that the council's official circulation of the proposal was in conflict with the 1958 Space Act. The proposal, prepared by the Livermore Laboratory's Lowell Wood, also violated the council's charter not to interfere with line management responsibility in NASA. (AvWk, March 9/92)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
In a speech to the National Space Club, outgoing NASA chief Richard Truly, who resurrected the Shuttle Space program after the 1986 tragedy, said that the country's space program is in jeopardy and that "the cheap shots" coming from the National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, "must end" if the White House and Congress want to maintain U.S. leadership in space. (USA Today, Feb 27/92; W Times, Feb 27/92; W Post, Feb 26/92; Fla Today, Feb 15/92; O Sen, Feb 14, 1992; Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 18/92; Defense News, Feb 17/92; B Sun, Feb 19/92; Space News, Feb 17/92; AP, Feb 19/92; NY Times, Feb 20/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of key personnel in the Office of Public Affairs and the Office of Equal Opportunity Programs. Bill Livingstone was appointed Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Sue Mathis Richard was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Lewin S. Warren was appointed Acting Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs; and Oceola S. Hall was designated Acting Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs. (NASA Release 92-94)
Veteran NASA astronauts Richard O. Covey and Kenneth        Bowersox and ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier were named to the crew for STS-61, the Hubble Space Shuttle Telescope servicing mission scheduled for late 1993. Covey was appointed the mission commander, and Bowersox was to be the pilot. Nicollier was named to be a mission specialist. Three other crew members previously named to the STS-61 mission were payload commander Story Musgrave, and mission specialists Tom Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Kathryn D. Thornton. (NASA Release 92-218)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin appeared ready to abandon the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane program with its goal of constructing and flying a single-stage-to-orbit air-breathing vehicle in favor of a hypersonic research effort. The latter, the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility effort, centers on a manned, Mach 10-class reusable test aircraft launched from the back of a NASA/Lockheed SR-71A, and on an unmanned platform launched atop a rocket to explore physical phenomena at speeds approaching Mach 25. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
The commander of the Space Shuttle Endeavour, Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein of the Navy, said that the problems and needs of America's cities were no reason to divert money from the space agency's annual budget of $14 billion. If anything, Capitain Brqndemstein said a strong space program was needed to nspire yopung to high achievement and hopes for the future. He said that voyages of exploration were a vital social investment, todayand centuries ago. "America is a country based on boldness and looking into the future, not looking out the back of the bus," said Captain Brandenstein. (NY Times, May 18/92)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration began evaluating new technology that could substantially improve the efficiency of the nation's air traffic system, including improved on-time arrivals, increased fuel efficiency, and a decreased work load for air traffic controllers, according to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center. (Commercial Aviation News, Sept 22/92)
Former NASA Administrator Richard Truly said that he would assume a new job as director of the Georgia Tech Research Institute, a branch of the Georgia Institute of Technology. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
NASA selected 28 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The proposals were submitted by 65 small, high technology firms located in 16 states. Total value of the 28 awards was $14 million. SBIR objectives are to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally funded research innovations. The SBIR program is managed by NASA's Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., and all individual SBIR projects are managed by nine NASA field centers. (NASA Release 92-27)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the expansion of the National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program to include all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The Space Grant Program offers states the opportunity to receive grants to further projects in aeronautics, space, and related fields. (NASA Release 92-112)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin issued a call to restore America's leadership in aeronautics that is threatened by failure to invest adequately in research facilities and advanced technology. Goldin told the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics meeting in Arlington, Virginia, that additional spending had to be directed to high speed research, advanced subsonic and systems integration, critical research facilities, and hypersonic research. Top priority needed to be given to developing a hypersonic commercial plane that could carry 300 passengers at least 6,000 miles nonstop at two-and-one-half times the speed of sound by the year 2005. NASA's budget provided for $1.1 billion for aeronautics, or 7.9 percent, Goldin said, a funding level that had to increase. (NASA Release 92-219; The Sun, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 10/92; H Post, Dec 10/92; AvWk, Dec 14-21/92)
Thomas O. Paine, 70 who was deputy administrator and administrator of NASA from 1968 to 1970, died of cancer May 4 at his home in Los Angeles.In 1985, President Reagan named him chairman of the National Commission on Space to set goals for future space exploration. He also was a member of Vice President Quayle's Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. After leaving NASA, he returned to GE where he became a vice president and power generation group manager. In 1982 he retired from the Northrop Corporation as its president. (W Post, May 8/92; NY Times, May 7/92)
NASA announced that a Board of Investigation had been formed to assess the problem of the fouled tether that prevented the successful release of the Tethered Satellite System during Shuttle Atlantis' just-completed flight. NASA officials said that any decision about reflight of the $380 million tether system would depend in part on a quick determination of what went wrong and how much it would cost to solve the problem. NASA set an August 28 deadline for the board to report its findings. (NASA Release 92-129; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92, Aug 17/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jeremiah W. Pearson, III, announced that Thomas Utsman, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight, will become the Program Director for the Space Shuttle. He will direct long-range Shuttle planning, Space Shuttle continuous improvement activities and overseeing efforts to reduce Shuttle operations costs while maintaining safety. (NASA Release 92-83)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Paul F. Holloway, in addition to his responsibilities as Director of Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, would be assigned temporarily to NASA headquarters as a special assistant to the administrator. Goldin also announced the departure of Don G. Bush, assistant administrator for procurement, effective January 11, 1993. (NASA Release 92-292)
It was reported that on March 17, 1992, that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel will present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly at NASA headquarters, Washington, D.C. The panel reviews, evaluates, and advises the NASA Administrator on present and future NASA programs and activities. Priority is given to programs that involve the safety of manned flight. (NASA Note 92-21)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
During the Soviet period, Ukrainian scientists and industry were an integral part of the Soviet space program, which employed over 250,000 people. When the breakup of the Soviet Union fragmented its space program, Ukraine gained one of the world's most advanced aerospace industries, capable of producing everything from rockets to satellites. However, without the Soviet Union to pour money into space exploration, Ukraine was looking for new ways to keep its aerospace industry working. (LA Times, Apr 24/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced new minority contract goals and the formation of a NASA Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee. He also announced that the Minority Contractor of the Year was Jackson & Tull, Chartered Engineers, of Seabrook, Maryland; B & W Services, Inc., Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 92-158)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA officials had scheduled an unprecedented spacewalk by three Shuttle astronauts to rescue a satellite. The agency decided to undertake the third and final three-man rescue attempt upon the request of Shuttle Endeavour's commander. (WSJ, May 13/92; USA Today, May 13/92; W Post, May 13/92; W Times, May 13/92; NY Times, May 13/92; LA Times, May 13/92; P Inq, May 13/92; AP, May 13/92; UPI, May 13/92)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
On their first full day in space, two crew members of the Space Shuttle Endeavour conducted experiments involving motion sickness. Understanding motion sickness has high priority among space agencies around the world. It strikes most astronauts during their first few days in space, and it affects flight planning, such as space walks, which are never scheduled early in a mission. (W Post, Sept 14/92; NY Times, Sept 14/92; W Times, Sept 14/92; AP, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92)
A new bearingless rotor system developed by McDonnell Douglas Helicopter Company, Mesa, Arizona, which promised to be a significant advance in helicopter technology, was tested by NASA. The tests, conducted in Ames' Research Center wind tunnel, evaluated the rotor concept and gathered data to help develop computer programs needed to design a new generation of bearingless rotors. The new system, which eliminates hinges and bearings that usually connect the blades to the rotor shaft, is the key to the innovative system. The blades have advanced airfoils and are made of high strength composites. The technology was expected to have many benefits, including easier maintenance and lower fuel use. "The new rotor system would allow for faster, more agile, more cost effective and safer helicopters," said Steve Jacklin, Project Manager for the wind tunnel test at the Ames Research Center. (NASA Release 92-27)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Charles J. Pellerin, Jr., to the position of Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Quality. Pellerin was also to serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator for long-range planning. (NASA Release 92-59)
The House of Representatives approved a $47.3 billion space program for the next three years after voting to limit spending on development of an advanced solid-fuel rocket motor motor. The bill reauthorizing NASA for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 was passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate. The House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned Space Station, nearly $8 billion for other space science applications, and $12.5 billion for the space shuttle program. Before approving the bill, the House agreed to cut in half, to $260 million, the 1993 budget for the next generation solid-fuel rocket, designed to enable the Space Shuttle to carry heavier payloads, including key components of the Space Station. (AP, May 5/92)
NASA officials said that the last scheduled U.S. shuttle flght this year, a military mission by Discovery, probably would be delayed because of a faulty component in the orbital maneuvering system. A December 2 launch date was subsequently planned. (AP, Oct 15/92; NY Times, Oct 16/92; W Times, Oct 16/92; AP, Nov 2/92)
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the fate of the Russian space program is in doubt. Although most of the republics that make up the successor to the Soviet Union, the Commonwealth of Independent States, had signed an agreement pledging to continue the space program and to honor all the Soviet Union's international agreements on space projects, many experts questioned the impoverished nascent union's ability to follow through. "There is a high level of uncertainty," said James Head, a planetary scientist at Brown University. "The commonwealth will absolutely not be able to maintain a space program at the same level of activity," declared Roald Sagdeev, former director of the Soviet institute that ran all scientific research programs in space. (C Trib, Jan 29/92; Boston Globe, Jan 30/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Chief of Staff. The Chief of Staff facilitates communications between the Administrator's office and senior staff members, as well as with private sector executives and international visitors. In addition, the Chief of Staff focuses on internal NASA Headquarters management and operations, aiming to increase the efficiency of the organization. (NASA Release 92-58)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
Yuri P. Semenov, general director of NPO Energia, the Russians' civilian manned space program, invited U.S. officials to lease room aboard the Mir Space Station, orbiting 240 miles above Earth, to conduct experiments. In addition, Semenov also proposed selling Russians' most powerful rocket, the Energia, which exceeds the lifting capacity of any U.S. launch vehicle. (W Post, Feb 23/92; NY Times, Feb 23/92)
In remarks before the National Space Club, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the United States needs a laboratory in space so scientists can learn how to protect the health of humans living and working for long periods in space and improve the quality of life on Earth. "We can light up the sky with the inspirational work of Space Station Freedom, or we can stand by and watch the greatest technological bonfire of the century if it's canceled. We need Space Station Freedom and we need it now," said Goldin. (NASA Release 92-92)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, predicted a "Perils of Pauline" battle in Congress over the survival of Space Station Freedom, saying the outpost was an investment in the future that should not be squandered for short-term gains. Despite the high costs and frequent redesigns, Goldin said the station was vital to the future of America's space program. Although he refused to predict the outcome of congressional debate, he expressed guarded optimism that Freedom would survive the latest challenge. (UPI, Apr 29/92)
Space Shuttle Endeavour touched down on Rogers Dry Lake, California, ending a historic, nine-day maiden voyage. The public's response to Endeavour's mission, which featured an unprecedented three-astronaut capture of a stranded communications satellite, was the most enthusiastic since the Shuttle program resumed in 1988, NASA officials said. A crowd of an estimated 125,000 turned out in the desert to watch the landing. (LA Times, May 17/92; P Inq, May 17/92; AP, May 16/92; W Times, May 17/92; B Sun, May 16/92; W Post, May 17/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
A new 5,000-mile-wide radio telescope designed to probe the edge of the universe was near completion in the United States, according to Peter Napier, project manager for the Very Long Baseline Array project. The federally funded project, actually a series of 10 dish-shaped antennas, was expected to begin high-resolution imaging work by December. (W Times, Sept 20/92)
In an effort to inspire students to study mathematics, science and technology, almost 1,000 engineers from NASA planned to visit schools nationwide during the week of February 16-22. NASA's "teachers for a day" will be participating in the National Engineers Week's Discover "E" Program, the largest student outreach effort sponsored by the engineering profession. NASA engineers were to participate in career day activities, teach students, conduct science competitions, participate in teacher workshops, and judge science fairs. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said, "Space exploration and its monumental engineering feats are vital to America's future competitiveness, will strengthen domestic economy, provide jobs for Americans and inspire students to study mathematics and science." (NASA Release 92-24)
In the summer 1992 issue of Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Richard H. Kohrs, director of Space Station Freedom in NASA's Office of Space Development, discussed the advantages and challenge of constructing Space Station Freedom. Aside from the international cooperation required to build and operate it, Kohrs gave three primary functions that the Space Station would perform in the U.S. civil space program: 1) it would enable humans to learn to live and work productively in space; 2) it would serve as an advanced research facility; and 3) it would provide experience and knowledge of building, operating, and maintaining large systems in space. The Space Station was also expected to be a vital component of the total U.S. civil space program, augmenting the planetary exploration program, astronomical research, life-sciences program, aeronautics research, and transportation program. (Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Summer 1992)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin charged a new team of agency officials with finding a cheaper way to build Space Station Freedom, even if that meant assembling much of it without the Space Shuttle. The team, comprised mainly of officials within NASA but outside the Station program, was asked to redesign the Station so that it can be completed on time despite congressionally imposed spending limits. Goldin's directive came in the wake of reduced Space Station funding in both the House of Representative and the Senate. Findings were due to Goldin by November. (Space News, Aug 17/92; AvWk, Aug 24/92)
The National Association of Small Disadvantaged Business presented NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin with its Meritorious Award. It was the second time Goldin had received the award. (NASA Release 92-162)
The countdown began for the Space Shuttle Atlantis on a mission to test an Italian satellite linked to the Shuttle by 12 miles of electricity-generating cord. NASA officials said there was a 90 percent chance of acceptable launching conditions on July 31. (NY Times, Jul 29/92, Jul 31/92; CSM, Jul 29/92; UPI, Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; AP Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; The Sun, Jul 31/92; W Post, Jul 31/92; LA Times, Jul 31/92; P Inq, Jul 31/92)
A study conducted for the Federal Aviation Administration by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments concluded that the Washington area could support flights of "tiltrotor" aircraft to New York and Boston. Tiltrotors would be competitive with commercial aircraft within a range of about 350 nautical miles from Washington. To date, tiltrotor aircraft had been developed and flown by the military, which hoped to use the craft for transporting troops. (W Post, Jul 16/92)
Defense contractor Teledyne, Inc., announced that it would pay $17.5 million in fines to settle federal criminal charges alleging that the company systematically falsified reliability tests of electromagnetic relays. The relays are used in virtually all U. S. weapons systems and space programs, including the Patriot missile and the Space Shuttle. It wasn't known if any systems failures had been caused by the relays, which function as electronic switches. (AP Oct 3/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
India launched a research satellite into orbit using local technology in what officials called an important milestone in the country's ambitious space program. The 750-foot rocket blasted off from an island off the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. Nine minutes into the flight, the $7 million rocket propelled a research satellite into orbit 280 miles above earth. The flight was pronounced a total success. (W Times, May 21/92)
It was reported that the Bush Administration's commitment to keeping Russia's nuclear scientists employed by offering financial assistance and technical cooperation was running into obstacles as U.S. officials held up some deals and sent conflicting signals about others. Among the projects awaiting approval were requests by federal agencies to acquire Russian-made plutonium, buy a Russian-made reactor for the U.S. space program, and join an international consortium with Russia and others to explore use of fusion energy.  (W Post, Mar 25/92)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his first hiring decisions, naming four men to senior management posts at NASA headquarters. The new appointments--Maj. Gen. Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Bryan D. O'Connor, Charles F. Bolden and Frederick D. Gregory--included three present or former astronauts and a Marine general who led forces during Operation Desert Storm. (W Post, Apr 29/92; NASA Release 92-54)
During Space Shuttle Columbia's upcoming mission, scientists planned to test a theory which may have applications ranging from hurricane dynamics to superconductivity . The Lambda-Point Experiment was to study the strange behavior of helium at its critical temperature of 2.177 degrees above absolute zero. Other experiments were to study the effects of gravity on metals and semiconductors as they solidify on Earth and in orbit and vibrations in the Shuttle as the vibrations affect the other two experiments. The Shuttle crew was also scheduled to deploy the Laser Geodynamics Satellite, an Italian satellite to study the movements of the Earth's crust and other phenomena. (NASA Releases 92-175 and 92-176; LA Times, Oct 2/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin endorsed the creation of a Space Agency Forum to coordinate activities among the leades of the world's space agencies to prevent duplication and overlap. (NASA Release 92-143)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
A Russian-French crew docked with the Space Station Mir during the first of several joint missions intended to strengthen both countries' space programs. While aboard Mir, the crew was scheduled to conduct several experiments, including one into the chemistry of urine and saliva in weightlessness. They also would test vibrations and pressure on the human body. (AP, Jul 29/92)
Scientists from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said they planned to seek answers to such problems as the development of frog eggs in weightlessness and control of space motion sickness on the next Shuttle flight scheduled for mid-September. Space Shuttle Endeavour was slated to carry a crew of seven, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J, a science laboratory containing 43 experiments, 34 of them provided by Japan, on a six-day mission. (NASA Releases 92-130 and 92-128)
At a meeting with NASA employees at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA chief administrator, Dan Goldin, emphasized the need for increased attention to aeronautics research in the face of competition from Europe and Japan. Goldin also said that NASA would have to do things "better, faster, cheaper"--the message Congress had just sent the agency by not increasing its $14 billion budget. Goldin also urged senior managment to place more minorities in its ranks and indicated that agency personnel would be reshuffled in the future. (Daily News, Sept 4/92; Antelope Valley Press, Sept 4/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he would act promptly to implement the recommendations of a Management Review Team for enhanced security at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The team considered Ames high risk for hostile intelligence operations. (NASA Release 92-207; UPI, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 19/92; USA Today, Nov 19/92; W Times, Nov 19/92; P Inq, Nov 19/92; AP, Nov 18/92, 19/92, and 20/92; W. Post, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 22/92; Space News, Nov 23-29/92)
A panel of experts recommended that the Air Force assume sole responsibility for developing a new all-purpose national launch system called the "Spacelifter" by the end of the decade. NASA's fleet of Shuttles would be phased out at the earliest opportunity, having become too costly and fragile a system to dominate the space program much longer. The report did not call for a large, heavy-lift vehicle but focused instead on development of lower-cost, medium-size rockets that could satisfy virtually all known payload needs and be tailored to carry cargo or people. (W Post, Nov 19/92 and Nov 21/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92 and Nov 22/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92)
The U. S. National Research Council urged NASA to expand study of advanced subsonic aircraft in order to keep U. S. aerospace companies competitive in the face of growing advances made by foreign industry. A council report said NASA should focus on improving aircraft performance and operating efficiency and coordinate the work with industry and academia. (AvWk, Oct 12/92; National Research Council News Report, Fall Report)
NASA managers set January 13 as the launch date for the first Shuttle mission of 1993. Designated STS-54, the flight was to have two primary objectives--deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-F) and astronomical observations of invisible x-ray sources within the Milky Way Galaxy with the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer. The crew was to be comprised of John Casper, commander, Don McMonagle, pilot, and three mission specialists, Mario Runco, Greg Harbaugh, and Susan Helms. (NASA Release N92-110; C Trib, Dec 23/92; AP, Dec 22/92; UPI, Dec 22/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of procurement reforms to make NASA the model of excellence for the Federal Government. Goldin said reforms in NASA's procurement process were necessary because 90 percent of the agency's budget is spent through contracts. Major changes in procurement will include the award of new contracts to companies that have demonstrated accountability by delivering quality systems that meet cost, schedule, and technical requirements. (NASA Release 92-123)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, speaking at the University of Hartford, Connecticut, said spending on space exploration was an investment in the future, but that the nation's space agency must get more for its money than it had in the past. NASA research has economic benefits for the nation, providing jobs and developing technologies with commercial applications, but just as important is the agency's role in supporting exploration that increases knowledge of the universe and provides hope for a better future, Goldin added. (Hartford Courant, Nov 18/92)
The NASA announced that both tape recorders aboard the $617 million Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were malfunctioning, and engineers directed the craft to not use the machines. Compton, a joint project of NASA and the European Space Agency, was built by the space and technology group of TRW under the direction of Daniel Goldin, the man selected by President Bush to become the new NASA administrator. (W Post, Mar 24/92)
The National Research Council said NASA should increase its budget for civil airliner and air traffic control research, even if it means a cutback in NASA's military and space programs. The council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, said the United States status as the world leader in aircraft manufacturing would continue to erode if NASA did not enter into a major cooperative program with industry, universities, and other government agencies to develop a new generation of airliners. (W Post, Oct 1/92)
NASA headquarters reported that eight finalists had been chosen for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy--NASA's Quality and Excellence Award. The finalists were: Cray Research Inc., Honeywell Inc., IBM Federal Sector Division, McDonnell Douglas Space Systems, Paramax Systems Corp., Rocket Research Co., Stanford Telecommunications Inc., and Technical Analysis Inc. (NASA Release 92-57)
NASA administrator Daniel Goldin announced in a number of recent speeches the first major reforms resulting from the internal review of NASA programs he had ordered. The Earth Observing System would be streamlined again, and incentives to Space Station Freedom contractors might be pooled to assure that they worked as a team. The reforms were designed to make U.S. civil space programs better, faster, and cheaper. Money saved would be applied to new missions using small spacecraft. (AvWk, Sept 28/92; Science, Oct 2/92)
Shuttle managers said budget-cutting goals recently mandated by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin could mean the loss of as many as 800 jobs on top of the 300 to 400 being phased out during the new fiscal year at the Kennedy Space Center. The cuts were part of Goldin's pledge to run a leaner, more efficient space agency. (O Sen Star, Sept 30/92)
The Association of Space Explorers 8th Planetary Congress opened at Georgetown University in Washington, D. C. It was attended by the largest group of astronauts and cosmonauts ever assembled, with over 100 international space flyers, representing 19 nations, in attendance. The congress opened with remarks by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and was concerned mainly with discussions about an international mission to Mars. Goldin also mentioned the practical applications of NASA's technology innovations since the 1960s. He identified CAT scans, laser surgery, and intensive care units as having had their genesis in the space program. "New products, new industries, and new jobs come through NASA research," Goldin said. (NASA Note to Editors: N92-75; W Times, Aug 31/92)
Astronomers resumed the search for evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) today with simultaneous commands to computers and radio telescopes at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and in the Mojave Desert of California. Although there have been previous limited projects, NASA officials, who are financing and directing the new project, said the planned 10-year, $100 million search would be the most comprehensive and ambitious one ever undertaken to search for signals of life beyond Earth's galaxy. Later, more radio telescopes around the world were to join the search, which NASA has renamed the High Resolution Microwave Survey. The latest SETI project was timed to begin on the 500th anniversary of Columbus' discovery of land in the Americas. (NY Times, Oct 6/92, Oct 13/92; W Post, Oct 5/92; LA Times, Oct 7/92; The Sun, Oct 8/92; Newsweek, Oct 12/92; AP, Oct 10/92, Oct 12/92; UPI, Oct 13/92; C Trib, Oct 10/92; P Inq, Oct 10/92; 13/92; NASA Release 92-160)
Solar scientists were puzzled by an unexpected "gamma ray afterglow" discovered on the sun by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. The glow, a strong emanation of high-energy gamma rays, persisted for more than five hours after a solar flare explosion on June 11, 1991. A similar phenomenon occurred four days later. The scientists also announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had taken the first image of the sun in neutrons, the first picture of any celestial object ever made with neutrons, that is, matter, rather than light. Another scientist reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had found evidence of powerful beams of downward-streaming protons at the onset of a stellar flare while looking at a red dwarf star more than 30 light-years away. Solar flares can produce magnetic storms on Earth that interfere with electrical power and radio transmissions. (NASA Releases 92-112 and 92-113; NY Times, Jul 16/92; USA Today, Jul 16/92; The Sun, Jul 16/92; P Inq, Jul 16/92; UPI, Jul 15/92, Jul 17/92; W Post, Jul 20/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
Space Center Houston opened on this date. The $70 million non-profit center, which expected to lure two million visitors a year, is designed to bring the "wonder days" of the early space program to a generation of children that has known only the Space Shuttle. The center, on the periphery of NASA's space campus, supplants the former visitor facility inside the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.  (USA Today, Oct 14/92; H Chron, Oct 14/92, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92; Newsweek, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
NASA started the first flight test in Denver of a laser-based sensor to provide airline pilots with advance warning of "microbursts" that can harbor potentially dangerous windshears. The Federal Aviation Administration has mandated that airlines must select and install an approved microburst detection system on their aircraft by the end of 1995. (NASA Release 92-108)
Deidre Lee was appointed deputy assistant administrator for procurement at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 92-146; Space News, Sept 21-27/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and National Space Council Executive Secretary Brian Dailey left with an interagency delegation to visit the European Space Operations Center in Germany. The delegation planned to proceed on to Moscow to gain a first-hand understanding of Russia's space program. (NASA Release 92-106)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Dr. Charles Pellerin as Associate Deputy Administrator for Strategic Planning, John R. Dailey as Associate Deputy Administrator, and Ralph C. Thomas as Assistant Administrator for Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. The appointments continued management changes Goldin had instituted in recent months. (NASA Release 92-194; Space News, Nov 9-15)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable in Washington, D. C,, that the U.S. government should spin off more new technology to help boost the economy. He also said that the space business sector must move beyond its attempts to sell goods and services to the government to become a real commercial industry. Goldin said NASA's newly created Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology would be given broad authority to pursue innovative ideas, seek out new technologies, and accelerate transfer of the agency's own breakthroughs to industry. (Space News, Nov 16-22/92; AvWk, Nov 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin agreed to seek increased funding for NASA's life sciences program destined for the Space Station Freedom, calling current funding levels "disgraceful" and clearly in need of increased funding. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
NASA officials said that the Galileo spacecraft and its atmospheric probe had passed the half-way mark on their voyage to Jupiter. The first full test results on November 20 and December 2 since launch three years ago showed that the probe's systems were in good working order. Galileo was scheduled to arrive at Jupiter in early December 1995. A major milestone in space communications was achieved recently when NASA scientists successfully transmitted laser signals to Galileo at a distance of 1.3 million miles. (NASA Releases 92-224 and 92-225; AP, Dec 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Bill Livingstone as Special Assistant to the Administrator for Communications. (NASA Release 92-71)
Outgoing NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced his support for using space to enhance education and his recommendation to administrator-nominee Daniel S. Golding that NASA fly Barbara Morgan, who was a backup to Christa McAuliffe. (NASA Release 92-40)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Samuel W. Keller as Associate Administrator for Russian Programs. The new position was established to provide focus for the many programs involving NASA and the former Soviet Union. (NASA Release 92-103)
In a speech to the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers in Los Angeles, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA was committed to building a culturally diverse workforce as it pursued the exploration of space. (NASA Release 92-170)
The Associated Press reported that two ex-Soviet cosmonauts circling the Earth went on television to reassure the public that they were safe and working hard, despite the many difficulties caused by the turmoil back home. The demise of the Soviet government and independence of the former republics had thrown the space program into disarray, delaying the cosmonaut's return for months. (AP, Feb 15/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
In the last of a week-long series of talks in California at California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA, its partners, and its contractors, were suffering from a bureaucratic "sickness" and political infighting that had sapped the U. S. civilian space program's will to take risks or to admit mistakes. "We need a complete resurgence of our space program to be bold, to take risks, and accept failure," Goldin said during a lively, two-hour discussion and debate with Carl Sagan, astronomer and founding president of the Planetary Society, based in Pasadena. Sagan agreed that NASA had lost its "sense of direction" and said that the key questions facing NASA were what would be its role in the post-Cold War era and what could it accomplish that was in the national interest in a time of pressing economic problems. (Space News, Dec 14-20/92)
NASA chief Daniel S. Goldin promised a bolder, "new" NASA that would control costs on its scientific missions in space and support the research and development efforts of domestic aircraft makers. Goldin's promise came at a NASA town meeting at California State University, Dominguez Hills campus, where several hundred people showed up for an opportunity to question Goldin about overpriced components, underfunded programs, and a lack of direction in the nation's space program. It was the fourth town meeting Goldin had hosted around the country since taking over as NASA's chief administrator in April. (LA Times, Dec 9/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with representatives from seven Historical Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), the latest recipients of NASA's Research Center grants. The awards were the latest approach to meeting some of NASA's present and future research and workforce needs and in tapping into scientific resources found among under-represented minority students and faculty at qualifying universities. (NASA Release 92-11)
After hearing complaints from employees across the nation, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin unexpectedly announced he was changing the agency's logo. Goldin killed the despised "worm," which displayed "NASA" in high-tech red lettering, and restored the insignia affectionately known as the "meatball." The meatball, which served the agency from 1959 to 1975, consists of the agency's name surrounding a starry blue background, a red wing shape and the flight path of a spaceship. It was worn by astronauts on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions. (W Post, May 26/92)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed an agreement with International Technology Underwriters (INTEC) to explore ways that the insurance industry can assist in financing human and robotic satellite rescue and repair missions. INTEC would also look at options for providing incentives in the construction of commercial satellites to make them easier to rescue and repair if problems develop. "We need to consider new approaches to salvaging satellites that will encourage the further commercialization of space, such as robotic rescues in high and lower orbits," Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-99)
NASA announced that Laurie A. Broedling had been appointed as Associate Administrator for Continuous Improvement. She would report directly to the Administrator and serve as NASA's primary facilitator of Total Quality Management. "This appointment is an important step in bringing a world-class TQM program to NASA," Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-72)
In a broad-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he expected to deal with declining agency budgets by prioritizing and focusing NASA projects. He estimated that a substantial cut had been made in the agency's costs during a review of the last few months--perhaps one-third to one-half of a needed $17 billion in savings--and that new programs would not be multi-billion-dollar projects but would cost in the range of tens to hundreds of millions of dollars. (Aerospace America, Nov 92)
A high-powered panel of space experts appointed by U.S. Vice-President Dan Quayle was scheduled to begin deliberations on October 1 that were intended to lay the groundwork for a revamped U.S. space program. The 11-person panel was to advise on ways to change the space effort in light of the Cold War's end, tight budgets, and rapid technological advancements. (Space News, Sept 28-Oct 4/92)
NASA officials said that tomatoes grown by students and teachers from seeds that had been in space for nearly six years show little or no difference from the fruit of seed that never left the Earth. The tomatoes from a batch of 12.5 million space-borne seed were as healthy as their earthly counterparts, though "findings suggest that the space-exposed seeds germinated slightly faster" and "seedlings had a faster initial growth rate," the officials said. (W Times, Apr 19/92; W Post, Apr 20/92; NASA Release 92-49)
The Senate, defying veto threats by the White House, adopted an $6.3 billion savings package that demanded deep cuts in President Bush's military and space priorities, including the Strategic Defense Initiative. Approved 61-38, the measure would take $1.3 billion from prior appropriations for SDI and $1 billion from production funds for the B-2 bomber. The cuts from the space program, though much smaller, dealt a further blow to exploration of Mars, and they would kill an on-going project to design a high-speed aircraft capable of orbiting into space after launch from a conventional runway. (WSJ, May 7/92)
After triumphing in a bruising congressional battle in 1991 and securing a $2.25 billion berth in the Administration's 1993 budget, NASA officials and Space Station Freedom contractors said they were on target toward a scheduled launch of the first Space Station components in November 1995. The station, to be lofted piece by piece aboard the Space Shuttle, was to be partially operational by 1997, and permanently manned by a four-astronaut crew by 2000. (LA Times, Feb 24/92)
NASA managers said last week that they would refashion the way the space agency conducts its programs, drawing on the results of internal NASA studies now under way and the advice of outside groups. The proposed reforms would serve as a test of whether Administrator Daniel Goldin's vision of faster and cheaper space projects could work in practice. (NASA Release 92-154; Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
The United States and France recently announced plans to increase civil space program cooperation. The two countries said they were also prepared to invite Russia to join with them in new cooperative endeavors. The focus of this new cooperation was the monitoring of the global environment and bringing France and Russia in with the United States as major partners on the Mission to Planet Earth program. The August 10 launch of the U. S./French Topex-Poseidon ocean survey satellite laid the foundation for the U.S/French initiative. (AvWk, Aug 17/92)
In an official statement, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly welcomed the nomination of Daniel S. Goldin to be next NASA Administrator. "I am pleased to learn that President Bush nominated Daniel S. Goldin as the next Administrator of NASA....I wish him every success as he comes to this elite organization," said Truly. (NASA Note 92-20)
NASA announced that Rockwell International Corporation's Space Systems Division had received NASA's first-ever award for World Class Performance in recognition of its exemplary work in building the new Space Shuttle orbiter Endeavour. The award is given when the NASA administrator determines that an organization has performed world-class work of significant benefit to the agency and U.S. taxpayers. (PR Newswire, Jul 14/92)
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that his agency had started an intense examination of itself and its programs aimed at setting goals for the nation's civilian space program and controlling costs in the future. Goldin said he had named two teams to undertake an agency-wide analysis of what NASA should be doing and what it could do within the constraints of a limited budget. The self-analysis was organized, Goldin said, after he examined the NASA budgets for the coming years and realized that the agency was committed to programs that could not be funded in an era of tight federal spending. (AP, May 26/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Jim Scott, Magellan project manager at the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, expressed regret at NASA's decision to cut short the spacecraft's mission. Since its launching from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on May 4, 1989, the spacecraft had mapped 97 percent of Venus' surface, using radar to peer through the planet's thick clouds and take pictures of the rugged, volcanic landscape. Scientists hoped to continue mapping in more detail during an "extended mission" ending in 1995, but NASA officials decided to avoid adding $80 million to the cost by ending the mission on September 30, 1993. The budget decision meant that engineers would not be able to move Magellan from its elliptical orbit and into a lower circular orbit starting in May 1993. That would have allowed Magellan to remap Venus with three to 10 times more detail than the pcitures it already had taken. (NASA Release, 92-14; W Times, Jan 29/92)
The fifth meeting of the Space Agency Forum on the International Space Year (SAFISY) opened in Washington, D. C. The forum is composed of 29 members (national and multi-national space agencies), including NASA, and 10 affiliate members (international, space-related organizations). The meeting was called to review progress of the various SAFISY-sponsored international space year projects and to discuss options for post-1992 cooperation. (NASA Note to Editors N92-76)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in San Francisco, California, NASA Administrator Samuel S. Goldin said that NASA should decide within five years whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005. A decision in the matter should be made by 1997, Goldin said, although in any event, the space agency would continue to fly the Shuttles until at least 2005. Shuttle costs would have to come down in the meantime, however, even as safety improvements continued. (Space News, Dec 7-13/92)
NASA headquarters announced that Space Shuttle Columbia would be launched on a 13-day mission on June 25, 1992. Mission STS-50, planned to be the longest flight to date in the Shuttle program, will carry the United States Microgravity Laboratory-1 payload into orbit. A Spacelab long module was to serve as an in-orbit laboratory for seven crewmembers and 31 experiments devoted to materials science, fluid physics, combustion science, and biotechnology. (NASA STS-50 Launch Advisory)
NASA managers decided to replace all three main engines aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour because of problems with powerful oxygen pumps that came to light after an engine test firing. Rocket engineers initially believed that Endeavour had sailed through its flight readiness firing in good condition, with no signs of any major problems in the ship's propulsion system. But detailed analysis of data from the 22-second test indicated the liquid oxygen high pressure turbopump bolted to main engine No. 2 had experienced high vibration levels during engine operation, apparently because of abnormal bearing wear. NASA decided to replace all three of the engines to minimize the impact on the Shuttle's launch processing. (UPI, Apr 8/92; AP, Apr 8/92)
NASA officials scheduled the next Shuttle launch for July 31, three weeks after the Shuttle Columbia returned from its record-breaking two-week mission. Atlantis' seven-day flight was slated to troll an Italian satellite on a 12-mile-long tether and to launch Eureca, a European satellite, on a one-year mission. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 26/92; W Times, Jul 27/92; NY Times, Jul 28/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri Koptev, the Director General of the Russian Space Agency, ratified the first contract between NASA and a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The contract was for the study of applications of Russian space technology to the Space Station Freedom program. The contract was for an initial period of one year with a value of $1 million. (NASA Release 92-91)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
J.P. Mitchell, Pratt and Whitney's Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME) Alternate Turbopump Development project manager, reported that a pair of Pratt and Whitney designed high-pressure turbopumps had been successfully tested at 100 percent rated power on a SSME at NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. (PR Newswire, Jan 23/92)
NASA officials added an extra day to the environmental mission of the Space Shuttle Atlantis so its seven-member crew could conduct more research on the atmosphere. (P Inq, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92)
U.S. Rep. Louis Stokes, who criticized NASA hiring policies as racially discriminatory during Congressional debate in July, said that he was encouraged by recent steps toward diversification discussed by the space agency at a gathering of top NASA officials at a mostly black elementary school in Cleveland. The gathering included a visit by black astronaut Charles Bolden. (The Plain Dealer, Oct 22/92)
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft was seriously contaminated with metal filings, paint chips, and other trash and could not be launched until it had been cleaned. The contamination may have been introduced when technicians tried to protect the spacecraft from possible damage from Hurricane Andrew. Originally scheduled for launch on September 16, NASA officials estimated a postponement of at least 10 days or possibly two weeks in the launch date. (NY Times, Aug 28/92; AP, Aug 28/92; W Post, Aug 29/92; The Sun, Aug 29/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
In an interview with Final Frontier magazine, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin gave his views about NASA and its contribution to American society. "I took this job because I believe NASA is critical to America's future. NASA provides hope, opportunity, and inspiration to the American public. It does this through its primary mission: to reach for the stars, in the broadest sense, of course. . . . For the last 30 years it has been demonstrated over and over again that the space program helps take America's value-added industry right to the cutting edge and provides jobs and opportunity." (Final Frontier, Sept/92)
