Washington Technology reported that at a May 11 appearance before the annual meeting of the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences (NCMS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin emphasized his commitment to NASA's technology-transfer outreach to industry. At the meeting, Goldin announced a memorandum of understanding that allowed NASA and the NCMS to propose joint research projects. (Washington Technology, May 20, 1993)
Jack Gibbons, President Bill Clinton's science advisor, said that the Clinton administration was debating various options for space policy management. Central was the question of whether to centralize control of the space program in a single White House office or spread out military, individual, and commercial space policy among several high-level councils. The role of science and technology in the Clinton administration was scheduled to be discussed during a January 30-31 meeting in Maryland. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
Space News praised President Bill Clinton's space plan as a "rational, sound approach that will keep the station alive, head NASA in the right direction, and keep NASA Administrator Dan Goldin around."(Space News, Feb 22-28/93)
NASA officials said that its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had yielded three major breakthroughs, two of which would enable scientists to unmask hidden supernovae buried deep in the center of the Milky Way.  The third discovery pinpoints a source of the mysterious cosmic rays in this galaxy that have puzzled researchers since the rays first were detected more than 80 years ago. (NASA Release 93-182)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the agency had exceeded its 1992 goal of awarding 6.7 percent of the total value of the agency's prime and subcontracts to small disadvantaged businesses. Over $865 million was awarded to minority organizations; this figure represented 7.2 of the total $12 billion awarded during the last fiscal year. (National Black Review, Feb 5/93)
Representatives from NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and industry described how they had worked together to take windshear advance-warning devices from the drawing board to the commercial aviation marketplace in just five years.  The windshear reports, part of a NASA/FAA conference in Hampton, Virginia, detailed development of microwave radar, laser radar, and infrared sensors that provide up to 40 seconds warning of windshear. Now NASA and the FAA were considering whether pilots should have formal training to interact with these new instruments. (NASA Release 93-270 and 93-171; AvWk, Oct. 18/93)
President Clinton named David R. Hinson, an aerospace executive and former Navy fighter pilot, to head the Federal Aviation Administration. Mr. Hinson was founder of Midway Airlines. In his new job, Hinson would oversee the safety of the aviation industry and be responsible for initiating and enforcing safety regulations and operating the air traffic control system. (NY Times, May 14/93; USA Today, May 14/93)
The Washington Post reported the White House was seeking to quell expectation about U.S. and Russian cooperation on Space Station Freedom. In an April 13 letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, White House science advisor John H. Gibbons stated that the "White House has made no policy decision to focus our Space Station redesign effort around present or future Russian capabilities."  He went on to say that "NASA should not limit its redesign options to those compatible with the orbit of the Russian Mir Space Station." (W Post, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
According to the Wall Street Journal, five aerospace companies were proposing to revive planning for a advanced new rocket to carry satellites and other commercial payloads into space. The companies had asked NASA to join in planning and researching the project; they anticipated that it would help the U.S. gain a greater share of the commercial launch business now dominated by Arianspace, a European joint venture. (WSJ, May 6/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the establishment of a study team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to explore possibilities for a return mission to Mars to recover some of the scientific objectives of the Mars Observer mission, if communications with that spacecraft could not be reestablished. (NASA Release 93-157; UPI, Sep 1/93; AP, Sep 1/93)
In a speech delivered April 2 at the annual conference in Washington of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, outlined what NASA was doing to emphasize cultural diversity within the organization.
Congress held an oversight hearing March 2, in which members of Congress attempted to determine what had led to a potential $1 billion overrun in the Space Station program. Space Station managers testified on how the overruns had developed and how they planned to fix them. At the hearing, NASA officials said they had offset all but about $500 million of the potential cost overruns for the next three year; they had done so largely by cutting management jobs and replacing consultants with government employees. (W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93; Space News, Mar 8-14/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93; H Post, Mar 3/93)
NASA reported that it had lost all contact with Shuttle Columbia for 80 minutes on May 4 because of an erroneous computer command sent to the Shuttle. The blackout led to the loss of some science data but did not cause any major problems; NASA officials, however, reviewed procedures for creating and sending commands to the Shuttle antenna.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and a team based at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which manages most planetary flights, have examined a variety of options for a new mission to Mars to achieve the scientific goals of the lost Mars Observer at less cost.  The flight would be launched no earlier than 1996. (W Post, Nov 13/93)
A NASA in-house study reported that the agency's technology transfer reputation had been overblown. According to the assessment,"Technology transfer processes are non-integrated, undocumented, and too slow." The report was requested last May by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. (Washington Technology, Jan 14/93)
NASA announced that it had postponed the Space Station Freedom Utilization Conference, planned for June 21-24 in San Francisco, California. NASA managers decided to postpone the conference because of recent instructions to redesign the Space Station. (NASA Media Advisory)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts was scheduled to blast off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission during which the team would carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments. This was the fourth joint Russian-French space mission since 1982. The mission had been largely overshadowed by the space program's serious financial problems caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union. (RTw, June 6/30)
NASA officials said that the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to be functioning well, but that they would not know until February whether or not the Hubble's vision problems had been corrected. (W Times, Dec 16/93; Fla Today, Dec 14/93, Dec 16/93; RTw, Dec 15/93; UPn, Dec 15/93)
NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)
NASA officials said that the Mars Observer mission could be a total loss if ground controllers failed to re-establish contact with the probe in time for the scheduled start of the orbit on August 24. Engineers suspected that a faulty flight clock aboard the craft might have caused communications to cease. New computer commands were sent telling Mars Observer to switch to a backup clock.  However the commands failed to restore contact with the spacecraft, suggesting that the clock theory was wrong. If contact could not be restarted, controllers would have no way of receiving scientific data or even confirming if the Mars Observer probe had made it into orbit. The Mars Observer project was the first U.S. Mission to Mars in 17 years; it was designed to pave the way for a new generation of international planetary exploration centered on Mars.
NASA announced that it had awarded contracts to three U.S. aerospace companies to develop materials and materials fabrication technology for a future U.S. high-speed civil transport. Contracts went to Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, Seattle, Washington; Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Co, Marietta, Georgia; and McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, Long Beach, California.  (NASA Release 93-124)
A White House panel recently called for the American space program to cut back its program significantly. The panel's report, issued on December 17, said that duplication among agencies had to be eliminated and cold-war secrecy reduced. The panel added that the United States should seek to make international cooperation an essential component of its space exploration strategy. (NY Times, Jan 26/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center Director Robert Crippen and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles had signed an agreement that would transfer benefits derived from the U.S. space program to the private sector and industries in Florida.  The two parties agreed to set aside $1 million each for the next two years to implement projects under this agreement. (NASA Release 93-155)
Sotheby's auction house announced that it had agreed to sell more than 200 items from the Soviet space program, including the first moon rock fragments ever to go up for sale.  The items were being sold by family members of the top participants as well as the state factories that produced the space suits and capsules being offered for sale. The Russian government  was not involved in the sale.  ((Rtw, August 9/93; AP, Aug 11/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced that following a White House directive, NASA had begun a redesign of the proposed Space Station to make it simpler, smaller, easier to build, and cheaper to operate. The redesign team planned to present three proposed models to the Clinton Administration by June 1. Goldin said that the agency would make maximum use of the $8.5-billion worth of work that had gone into designing and planning the Space Station since the mid-198s. (NY Times, Mar 12/93; W Times, Mar 12/93; LA Times, Mar 12/93; B Sun, Mar 12/93; AP, Mar 11/93, Mar 12/93; WSJ, Mar 12/93; Space News, Mar 15-21; AvWk, Mar 15/93; H Post, Mar 8/93, Mar 12/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeff Lawrence, a senior congressional staff aide with experience in space and aeronautics matters, as the agency's Associate Administrator for Legislative Affairs. (NASA Release 93-70; W Post, Apr 21/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
According to a USA Today/CNN/Gallop Poll, most Americans now feel the nation should cut or eliminate spending for the space program. Marcia Smith of the Congressional Research Service said that people are concerned about where to cut the budget, and NASA is seen as a discretionary program. The poll also revealed that people were losing faith in NASA's performance. (USA Today, Sep 7/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Dr. France Anne Cordova, head of the Astronomy and Astrophysics Department, Pennsylvania State University, was scheduled to assume the responsibilities of NASA Chief Scientist effective mid-October. She was to be on extended detail from the University to NASA. (NASA Release 93-162)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
Three major aerospace companies announced cutbacks yesterday, with Connecticut and Washington State losing most of the jobs. Pratt & Whitney, a jet engine manufacturer whose plants are mainly in Connecticut, said that 6,700 jobs would be eliminated over the next 12 months. The Boeing Company announced that it would cut back production of all models of jet airliners. Such a downsizing could result in as many as 30,000 lost jobs. McDonnell Douglas, which had already announced that 8,700 jobs would soon be eliminated, most of them production jobs in its California factories, said that 1,500 white-collar jobs would disappear from its St. Louis headquarters. (NY Times, Jan 27/93; WSJ, Jan 27/93)
NASA announced the assignment of Dr. John Cox as acting Deputy Director, Program and Operations, Space Station Freedom Program, and Robert Moorehead as Chief engineer for the Office of Space Systems Development (OSSD), NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release 93-136)
Galileo's controllers at the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, continued to work on unfurling the spacecraft's stuck high-gain antenna. If their attempts were unsuccessful, the craft's controllers would use Galileo's low-gain antenna to gather data, including data from a probe that would descend into Jupiter's atmosphere. Use of the back-up system would enable NASA to complete 70 percent of its mission, according to project manager William O'Neill. (CSM, Jan 13/93)
Ellen Ochoa, the first Hispanic woman astronaut, was scheduled to be a mission specialist on the Shuttle Endeavour launch March 23. Her mission raised anticipation in the Hispanic community, and NASA invited several Hispanic educators and activists to be present at the launch. NASA planned to send Ochoa on a tour of several cities later in the year. (El Sol, Feb 4/93, Feb 10/93)
In a speech to the National Space Symposium, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make the space program relevant to all Americans. He said he wanted everything smaller, faster, cheaper, and more varied. And he wanted to take more risks.
Some NASA scientists, following the "faster, better, cheaper" advice of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden, want to send two small space probes to study Pluto, the solar system's last known unexplored planet. The Plato mission could cost $600 million to $1 billion, depending on whether the probes were reached by Russian or U.S. rockets, respectively. By comparison, NASA expected to spend more than $2 billion to launch a spaceship in 1997 to explore Saturn. (AP, Feb 8/93)
NASA awarded the Arlington, Virginia-based Analytic Services Inc. a one-year grant to help study opportunities for cooperation among nations with space programs. (W Times, Mar 9/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93)
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) recommended eliminating the JPL Edwards Test Facility, staffed by 28 JPL employees and 18 contractors, at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert. If NASA managers accepted the recommendation, the facility could shut down by 1996. (UPI, Feb 8/93; Feb 9/Antelope Valley Press, Feb 9/93)
NASA reported that the agency was working with the nation's large aerospace companies to determine how NASA computer programs could help industry design and produce aircraft more efficiently. The ultimate goal was to integrate all the factors involved in aircraft design and production in order that aeronautical engineers would be able to design aircraft systems simultaneously rather than separately as is done now. (NASA Release 93-90)
NASA negotiated with PRC, Inc. of McLean, Virginia, a sole source contract extension to provide data processing and telecommunications support for NASA headquarters, Washington. (NASA Release C93-o)
In response to questions from reporters, President Clinton said that there might be some changes in the space program but that supporters of NASA should be pleased with his recommendations. He gave no details, but White House officials said the President would call for full funding for the Space Station when he addressed Congress February 17. John H. Gibbons, the President's science advisor, on the other had, said that big science projects would be cut back as the Administration searched for ways to pay for them. (AP, Feb 13/93, Feb 16/93; Space News, Feb 15-21; LA Times, Feb 13/93; USA Today, Feb 17/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Bryan O'Connor, Deputy Director of the Space Station Redesign Team, would take over management of the Space Station effort in order to accommodate a request by the team's leader, Joseph F. Shea, that his workload be reduced. Shea submitted his resignation as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis; he was to serve as Special Advisor to the Administrator and advisor to O'Connor. (NASA Statement on Advisory Committee Meeting)
NASA's newly formed Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee met in Washington to discuss their charter and to begin developing an agenda. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who formed the group, charged them with helping NASA respond to a directive from Congress that required the agency to award 8 percent of the total value of the agency's contracts to economically and socially disadvantaged businesses and minority educational institutions involved in key NASA activities.	Goldin pledged in September that NASA would meet its 8 percent goal. In an attempt to meet his pledge. the agency identified 26 procurements that would be set aside for small disadvantaged businesses (SDBs) and for members of the Small Business Administration's 8(a) program for minority-owned firms.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number  of organizational changes in the agency. He named John R. Dailey to be Acting Deputy Administrator and said that Dr. Joseph Shea, recently named as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis, would have oversight over all Space Station related development activities.
The Washington Post reported that NASA, under White House instructions to cut the budget of Space Station Freedom, was attempting to push the McDonald Douglas Corporation out of the $30 billion Space Station contract. McDonald Douglas was the prime contractor in the project, which had cost overruns of between $300 million and $1 billion. (W Post, Apr 25/93)
NASA announced that the agency was accepting applications for mission specialist and pilot astronaut positions effective immediately. The cut-off date for applications was July 1, 1993.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Office of Space Flight would assume responsibility for management of the Space Station Program.  Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Associate Administrator of Space Flight, was scheduled to lead the integration of these major programs.  (NASA Release  93-1291; AP, Oct 20/93)
NASA officials said that Germany was being charged only $150 million of the $400 million cost of launching a science mission aboard Shuttle Columbia on February 25. Columbia's crew was expected to include two German researchers and a laboratory of German science experiments. The price was agreed upon in 1986 under a pricing policy NASA officials admitted was outdated. (O Sen Star, Feb 4/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)
In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPLA), Pasadena, California, announced the selection of two major aerospace companies as the associate contractors for the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Network Phase B1 study and MESUIR Pathfinder support effort.  The companies were Hughes Aircraft Company; Hughes Spacecraft & Communications , El Segundo, California; and Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division, Downey, California.  (NASA Release C93-r)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA was raising the number of contracts it had with small, disadvantaged and women-owned businesses. According to Goldin, $310 million would be set aside under a Determinations and Findings (D & F) to make sure that NASA awarded 8 percent to such businesses. Eight percent was the figure set by Congress. (LA Watts Times, Jan 7/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA had awarded 8.5 percent of its 1993 fiscal year contracting budget to socially and economically disadvantaged firms, achieving a congressionally mandated goal of 8 percent for FY 1994 a year early. (NASA Release 93-214)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the activities of the Office of Exploration would be absorbed by the Office of Space Science, effective immediately. (NASA Release: 93-54)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the recipients of the Minority Contractor and Subcontractor of the Year Awards in recognition of minority businesses that had made outstanding contributions to NASA. Hernandez Engineering, Inc., Houston, was named as Minority Contractor of the Year. AJT and Associates, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, was named Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 93-177)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden awarded test pilot A. Scott Crossfield the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contributions to aeronautics and aviation during his career of 50 years.
NASA announced that a task force established by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to review plans for the Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission had concluded that "the mission is achievable." The servicing mission was currently scheduled for December 1993. (NASA Release 93-96)
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
Representative George E. Brown Jr, chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, warned the Clinton Administration that ordering a redesign of the Space Station might doom not only the space station but also other international "big science" projects. He also sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin cautioning him against abandoning the current design, which had cost $8 billion so far. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin's shuffling of top Space Station officials had led to internal friction between NASA and officials at the Reston, Virginia, program office for the Space Station. NASA's international partners in the Space Station were also reportedly concerned that they were not fully involved in key decisions involving the Station. (AvWk, Aug 2/93)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) described innovative new aeronautics research programs that would let airports across the nation and around the world handle more planes with fewer delays while maintaining today's high level of safety. (NASA Release 93-172)
The Boeing Company and the four leading European aerospace companies, partners in the Airbus Industrie consortium, reached an agreement to conduct a one-year study of the feasibility of jointly building a superjumbo airliner capable of carrying up to 800 passengers. (NY Times, Jan 28/93)
The Houston Chronicle  announced that NASA, responding to criticism of its cost overruns and the quality of its projects, had announced major reforms in the way it did business. In addition to other changes, procurement reforms would levy greater penalties on contractors that deliver defective products, continually exceed cost estimates, or fall behind schedule. (H Chron, May 10/93; Federal Computer Week, May 24/93)
The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.
A Christian Science Monitor editorial urged the Clinton Administration to rethink its civilian space program, noting that the program had drifted without overall purpose since rivalry with the old Soviet Union had ceased to be a significant factor. The editorial urged the Administration to define what the United States should accomplish in space and outline a realistic program to do it. (CSM, May 18/93)
John Aaron, the project manager of the Space Station, resigned after Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, demanded Aaron's resignation in return for continued funding for the project. Krueger said Aaron must be removed because "precious tax dollars have been mismanaged. There is no question that a new management team must get to work immediately to increase efficiency and productivity." (UPI, Feb 13/93)
Some scientists, led by former CBS News science adviser Richard C. Hoagland, accused NASA of not doing enough to investigate surface features that may be signs of intelligent life. The critics say that computer-enhanced photographs taken by the 1976 Viking Mars mission show objects on the Cydonia Plain that they believe were left by an extraterrestrial civilization.  Mr. Hoagland said a "rogue group in NASA" might have sabotaged the Mars Observer mission to suppress information about the Cydonia Plain structures. NASA officials denied the charge.  (APn, Aug 24/93; LA Times, August 25/93; Weekly World, Sept 14/93)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that he had appointed Margaret G. Finarelli to be Assistant for Strategic Planning.  Prior to her appointment, she served as NASA's Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations. (NASA Release 93-132)
David Lux, project manager for the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane, which crisscrossed the globe on Cold War spy missions, said that the plane had a new job helping NASA generate a database to be used by people who do aircraft design.  He said that Blackbird would soon take to the skies to see if it were possible to eliminate or reduce sonic booms for future high-speed airliners. (UPI, Jul 25/93)
A report released by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA must improve its ability to transfer technology to business. The report included eight recommendations for changing NASA's culture to facilitate technology transfer.
An article in the Christian Science Monitor reported that scarce NASA funding jeopardized the Space Station and manned flights. NASA had asked for a $1 billion increase over fiscal year 1993; however, Representative Ralph Hall, D of Texas, the chairman of the House space subcommittee, told Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, that a billion-dollar increase was not very likely. (CSM, Apr 28/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and astronaut Mae Jemison visited the Challengers Boys and Girls Club in South-Central Los Angeles and announced funding of a science room in the club's new facility. The club runs all-day education, social, and sports programs, six days a week.
NASA announced that Guy Gardner, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight Russian programs, had been put in charge of overseeing two joint missions with the Russian space program.
The Prince William Journal reported that Daniel Goldin, NASA Administrator, had decided that NASA should spend $90 million for the development of the Perseus aircraft, a remote-controlled drone that NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Science Corporation of Manassas to build. The unmanned aircraft would be used for environmental studies of the upper atmosphere. (Prince William Journal, May 5/93; LA Times, May 9/93; UPI, May 14/93)
Joseph R. Cipriano, associate director of the department's Energy Research office, recommended that the department fire the project manager for the $11 billion Super Conducting Super Collider, slash President Clinton's budget request, and "take a year... to fix problems." In a memo, Cipriano noted that morale was very low, confidence in existing management was practically nonexistent, and cost and schedule trends were worsening at an alarming rate.  A nonprofit group of research universities, Universities Research Association, Inc, was under contract to build the instrument. (W Post, Aug 2/93)
The Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce announced that it had awarded NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, U.S. Air Force Lt. General Edward Barry, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) its Kitty Hawk, Sands of Time Award. The chamber annually recognizes individuals and companies in the aerospace industry as a means of promoting the industry. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
The Clinton Administration considered cancelling NASA's $30 billion Space Station and the $8.2 billion Super Collider but decided to keep the programs after encountering intense opposition to their cancellation. Cost overruns on the two programs, however, have damaged their political prospects in the administration and Congress. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93; AP, Feb 6/93, 8/93; UPI, Feb 5/93, Feb 8/93; W Post, Feb 6/93; W Times, Feb 6/93; P Inq, Feb 6/93;B Sun, Feb 6/93; NY Times, Feb 6/93)
NASA announced that Mae C. Jemison, M.D., the first woman of color in space, had resigned to pursue interests in "teaching, mentoring, health care issues, and increasing participation in science and technology of those who have traditionally been left out."  Jemison, who joined the astronaut program in 1987, was a science mission specialist on STS-47, Spacelab-J, in September 1992, a cooperative mission with the Japanese to study life sciences and materials processing. (NASA Release 93-043; P Inq, Mar 7/93; B Sun, Mar 7/93; W Post, Mar 8/93; W Times, Mar 7/93; AP, Mar 6/93; UPI, Mar 6/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; People Magazine, Apr/93)
An improperly etched spring in one of Space Shuttle Endeavour's three oxygen turbopumps could delay next week's planned launch of the Space Shuttle. The inspection stamp was etched in a high-stress area rather than in a spot with minimal stress, NASA officials said. The spring holds the pump bearings in place. If the improperly marked spring broke at liftoff, the affected bearing cage could come loose. (AP, May 25/93)
The House of Representatives passed an amendment to the National Helium Act of 1960. The amendment judged the helium program as a case of government waste and voted to end its monopoly on sales to the space program. The 1996 Act required NASA to buy its helium from the government-run reserve, even though it could be bought for as much as $10 less per 1,000 cubic feet on the open market. The Senate was still considering the amendment.
Three days before the Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to begin orbiting the red planet, NASA engineers lost communications with the $1 billion probe. Radio contact broke off after engineers commanded the spacecraft to prepare for a crucial rocket firing on August 24 that was designed to send the spacecraft in orbit around the planet. Mars Observer was programmed to automatically fire its rockets, but NASA needed to hear from the spacecraft to be certain that had happened. If the commands were not received, the ship could fly past Mars completely. NASA officials expressed grave concern over the problem but said that communications could be restored at any moment. (UPI, Aug 22/93; AP/Aug 23/93; Rtw, Aug 23/93; WSJ, Aug 23/93; P Inq, Aug 23/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; USA Today, Aug 23/93; W Post, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Aug 23/93; C Trib, Aug 23/93; LA Times, Aug 23/93; RT, Aug 23/93)
The Washington Post reported that Maxime Faget, chairman and founder of Space International Inc., had resigned from his position as consultant to the Space Shuttle redesign team. Some NASA employees questioned Faget's objectivity because his company had earlier proposed its own alternative Space Station and design and because the company would likely bid on any new design proposal. Faget's resignation "was determined by both NASA and Space Industries as necessary." (W Post, Mar 24/93)
Daniel S. Golden, NASA administrator, named Dr. Joseph F. Shea, adjunct professor of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and former NASA employee, to be in charge of the redesign of the Space Station. Golden also announced measures to conserve resources and restrict new spending during the redesign transition. (NASA Release 93-038; Space News, Mar 1-7; UPI, Feb 27/93; W Post, Feb 27/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden instructed senior NASA managers to begin a five-month study that would examine whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005 or upgrade the fleet so that shuttles could fly until 2030. The study was being led by Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Systems Development. (Space News, Feb. 8-14/93)
The House of Representatives voted to maintain $2.1 billion in funding for the scaled-down Space Station Freedom by a 220 to 196 vote. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin attributed the growing support to an intense lobbying effort by the White House and congressional supporters. The project's chance of surviving the Senate vote were seen as good. (RTw, June 28/93; UPI, June 28/93; APn, June 29/93; AP, June 29/93; W Post, June 29/93; LA Times, June 29/93; H Post, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93; W Times, June 29/93; NY Times, June 30/93)
In his keynote address at the inaugural University of Southern California Engineering Day, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, emphasized that space exploration involved risks but that they were worth taking. He also said that NASA's specific challenge was to "win back our credibility through performance." ( LA Times, May 21/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, presented Gene Roddenberry, creator of the Star Trek television series, NASA's Distinguished Public Service Medal on January 30. The medal, which was awarded posthumously, was presented to Roddenberry's widow, Majel Barrett Roddenberry. Gene Roddenberry died in October 1991.
The Mars Observer failed to call Earth on August 25, when a five-day timer should have had it send an emergency signal, lessening hopes that the mission could be salvaged. Observer was the latest reminder of the growing problems of the U.S. space program.  The Observer failure added to a string of expensive space failures: the loss earlier in August of a $500-million spy satellite, then of a $67-million weather satellite, and a series of mishaps with NASA's orbiting observatories and other planetary probes.
The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)
In an interview in the Scientist, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the current NASA reorganization would make science more of a priority in NASA and involve the science community in correcting problems at NASA. He stated, "NASA is science and exploration, not infrastructure and bureaucracy." In response to a question about jobs, he noted that NASA was not a jobs program, but rather existed for "inspiration and hope, and a basic understanding of science." He said that he hoped to launch a small discovery satellite every year, while cutting back Space Shuttle flights from 12 or 13 to six a year. (The Scientist, Jan 11/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
NASA's Inspector General told Congress that NASA is plagued with contractors who overcharge, receive bonus payments while running up huge cost overruns and employ workers who frequently sleep on the job. The agency currently has more than 400 criminal fraud investigations under way, the Inspector General told the House Government Operations Committee. (AP, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 6/93, Oct 7/93; LA Times, Oct 7/93)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had provided the most detailed look yet at comet Shoemaker-Levy 5, which was hurtling toward a July  1994 collision with the planet Jupiter.  Hubble's high resolution images showed that the approximately 20 objects that make up the comet are much smaller than originally estimated from observations with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 93-188; USA Today, Oct 15/93; S F Chron, Oct 15/93; RTw, Oct 14/93; W Post, Oct 25/93)
NASA officials announced on April 25 that a three-month review of the development of Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been successfully completed. The work package involved work on laboratory and critical subsystems. The Marshall Space Flight Center and its main contractor Boeing Defense & Space Group were responsible for the work, which included many elements considered the core of the Space Station. (UPI, Apr 25/93)
NASA appointed Deidre A. Lee as Acting Associate Administrator for Procurement. She replaced Don G. Bush, who announced his intention to resign in November 1992. Since September 1991, Lee has been serving as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Procurement. Prior to that she was the Executive Officer to NASA's Acting Deputy Administrator. (NASA Release 93-11)
The Houston Post reported that the two committees charged with redesigning Space Station Freedom were behind schedule. The two groups, a technical resign team mainly made up of NASA employees and a team of outside experts, had been faced with much infighting at NASA and a barrage of criticism from Congress and the foreign countries participating in the Space Station project. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin asserted that the work would be finished on time. (H Post, May 4/93; AvWk, May 3/93; H Chronicle, May 6/93)
In a report to Congress, the General Accounting Office (GAO) reported that NASA  had underestimated the cost of its programs by billions of dollars. The report noted that original estimates for 25 of the 29 NASA programs GAO analyzed were too low. GAO found that more than a third cost more than double the early estimates, while only four cost less than those estimates. Most of the programs cost between 50 and 99 percent more than the early projections. One notable exception was Space Shuttle Endeavour; its $1.8 billion cost was $399 million less than the original estimate. NASA officials cited "overoptimism" as a reason why initial estimates were often significantly lower than current estimates. (NY Times, Jan 31/93; AP, Jan 30/93; Space News, Feb 8-14/94)
The Houston Chronicle reported on a new nationwide poll of registered voters conducted by Yankelovitch Partners and sponsored by NASA contractor Rockwell International Corporation. The poll revealed that 70 percent of American voters supported the construction of a permanently staffed Space Station and 63 percent believed that the United States should spend "whatever is necessary" to preserve its lead in space activities. Some of the poll results, however, reflected wide swings of support for the space program. (H Chron, May 25/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, who described himself as "an agent of change" in a late-November interview with Government Executive magazine, has set about instituting the "faster, better, cheaper" goals popularized over the past two years by the National Space Council.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that Space Station Freedom needed to be everything from a scientific laboratory to "an inspiration to children."  Disagreeing with Goldin, Robert L. Park, representing the American Physical Society, argued that the "Space Station is unlikely to make any significant scientific contribution." (AP, Jul 1/93, Jul 2/93)
NASA managers and industry contractors blamed Space Station cost overruns on the rush to redesign the effort in 1990 and 1991. Congress directed NASA in October 1990 to shave $6 billion from the Space Station over five years. NASA settled on a plan in early 1991 to shorten the pressurized modules and reduce the number of solar arrays. The agency also pushed back the date when the crew could occupy the Space Station by two years--to 1999--and reduced the crew size by half. In addition, NASA redid plans for the latticework structure that forms the Space Station's backbone and the Johnson Space Center's major responsibility in the program. According to Jack Boykin, Johnson's acting project director, the plan was too optimistic in its estimates of cost and technical complexity.
NASA unveiled a $300 million radar system that can take color pictures of Earth's damaged environment from a Space Shuttle. According to NASA project scientist Diane Evans, "In many case, radar is the only way scientists can explore unaccessible regions on Earth's surface." The camera was scheduled to fly on the Shuttle three times, in 1994, 1995, and 1996. NASA and the German and Italian space agencies cooperated on the project. NASA paid half the cost. (AP, May 14/93)
In an address to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, said that the redesign effort for Space Station Freedom was making "great progress." (AvWk, May 10/93)
NASA managers and engineers warned that infighting and confusion jeopardized the Space Station effort. Critics said that NASA must strengthen accountability, do away with bureaucratic constraints, and forge a more cohesive team. There was widespread disagreement among Space Station players over whether NASA should make some personnel changes or take a more radical path, for example, invest more authority in the program office in Reston, Virginia, or concentrate effort at a single NASA center. (Space News, Feb 15-21/93)
NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)
A feature in the NY Times about Daniel S. Golden, NASA Administrator, called him a "bold remodeler of a drifting agency." Golden was quoted in the article as saying that he believes "nonlinear thinking" is essential to the rebirth of NASA. (NY Times, Dec 21/93)
NASA officials announced that further testing on the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II (WF/PCII), an instrument scheduled to fly on the Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission in December, might be necessary. Tests had cleared the camera of suspicion that it was flawed, but NASA asked for one last independent review of the data just to make completely sure.  (NASA Release  93-169; W Post, Sep 28/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of two astronauts, William M. Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, to senior management positions at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release June 24/93)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
Federal Computer Week recognized three NASA employees for their work in procurement. Don Lovall, Chief, Technical and Information Systems, Design engineering Directorate at the NASA Kennedy Space Center, was recognized, together with his team, for awarding the Personal Computer Acquisition Contract (PCACP), an innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's First consolidated microcomputer buy. PCAC was unusual because it fostered competition among three chosen vendors throughout its five-year life. Skip Kemere, ADP Procurement Branch Chief, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, was also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in the SEWP BOWL, its first agency wide buying vehicle for high-powered work stations. Darleen A. Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement at NASA, was recognized for her action on the awarding of NASA's Earth Observing System Data and Information System core contract. Instead of accepting low-ball bids from major firms, she sent the bids back to the bidders and asked that they be adjusted--upward--to reflect more realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, attempted to smooth over "strained" relations with top NASA management, upset over a letter that he had written to a House subcommittee investigating space station funding. In part the letter read,"I have been concerned with regard to the validity of the present cost and schedule estimates." NASA officials scheduled to testify before the subcommittee said that Goldin's comments seemed to discredit what they had to say even before they said it. Yesterday, Goldin denied that he distrusted his top managers. (W Post, Mar 5/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that the U.S. space program "is in chaos" because of congressional budget cuts. NASA's five-year budget plan dropped from $106 billion last year to $71 billion. Noting that NASA's budget changed every two or three months, Goldin called on Congress to institute a multiyear budget that would enable the agency to develop a strategic plan. (USA Today, Nov 17/93; W Times, Nov 17; Reuters, Nov 16/93, Nov 17/93; Fla Today, Nov 17/93)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
NASA announced that the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, would lead a multi-year research program effort to develop technology for a future high-speed civil transport. According to Louis Williams, Director of the High-Speed Research Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., "The program is laying a technical foundation for an environmentally compatible, economically practical commercial transport that could contribute up to 140,000 jobs and $200 billion to the national economy in the next century." (NASA Release 93-52; Daily Press, May 24/93)
USA Today reported that scientists on the Space Shuttle Columbia during its fall mission were scheduled to behead five white rats. Space program scientists Frank Sulzman said that killing the rats in orbit would give researchers better information on the effect of weightlessness on the animals. (USA Today, May 12/93)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin volunteered to remain at NASA until the Clinton Administration appointed an replacement. He made the offer in a January 14 letter to the White House. Meanwhile he suspended an agency reorganization that he had just begun following months of review. White House officials have just begun to collect names of potential NASA chiefs and solicit opinions on Goldin's record, according to government officials (W Post, Jan 20/93; Space News, Jan 25-31)
The Washington Post reported that a White House official had indicated that President Clinton intended to retain NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, a Bush appointee. The White House apparently had decided that Goldin was just the type of hard-nosed administrator that NASA needed. (W Post, June 24/93; UPI, June 24/93)
Moscow held its first international aerospace show in Moscow.  As many as 200 foreign aerospace companies and 250 enterprises from all over the former Soviet Union took part in the show, the largest event of its kind ever held in Russia.  Russian military space equipment was on show for the first time. (UPI, Aug 31/93; LA Times, Sept 1/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced agency plans to use its nearly completed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) Yellow Creek facilities in Iuka, Mississippi, for manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. (NASA Release 93-215)
NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory was to receive a scheduled boost to a higher orbit beginning on October 4, to prevent the spacecraft from reentering the Earth's atmosphere. The reboost was necessary to compensate for orbit decay, which is the result of solar activity slowly pushing the satellite toward Earth over a period of time, said NASA officials. (NASA Release 93-179)
NASA announced that it had banned news organizations from covering meetings about the redesign of Space Station Freedom. NASA said the meetings would be closed because they involved mainly NASA employees, not outside advisers. NASA has formal advisory committees, which meet openly in compliance with a 1972 law governing such meetings. (Space News, March 22-28/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin notified employees in a memo distributed the previous week that the scaled-back Space Station would mean the loss of about 1,300 jobs among federal workers alone.  Space Station work involved 2,300 of NASA's 24,000 employees. (AP, Jul 26/93; Sp News, Jul 26-Aug 1/93; B Sun, Jul 27/93)
The Federal Aviation Administration authorized civilian pilots to use a satellite-based navigation system that would enable them to choose direct routes without relying on navigational aids on the ground. The system, the Global Positioning System, uses a network of 24 satellites orbiting 11,000 miles above the Earth. Each satellite sends out a continuous signal that can be computed by receivers to determine an exact position. (NY Times, June 10/93)
NASA officials announced that they planned to eliminate a number of expensive facilities and delay several Space Station assembly missions in their attempt to cut growing cost projections for the program. Senior program officials said that they had reduced $l.08 billion in anticipated cost increases for the Space Station to $678 million. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
