NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center released their annual economic impact statement in terms of the effect of the Center on Brevard County. Despite budget cuts, the 1994 impact on the economy was $1.18 billion in comparison to $1.32 billion in 1992; the total workforce (including contractors, civil service, and construction) was 16,500 in 1994 in contrast with 18,700 in 1992. The review of NASA operations should result in more job cuts, which would occur in early 1995. (Fla Today, Nov 24/94)
The crew for the STS-67 mission aboard Columbia for late 1994 was announced. Stephen S. Oswald was to command the Astro-2 astronomy mission to study the far ultraviolet (UV) spectra of faint astronomical objects and polarization of UV light from hot stars and galaxies. USAF Major William G. Gregory was named pilot, Navy Lieutenant Commander Wendy B. Lawrence mission specialist, Ronald A. Parise and Samuel T. Durrance payload specialists, Tamara E. Jernigan Payload Commander, and John M. Grunsfeld mission specialist.
While visiting the University of Tennessee, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA had to share responsibility for the failure of the canceled Commercial Experimental Transporter (Comet) spacecraft program. The University of Tennessee Space Institute (UTSI) managed the project, which involved other universities and private contractors. The goal was to provide a lower cost alternative for ferrying private industrial experiments into orbit. Goldin said UTSI was not to blame for the cost overruns that nearly doubled the project's price; in retrospect, NASA should have been more active and offered help to UTSI. (AP, May 13/94)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) authorized airlines to begin using military satellite signals for navigation. The military's Global Positioning System, consisting of 24 orbiting satellites, according to the airlines would save them millions of dollars by flying more efficient routes. It was unclear what the FAA would do with existing microwave landing systems. (WSJ, Feb 18/94; W Post, Feb 18/94; NY Times, Feb 18/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the University of North Dakota's Center for Aerospace Sciences (CAS). Goldin visited at the invitation of Senator Byron Dorgan, a member of the Commerce Committee, which oversees NASA and its budget. Goldin was impressed with CAS's new technology and the educational services and programs it conducted for children and the public as well as college students. (Grand Forks Herald, Jun 3/94)
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)
NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Systems, Inc., Vienna, Virginia, for a contract to provide information resources and management support services to NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release C94-ll)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston as his first stop on a fall tour of all NASA facilities. In a tough speech to all employees, he said he wanted more innovation and less bureaucracy. He stressed that in a time of tight government budgets, "every single person is going to have to justify their activity--all the time." In emphasizing the need to improve business practices, he cited the NASA worker-to-manager ratio on some projects as 2-to-1, whereas 12-to-1 was the private sector goal. (H Post, Sep 13/94; H Post, Sep 14/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Brian Welch as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-116)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center but declined to endorse Representative Bud Cramer, Democrat, saying it was not appropriate for him to get into partisan politics. Goldin did, however, give Cramer credit for his help in saving the Space Station and he announced that a new generation launch vehicle would be developed at Marshall. (Huntsville News, Oct 28/94)
The National Research Council reported that NASA officials had not yet established a solid working relationship with the Russian Space Agency. The Council found tremendous improvement in NASA management but considered that NASA thus far lacked a strong grip on Russian involvement. Since 1985 the Council, the operating arm of the National Academies of Science and Engineering, had reviewed the Space Station regularly under federal funding. The Space Station Committee, headed by Jack Kerrebrock, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor, also expressed concern that NASA needed to invest more in experiment development and preparatory work on Spacelab, the Shuttle's science laboratory. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; NY Times, Jul 29/94; Phillips Business Information, Jul 29/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that NASA would stop work on the Polar spacecraft and would continue with pre-launch activities on the Wind spacecraft. Work on Polar was to resume only after the Wind spacecraft had operated successfully on-orbit and after a reevaluation of resources needed to complete the program within budgetary limits. (NASA Release 94-75; SP News, May 16-22/94)
NASA announced that the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) was awarding the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon management team the CNES Medal in recognition of their achievements. Seven team members from NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, and the CNES project office received the awards.Launched August 10, 1992, TOPEX/Poseidon continued to study the topography of the oceans. (NASA Release 94-132)
Another article in the same newspaper commended NASA for having learned the secret to getting along with Congress: humility equaled stability. NASA had done its homework prior to submitting its budget request and got almost everything it asked for. The writer gave most of the credit to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin whose mantra of "cheaper, better, faster" had forced NASA staff to wake up to reality. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)
Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)
NASA announced that it had released the Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Cassini mission to Saturn, which would be available for public review and comment over a 45-day period. Cassini was a cooperative scientific mission of the U.S. and European space agencies scheduled for launch in October 1997 for a seven-year robotic spacecraft journey to Saturn. (NASA Release 94-174)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Readdy would replace Kenneth D. Cameron as NASA manager of operational activities at Star City, Russia. As Director of Operations, Russia, Readdy would work with Russian trainers, engineers, and flight controllers to support the training of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City, and to enhance continued cooperation between NASA and Russia's Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-115)
Ken Szalai, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, said that construction of the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane (NASP), the X-30, and its first flight scheduled for 2000 were no longer goals. Funding for the plane runs out in 1994, but Szalai said research into supersonic flight would not end. John Bass, deputy program manager for the NASP consortium of government and industry, including five aerospace firms, the Department of Defense and NASA, considered the decision a great loss. The one area remaining a problem was that of propulsion, which engineers could not test because the scramjet engine required to power the X-30 needed an environment where wind speeds reach 25 times the speed of sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May 30/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that members of the NASA Hubble Space Telescope Recovery Team would receive the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association on May 6 for their outstanding work. (NASA Release 94-71; H Post, May 6/94)
Bryan O'Connor, overseer of Shuttle operations at NASA headquarters, said that NASA expected to receive shortly a Russian-built Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly that would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russia's Mir Space Station. A damaged tube delayed delivery of the docking component. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)
NASA Program Manager for Human Systems Technology in the Office of Aeronautics, Washington, D.C. announced that NASA was designing an electronic chart to make flying safer for aerial firefighters who often fly in potentially dangerous conditions above forest fires. The Electronic Chart Display being developed at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, shows pilots an area's terrain and obstacles on a computer screen. (NASA Release 94-69)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) in its report faulted NASA's effort to fit a program projected in the late 1990s to cost more than $20 billion a year into an annual budget of $14 billion. The CBO said such effort risked delay and failure, and the CBO offered the alternative of grounding the astronauts and ending the Space Shuttle program. Specifically, the report proposed one of the following: ending costly piloted space flight, concentrating instead on robot aircraft and new technology for industry; emphasizing a roboting spacecraft and conducting only four instead of eight Space Shuttle flights a year; concentrating on piloted space flight, building the Space Station and planning for manned missions to the moon and Mars, limiting robot missions to pathfinder projects for the moon-Mars effort. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA would not back away from the Administration's balanced aeronautics and space program. He added that any of the three CBO alternatives would destroy that balance and that NASA could accomplish daring and difficult missions on a tight budget. (NASA Editor's Note N94-27; B Sun, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; P Inq, Mar 25/94; NY Times, Mar 25/94; O Sen Star, Mar 25/94; W Post, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; LA Daily News, Mar 27/94; Federal Computer Week, Mar 28/94; O Sen Star, Mar 31/94)
An article about U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar and their training in Russia stressed their intensive Russian language lessons and their sense of Russia's space program accomplishments in the face of the country's serious economic problems. They believe both countries would benefit from space cooperation: the United States would gain from the experience and data Russia had collected from long stays in space and Russia would profit from U.S. technology and the use of the U.S. Shuttle to ferry large cargos to Mir. (C Trib, Jul 3/94)
In a speech to aerospace executives at the South Bay Association of Chambers of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that "survival of the fittest," the new motto at NASA's contract office, should also be the rule at aerospace companies. He asserted that defense and space companies must follow NASA's lead in streamlining operations and delivering results for the public. (Daily Breeze, Oct 21/94)
NASA announced that it would conduct a joint campaign with Brazilian space agencies to study the Earth's space environment over the magnetic equator from August 15 through October 20, 1994, as part of the International Equatorial Electrojet Year. During the campaign, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, was scheduled to launch 33 rockets from the Centro de Lancamento de Alcantara launch range in the northeastern state of Maranhao, Brazil. (NASA Release 94-126)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, described some of the benefits Americans enjoyed in their daily lives that resulted from space-based research. Among these were insulation techniques used by Meals on Wheels to deliver food to senior citizens, miniaturization and computers, laser technology for use in the information superhighway, and biomedical discoveries. The latter included laser systems used in heart treatment, pacemakers, and body imaging techniques used in breast cancer detection. In addition, the space program created thousands of jobs. Despite the above achievements, Mikulski admitted that NASA in the past had over-promised technology and underestimated cost. NASA needed a clear set of priorities, and space programs must become multinational. (W Post, Jul 20/94)
Wilbur Trafton, NASA's Space Station program director, who was in Houston to attend the Space Exploration 94 conference sponsored by the NASA Alumni League, said several Chinese officials attending a gathering of aerospace professionals in Huntsville, Alabama, asked informally about joining the U.S.-led International Space Station program. They were urged to pursue their goal through diplomatic channels. (H Chron, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94)
In an address to business executives, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also spoke of NASA's goal of putting a man on Mars. With the proper technical groundwork and economic and political conditions, Goldin felt 10 years was a reasonable time frame for accomplishing this. The plan was for innovative technology to cut the cost, such as drawing methane from Mars to use as fuel for the return trip, thus cutting the space vehicle's size in half. Another part of NASA's vision was to learn how to work together with other countries in space programs. (Reuters, Feb 15/94)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had an extensive interview with US Black Engineer (USBE) Magazine on his past and current experience, commitment, and achievements in promoting minority advancement in the aerospace field. He detailed how in his long career in rising through the field he had worked for minority progress.
NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Services Inc., Vienna, Virginia, to provide Information Resources Management Support at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release C94-gg; Federal Computer Week, Oct 24/94)
According to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, NASA received 28 outstanding proposals from universities, the aerospace industry, and government laboratories for smaller, less expensive planetary science missions under its new Discovery program. By January 1995 NASA was to select a few to pursue seriously with the expectation that one or two would be developed and launched by the period 1999-2001. NASA set forth specific funding limitations and wanted models of streamlined management of such projects while demanding high quality. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
A Japanese cabinet advisory commission report stated that Japan needed to double its space budget over the next 15 years to initiate planetary expeditions, become a leader in Earth observation, and develop advanced robotics. The new space plan confirmed Japan's existing commitment to international space programs, inclduing the Japanese Experiment Module for NASA's International Space Station. The recommendations came from a long-term planning group within the Space Activities Commission and were to be forwarded to Japan's Finance Ministry at the end of August when the fiscal 1995 budget would be prepared. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement following the defeat of the Senate amendment to end funding for the International Space Station. Goldin praised the Senate's vote of confidence as an indication of a bipartisan coalition of support. He said that the Space Station was a "truly international scientific effort, and a powerful symbol of peaceful cooperation in the post Cold War world." Subsequent to Goldin's statement, various media comments appeared stressing the commitment of "time and political capital" by the President and the Vice President to supporting the Space Station, in addition to Goldin's tireless efforts. (NASA Release 94-127; SP News, Aug 8-14/94; B Sun, Aug 12/94)
Space Shuttle Endeavour, which had been rescheduled to lift off on April 8, was launched April 9 because of bad weather. In its cargo bay was the Space Radar Laboratory, weighing 23,000 pounds and containing $366 million worth of imaging systems. The system was to bounce radar waves off Earth in three frequency bands to produce three-dimensional maps of ocean currents, river valleys, forests and farm lands, the geology of volcanoes, and features under desert sands. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and the German and Italian space agencies developed the equipment. The radar developed a glitch after the first day, but ground control was able to repair it and the results were most successful. (NY Times, Apr 8/94; W Post, Apr 8/94; B Sun, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 8/94; USA Today, Apr 8/94; AP, Apr 8/94; UP, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 9/94; W Post, Apr 10/94; NY Times, Apr 10/94; B Sun, Apr 10/94; P Inq, Apr 10/94; UPI, Apr 10/94; Reuters, Apr 10/94; AP, Apr 11/94)
NASA, together with the U.S. Department of Energy, the U.S. Department of Defense Information Systems Agency, AT&T, and Foxworth & Dinkins, a Washington, D.C.-based marketing firm, sponsored a three-day conference at Clark-Atlanta University November 7-9 that brought representatives of the 117 historically black colleges and universities to explore the opportunities for minority students in science and mathematics. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was one of the conference speakers. (Atlanta Business Chronicle, Nov 11-17/94)
The Earthwinds balloon flew 200 miles in seven hours from Reno, Nevada, over the Sierra Nevada and landed 200 miles north of Los Angeles in its fourth failed attempt since its initial try in February, 1992, to make the first nonstop round-the-world flight. The hourglass-shaped craft about the length of a football field consists of an upper teardrop-shaped, helium-filled bag separated by a three-man crew capsule from its lower round, air-filled anchor balloon. The project, sponsored mainly by hotel magnate Barron Hilton, has cost $7 million to date, with $700,000 for non-reusable balloons and helium for each flight. Project manager Don Engen expected no new flight this season, but project advisor, Apollo XVII commander Gene Cernan, predicted another attempt. (Reuters, Jan 12/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and its affiliated sites--Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island, Virginia, and NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C.--announced the selection of Cortez III Services Corporation of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to provide comprehensive logistics services to these sites. The services included transportation, flight project planning and coordination support, supply management, warehousing, property management and disposal, mail services, forms and records management, and interior design. (NASA Release C94-s)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Robert E. Whitehead as Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release 94-23)
New Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich indicated in an interview that he favored a NASA confined to research and development, with remaining functions contracted out to the private sector as far as possible. His overriding mission for NASA was drastically reducing the cost of getting into space. Gingrich praised NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's efforts to reshape NASA but considered the agency still to be "a people-heavy, obsolescent bureaucracy." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced a report by the General Aviation Task Force of NASA's Aeronautics Advisory Committee. The report of the industry-led task force called on NASA to revitalize its general aviation program, make its wind tunnels, laboratories and simulators more accessible to the general aviation community, and better balance its technology program to meet general aviation needs. The four areas on which the report called on NASA to concentrate were: propulsion, noise, and emissions work; aeronautical systems research; structure and materials development; and aerodynamics research. (NASA Release 94-29; Wichita Eagle, Feb 26/94)
Senator Howell Heflin, Democrat from Alabama, told a space conference at Auburn University that he owed his life to the space program. He referred to angioplasty, a pacemaker, and a steel artery expansion device, all of which were based on space-related research. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and several Auburn graduate astronauts also took part in the program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
John Gibbons, White House science adviser, said that as a result of tight budgets the Government would combine the operations of civilian and military weather satellite systems: two belonging to the Defense Department and two belonging to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The combining should save as much as $300 million by the end of 1999. Under an interagency agreement, the Defense Department was to procure future weather satellites, the Commerce Department's Atmospheric Agency was to operate the system, and NASA was to conduct research on advanced technology to be incorporated into the new spacecraft. The program became a joint Defense Department-NASA project in 1993. NASA was to build and launch a Landsat 7 spacecraft to replace the aging Landsat 4 and 5 spacecraft. NASA also was to design a new generation of spacecraft to compete with foreign satellites that provide similar data. On May 11 John Morgan, Director of the European weather satellite operations (Eumetsat) said he would discuss with nations that participate in European satellite and space programs NOAA's invitation to join the combined weather satellite system. These agencies already cooperate with NOAA on developing a Joint Polar System. (AP, May 10/94; NY Times, May 11/94; W Post, May 11/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 12/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
Volodymyr Gorbulin, head of Ukraine's space agency, appealed to the West for full space research cooperation to save Ukraine's aeronautics industry from collapse. Gorbulin expressed disappointment that NASA officials had refused to discuss joint space construction at talks in Kiev the following week because Ukraine had not yet signed international agreements on proliferation of advanced rocket technology. (Reuters, Mar 15/94)
Drucella Andersen, who served as head of public affairs for aeronautics at NASA, moved to the Federal Aviation Administration as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. (W Post, Aug 19/94)
Commenting on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's urging of space scientists to search for a habitable planet among the stars, science columnist Robert C. Cowen viewed such a quest as feasible in view of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope. He saw the next phase of the search as involving a look for signs of gravitational interaction of a star and planets. (CSM, Jun 22/94)
The group of scientists from Phillips Rocket Laboratory investigating the disappearance of the Mars Observer more than one year ago concluded the probable cause of the accident. Phillips aeronautical engineer and project manager said the likely cause was failure of a small pyro valve that allowed propellants to mix. This in turn could cause the rupture of a tube and result in the Observer tumbling out of control. (Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94)
NASA officials indicated that details of scientific evidence supporting the theory that man-made chlorine was causing the ozone hole above Antarctica would be released on December 19. The evidence was based on three years of data from NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). UARS instruments had found chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in electronics and refrigeration systems in the stratosphere. The stratospheric ozone layer was responsible for protecting people, animals, and plants from too much ultraviolet sunlight. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; NASA Release 94-215; UP, Dec 19/94; Reuters, Dec 19/94; LA Times, Dec 20/94; NY Times, Dec 20/94; W Post, Dec 20/94; W Times, Dec 20/94; USA Today, Dec 20/94; WSJ, Dec 20/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94; H Chron, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 20/94; C Trib, Dec 20/94; AP, Dec 20/94)
At Russia's request, the Federal Aviation Administration was about to launch a sweeping inspection of Russia's airlines and air safety controls. The review resulted from three serious air crashes in Russia during the year and dire warnings of the dangers of Russian air travel. (W Post, Aug 27/94)
NASA Kennedy Space Center spokesman Bruce Buckingham said that that NASA had worked out a plan that would allow NASA employees to have the Labor Day weekend off and still would permit the launching of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (Fla Today, Aug 15/94)
NASA named John C. Lynn to head the new office of Chief Information Officer within the Office of the Administrator at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-199)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said he would personally discuss the Space Station program with 220 members of Congress before the House of Representatives votes on the Station in the summer. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94; AvWk, Apr 11/94)
In a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, chairman John Dingell, Democrat from Michigan, pressed NASA officials to explain why they had selected Boeing as prime contractor for the Space Station in late 1993 in spite of the firm's having failed NASA's own cost-control reviews. NASA officials admitted they did not know that Boeing was under 21 federal criminal investigations and was forced to pay the government $161 million in settlements. Testifying for NASA were Deirdre A. Lee, Associate Administrator for Procurements, and Deputy Administrator John R. Daily. In addition to the problems with Boeing, Michael Thibault, Assistant Director of the Defense Contract Audit Agency, said that an audit of charges by IBM, a subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas, one of the earlier Space Station contractors, found that about 20 percent of IBM's $490 million charges were not allowable under its contract. (LA Times, Jul 28/94; SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
NASA's attempts to streamline its management of space programs and cut costs were highlighted with details of personnel cuts and commendation of the efforts of Jeremiah Pearson who had served as associate administrator for space flight. An example of Shuttle and Space Station mergers was the Johnson Space Center's new $250 million Mission Control Center. The Center could handle Shuttle missions, activities aboard the Mir, and the new International Space Station simultaneously. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
A feature article on NASA stated that cooperation with the Russians in space was an important foreign policy initiative of the Clinton Administration. In this connection, NASA was working hard at merging many of its programs with those of Russia, as NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin indicated in a recent interview. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
Bowman Cutter, deputy assistant to the President for economic policy, took a lead in developing a space policy for the administration, according to a statement he made on May 26. As a first step, he convened a meeting May 13 at the White House with a diverse and bipartisan group of industry representatives, NASA managers, military officers, and academicians to discuss the space program's future. Although there was some talk about the Space Station, the major emphasis was on longer-term policy. Rather than new programs, White House officials said the focus was to be on streamlining NASA's bureaucracy, focusing research and development to help private industry, and pushing small missions to demonstrate advanced technologies. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
The flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour was aborted 1.9 seconds before liftoff as a result of automatic engine shutdown caused by an overheated fuel pump. In consequence NASA officials stated that they were moving the launch of Endeavour to the first week of October because of the time it would take to refurbish the craft. (UP, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94; NY Times, Aug 19/94; W Post, Aug 19/94; W Times, Aug 19/94; USA Today, Aug 19/94; AP, Aug 19/94; Fla Today, Aug 19/94; O Sen Star, Aug 19/94; NY Times, Aug 21/94; AvWk, Aug 22/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and astronaut James D. Halsell gave a talk at California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA). Both men stressed the importance of education and discussed NASA's forthcoming projects. The talk ended with congratulations to CSLA electrical engineering professor Helen Boussalis, who won a $3.8 million grant for her project to design and build a model space segmented telescope. (University Times, Oct 27/94)
New Mexico's senators, Democrat Jeff Bingaman and Republican Pete Domenici, sent a letter urging NASA to keep two data facilities at the White Sands Space Network Complex northeast of Las Cruces. A $5 million building planned for NASA data operations remained empty in Las Cruces because NASA had decided to shift activities to West Virginia, according to NASA officials. However, NASA's inspector general said NASA could save $39 million through fiscal year 2000 and nearly $97 million thereafter if data operations connected with the Earth Observing System remained at White Sands instead of being moved to Fairmont, West Virginia. According to a September 5 syndicated column by Jack Anderson, Senator Robert Byrd engineered the change in location. (Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 9/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 10/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 12/94; Times-West Virginian, Sep 15/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
The $20 million docking ring, known as the Androgynous Peripheral Docking System, which would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995, arrived from Russia after it had been tested in Russia, in California, and in orbit. NASA managers expressed confidence in the ring although they could not read the Russian plaque on it. (O Sen Star, Dec 7/94; Fla Today, Dec 7/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named Jay F. Honeycutt as Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center upon the departure of Robert L. Crippen on January 21, 1995. (NASA Release 94-214; AP, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 16/94; O Sen Star, Dec 16/94; H Chron, Dec 16/94; H Post, Dec 16/94; AP, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Brigadier General Elmer T. Brooks, USAF (Retired), as Deputy Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Communications (OSC) at NASA Headquarters. Charles Force, Associate Administrator for Space Communications, commented on the problems facing NASA's use of telecommunications technologies with reduced funding. OSC was responsible for planning, development, and operation of NASA's worldwide communications, telemetry, and data acquisition activities. (NASA Release 94-9)
In a telephone interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, who was formerly general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group in Redondo Beach, California, answered questions about NASA and his efforts to revive the agency. Among other topics, he discussed the International Space Station, the difficulties of working in space, and the problems of budget cuts that NASA faced. (Orange County Register, Apr 8/94)
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)
At a conference at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., officials of NASA and of Spacehab Inc., the Arlington, Virginia, company that built and leased the laboratories that fly in the Space Shuttle, described progress made in the more than 80 missions that had included research payloads. Other private and university researchers were encouraged to join in such projects. (UP, Sep 28/94)
Engineers William Weist and Ray McLaughlin, with three other scientists and pilots of AlliedSignal, Inc., have since October 1991 been flying a converted 1952 Convair with powerful, updated turboprops at 300 feet in Florida testing a new system to detect low-level wind shear. In summer, bursts of concentrated cold air descend to the ground and violently spread out horizontally in all directions, causing unpredictable changes in wind direction at low altitude. Identified only two decades ago, wind shear has since 1964 caused at least 26 aircraft accidents in the U.S., killing more than 500 people. Although airports are installing radar, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that air-traffic controllers might need two minutes to warn pilots, who might have only ten seconds to react. In contrast, this system can warn in 50 seconds, despite analyzing four million pieces of information per second and filtering out ground clutter such as traffic. (WSJ, Jan 13/94)
Spence Armstrong, NASA Associate Administrator for Human Resources, stated that in order to cut more than 1,000 jobs as Congress ordered, NASA needed to offer buyouts to staff. To restructure the Space Station Freedom project, NASA had to cut 1,300 positions, but employees were not leaving in normal attrition numbers--an attrition of only 600 to 700 persons was predicted for fiscal 1994, without buyouts. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said further cuts would endanger NASA's entire mission. The vice president's "reinventing government" group said NASA needed to accelerate its job cuts but stick with attrition and buyouts rather than reductions in force. The group offered no specifics as to positions NASA should cut. (Federal Times, Feb 24/94)
Mars Pathfinder, the first of NASA's Discovery missions, was beginning construction in preparation for launch in two years' time. Anthony J. Spear, project manager for the Mars Pathfinder project at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said fabrication of the cruise portion's structure had begun; final assembly of the spacecraft was to begin in June 1995. Testing of various kinds would follow with the spacecraft being shipped to Cape Canaveral for launch by early September 1996. The primary goal was an engineering demonstration of a low-cost Martian landing system. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
As part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program, NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC) was using its National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex to study and curb the noise from the takeoff exhaust or "plume" of turbulent air in the wake of future supersonic jetliners without affecting takeoff performance. Project Manager Paul Soderman, an aeronautical and acoustical engineer, said that such future aircraft would have to comply with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. An exhaust nozzle of an "ejector suppressor" type was being studied by laser and infrared video. (NASA Release, Jan 31/94)
Officials at NASA, Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said mission designers were being discouraged from including Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) in future satellites. RTGs were plutonium-powered and were used most frequently on spacecraft traveling beyond Earth's orbit because solar panels became increasingly less efficient the farther they were from the sun. Scientists and engineers planning NASA's proposed Pluto Fast Flyby mission wanted to use an RTG, but thus far approval had been refused. The scientists were concerned that NASA was becoming anti-nuclear, but NASA officials and the White House denied there was a policy decision to end the use of RTGs. In late June, a Technology Challenge team headed by Dwight Duston, director of science and technology for the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, "unanimously recommended the use of an RTG without reservation" for the Pluto Fast Flyby. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94)
NASA announced that aerospace industry engineers were finding NASA's Remote Access Wind Tunnel (RAWT) at the Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, was saving them time and money in testing a model of a next-generation supersonic transport. The RAWT was equipped with a computer and video camera that allowed them to send real-time test data to engineers at aerospace companies nationwide. (NASA Release 94-186)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was the scheduled keynote speaker for an October 27-28 conference at Auburn University on the past, present, and future of the U.S. space program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 17/94)
Although the November 8 elections gave control of Congress to the Republicans, major changes in funding for the space program were not expected. This was the case despite the fact that Newt Gingrich, Republican from Georgia, who was expected to be the next Speaker of the House of Representatives, was an outspoken space advocate as was Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania and ranking Republican on the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee. NASA was already making plans to sell the Space Station program to the 11 freshman Senators and approximately 85 new House members who were to take office in January. (SP News, Nov 14-20/94)
In a wide-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin reviewed his tenure to date and focused on prospects for civil space flight. Goldin proposed that while private industry would use the low orbiting costs offered by a new single-stage-to-orbit vehicle to profit from commercial space applications, governments would cooperate on building a space infrastructure to support robotic and human exploration. He believed that countries could cooperate in space infrastructure while maintaining competition in space ventures such as the development of a launch vehicle. (AvWk, Sep 5/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House of Representatives Science Committee, told the seven-member Space Shuttle crew that repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in September 1973, that their successful mission would help restore support for the space program. (Reuters, Mar 8/94; B Sun, Mar 9/94)
The deed to NASA's Computer Complex in Slidell, Louisiana was transferred to the city of Slidell at a ceremony attended by NASA Acting Deputy Administrator General John R. Dafley among others. For more than 30 years, the Slidell complex had provided support for the Space Shuttle external tank program as well as other Office of Space Flight administrative and program activities. However, these functions recently were moved to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Various plans were underway for ways in which the Slidell facilities could be used. (Sentry News, Dec 15/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number of management appointments and organization structural changes at NASA Headquarters and various field centers. The changes will affect NASA science, technology, research facilities and major programs, as well as the agency's Advisory Committee structure.
Jean-Marc Artaud, program director for the Ariane-5 rocket for the French National Space Agency (CNES) in Guiana, discussed the launch that took place of a solid propellant booster that was part of the new generation rocket. The rocket was launched from a European Space Agency (ESA) center in the jungle of French Guiana on the northeast coast of South America in a test aimed at keeping the ESA in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the next century. (Reuters, Sep 30/94)
On the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the first moonlanding mission, the Italian newspaper La Repubblica published an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. In it he complimented Italy for its good space knowhow, saying Italians were magicians in the area of space communication. He also mentioned ways in which Italy was cooperating with NASA such as the Italian astronaut who was to help complete the testing of the tethered satellite system and the Italian Space Agency's work with NASA on the Cassini Space Mission. He pointed out that above all NASA counted on Italy for the construction of logistic pressurization modules and that this construction would give Italian firms a technological capacity that would have an impact on all Italian industries. (La Repubblica, Oct 11/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the National Space Society's conference and challenged the space community to define the U.S. role in space. He expressed frustration at repeated congressional efforts to kill the planned International Space Station. (Fla Today, Mar 11/94)
After a closed door session of the House Space Committee, Chairman George Brown, Democrat from California, said he would support the Space Station. The growing support for the Space Station also was reflected in public opinion polls. However, James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican from Wisconsin and senior Republican on the Committee, was angry at the response to his concern about Russian participation in the space program from White House science adviser John H. Gibbons. (H Chron, Jun 16/94; H Post, Jun 16/94; Fla Today, Jun 16/94; H Chron, Jun 17/94)
In a speech to the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the Marshall Space Flight Center's top priority was safe Space Shuttle propulsion. The second priority was the Center's share in the Space Station program and the third priority was the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, and X-ray telescope scheduled to be launched in the late 1990s. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
NASA in a cooperative agreement notice called on third parties to develop public-use applications of its remote sensing databases in order to make use of the reams of Earth and space science data collected to date. Paul Hunter, Program Manager for NASA's Information Infrastructure Technology Applications program, said NASA planned to grant about eight to 10 large awards of $500,000 to $1.5 million per year, and eight to 20 smaller awards of about $100,000 to $300,000. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 11/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Appropriations Subcommittee meeting to consider NASA's budget, that NASA needed $2.1 billion for the International Space Station and could not build the station for less. (AP, May 17/94)
Free-lance journalist Alcestis Oberg maintained that following the November elections NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin planned to cut jobs at Johnson Space Center drastically. According to the article, Goldin hoped to reduce the Space Shuttle operations work force by 50 percent in five years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of 30 percent in 1995. (H Post, Oct 20/94)
Former CBS news anchor Walter Cronkite was quoted as saying that in view of the lack of a guarantee that money saved from the space program would be used for urgent needs such as health, housing, education, and crime, the United States could not afford not to continue going into outer space. (LA Times, Jun 21/94)
Carl Pilchner, who works on advanced planning issues in NASA's Office of Space Science, told the agency's Space Science Advisory Committee that top NASA managers were drafting a 12-20 page strategic plan giving highest budget priority to the Mission to Planet Earth (MTPE). The MTPE was due to the insistence of Vice President Gore, reflecting messages NASA Administrator Goldin was receiving from the White House in response to his submitted proposals. (Def Daily, Jan 21/94)
The Mars Observer spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. NASA officials reported the probable cause of communication loss as a rupture in the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine--MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have put the craft in a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. Goldin asked Dr. Wes Huntress, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Science, to conduct a thorough review of the findings and recommendations and to report back in the near future on corrective actions to be taken by NASA. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
At a press briefing at the Kennedy Space Center, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Jeremiah Pearson said NASA was currently undertaking a review to gauge the Shuttle program's health after budget cutbacks and to identify possible additional savings. The review was scheduled to be completed in early January. Bryan O'Connor, Shuttle program director at NASA Headquarters, said 13 teams at NASA field centers across the country were examining jobs, procedures, and requirements to improve efficiency. However, he indicated that much of 1994's $141 million cut in the Shuttle program's operating budget could be made up with expected reimbursements and reassignment of funds. For example, Congress had suggested that the program use a $22 million reimbursement from Japan for Shuttle flights to that end. (Fla Today, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94; AvWk, Oct 17/94; AP, Oct 24/94)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
The 25th anniversary of the first moonwalk was the occasion of several articles looking back at the excitement of that event and developments since as well as an assessment of the current status of the space program. Noting that one-third of the U.S. population was not alive in 1969, the articles especially remarked upon lack of enthusiasm about space, together with expressing concern about earthly matters. Neil Armstrong's role in the moon landing and the fact that he never became a public hero also was touched upon. (W Post, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; WSJ, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; H Post, Jul 22/94; P Inq, Jul 22/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave the commencement address at Tullahoma to 22 University of Tennessee Space Institute graduates. He said Congress had been supportive but the nation needed to decide where it was going. America used to have a vision and be willing to take risks, but it had lost confidence in itself and was willing to settle for mediocrity. He pointed out that the cost of the entire space program "was only a quarter of a percent of the gross national product" so canceling one program would not solve the nation's problems. (Htsvl Tms, May 13/94; Independent, May 14/94)
A 20-month long Justice Department sting operation centered on NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston resulted in criminal fraud and bribery charges against nine men and one contractor. Two other contractors, General Electric Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, which had employed two of those charged, agreed to pay the government $1 million to cover cost of the undercover operation, code named Operation Lightning Strike. The two firms cooperated with the probe and might continue to do business with the government. Among the charged were Astro International Corporation of League City, Texas, and two NASA employees. The sting, conducted by the FBI, NASA's Office of Inspector General, and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, particularly targeted NASA's Space and Life Sciences Division in Houston. In October 1993 NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin told Congress that NASA had some 400 criminal fraud investigations underway. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; W Post, Feb 23/94; W Times, Feb 23/94; USA Today, Feb 23/94; NY Times, Feb 23/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94; WSJ, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 23/94; C Trib, Feb 23/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced receipt of a report investigating the loss of the Mars Observer mission.
In a written statement, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said the Department of Energy had told his office that NASA was "involved in the sponsorship or co-sponsorship of some human experiments to determine the effects of radiation" during the 1960s and 1970s. Goldin did not say what experiments had taken place. He promised a full public accounting. "There is no place in this agency for human medical experimentation conducted in secrecy or without full respect for human dignity of each and every participant," the statement said.
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) was making components and expected to integrate the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) by early June 1995. NEAR was the second mission approved in NASA's Discovery program but would be the first to be launched. To make a scheduled January 1999 encounter with 433 Eros--a silicate rock asteroid--NEAR would need to be launched within a two-week period beginning February 17, 1996. It would be launched on a Delta 2 and would swing by Earth in 1998 so that its plane could be changed to match that of Eros. The spacecraft would carry four instruments: a visible imager, an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a near infrared spectrograph, and a magnetometer. In entrusting to APL its first planetary science mission to be developed outside the agency, NASA turned to a laboratory experienced in rapid, inexpensive space programs. APL was responsible for three other proposals that NASA was considering under the Discovery program. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
A study by Loren Thompson, Deputy Director of Georgetown University's National Security Studies Program, was one of several major sources examining the U.S. space industry's growing challenge from competition and domination by foreign governments' expanding space programs and their successes with smaller but cheaper launch vehicles.
NASA announced the appointment of Earle K. Huckins III as Cassini Program Director in the Office of Space Science. An international program, Cassini was designed to explore the planet Saturn, its rings and moons, and the surrounding environment. Scheduled for launch on a Titan IV Centaur in October 1997, the Cassini spacecraft was to swing by Venus, the Earth, and Jupiter before being inserted into orbit around Saturn in June 2004. Cassini was projected to orbit Saturn for four years. (NASA Media Advisory Aug 11/94)
William Baragar, Boeing Company's corporate director of congressional affairs, said that Boeing planned to help NASA develop a High Speed Arm Transport (HSAT) that could cut flying time from Los Angeles to Tokyo from 12 hours to four. Baragar said NASA had asked Congress for $220 million for research on the plane, which could fly at about 2.4 times the speed of sound or slightly faster than the Concorde and carry about 300 people. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also discussed the project with a British newspaper. (Antelope Valley Press, May 17/94; Financial Times of London, May 30/94; LA Times, Jun 1/94)
NASA was pressuring the European Space Agency (ESA) to allow U.S. personnel greater access to European industry, laboratories, and reviews in order to provide additional assurance that the U.S./European Cassini mission to Saturn would succeed. The mission was of great importance to NASA and it felt that ESA's contribution to Cassini was not being coordinated fully with NASA. The pressure was creating sharp controversy among Europeans who did not want such extensive U.S. access although NASA proposals included greater European access to U.S. facilities. NASA managers raised the issue with their European counterparts behind the scenes at the International Astronautical Federation conference taking place in Jerusalem. NASA pressure resulted from NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's instruction to NASA Cassini managers that they must assume responsibility for quality control not just for the orbiter but the whole mission, including the Martin Marietta Titan-4 booster and the ESA probe. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
Flight tests of new terminal automation software confirmed that airline traffic could be routed to arrive at a gate within 20 seconds or less of a scheduled time, while enabling fuel-efficient descents initiated at pilots' discretion. According to NASA researchers, when deployed at hub airports, the complete Center-Tracon Automation System (CTAS) would optimize the flow of aircraft and improve air traffic control productivity significantly. Recent evaluations dealt with the Descent Advisor portion of CTAS but other parts of CTAS provided air traffic controllers with the data they needed to ensure efficient and safe operations. The recent flight tests were performed under a joint research and development effort involving the Federal Aviation Administration, NASA's Ames and Langley Research Centers, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, several contractors, and United Airlines. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin released a statement in response to the markup of NASA's budget by the House Appropriations Subcomittee on VA-HUD-Independent Agencies. He said that "Given the enormous challenge that Chairman Stokes and the members of his committee had in adequately addressing the many needs of the agencies covered in this budget, NASA is pleased with today's markup." He added that NASA was pleased to comply with the further challenge Stokes presented in the markup. (NASA Release, Jun 9/94; AP, Jun 9/94; W Times, Jun 10/94; O Sen Star, Jun 10/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 10/94; H Post, Jun 10/94; Fla Today, Jun 10/94; AP, Jun 10/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for September 1994, would include two firsts: atmospheric research using a laser, the Lidar In-Space Technology Experiment (LITE), and robotic processing of semiconductor materials. The mission would also feature the deployment and retrieval of a free-flying astronomical observer and the first untethered spacewalk by astronauts in more than 10 years. On August 31, NASA officials indicated there might be a delay in the contemplated September 9 launch because of problems with the craft's propulsion system. (NASA Release 94-135; AP, Aug 31/94; Reuters, Aug 31/94)
The publication of former astronaut Jim Lovell's new book, Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13, led to an article recounting the Apollo 13 flight 24 years previously. He stated his belief that NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin should do more to use NASA's past successes to show how NASA had progressed since. (W Times, Oct 21/94)
Groups of citizen lobbyists, particularly from Florida, Texas, and Ohio, came to Washington to lobby Congress on the importance of the Space Station to the continuation of a manned space program. (Fla Today, Jun 15/94; O Sen Star, Jun 15/94)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced their joint sponsorship of a general aviation design competition for students at U.S. aeronautical and engineering universities. Teams of graduate and undergraduate students, working with faculty advisers, were to develop a multidisciplinary design for a general aviation aircraft. (NASA Release 94-102)
In a speech to the American Geophysical Union, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin challenged scientists to establish an ambitious new goal for space science that would unite competing research disciplines and resurrect public excitement. As a possible goal, Goldin suggested that NASA commit itself to finding habitable planets outside the solar system. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
The seven astronauts who repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in December 1993 were designated recipients of the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award. In their names $250,000 was to be donated to a scholarship fund for dependents of NASA employees. The award ceremony occurred on March 28. (AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Mar 28/94; UP, Mar 28/94; USA Today, Mar 29/94)
Flight tests of the X-31 at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base were featured. Dryden director Kenneth J. Szalai noted that the X-31 had completed more flights than any other experimental aircraft, demonstrating methods of enhancing fighter maneuverability. Gary Trippensee was NASA project manager and director of the International Test Organization that included the Department of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Navy, Air Force, Rockwell Aerospace, the German government, and Deutsche Aerospace. The program focused on technology transfer--industrial use of data gathered during government research projects. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/94; Bakersfield Californian, Apr 21/94)
NASA was scheduled to open a new facility, the Global Hydrology and Climate Center, in Cummings Research Park West in Huntsville, Alabama, October 27. The focus of the Center's $15 million annual program was to study Earth's water cycle and the ways in which it affected climate. Research would involve collection and analysis of rainfall, lightning, and temperature data on a global scale, according to Center director Ron Greenwood. The Center was to house 42 scientists from Marshall Space Flight Center, 59 from the Universities Space Research Association, and 46 faculty, staff, and students from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was present to open the Center, which was to operate in cooperation with the other institutions mentioned and to concentrate on studying water vapor. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 25/94; Htsvl Tms, Oct 27/94)
NASA announced the creation of the Office of Space Access and Technology at NASA Headquarters in Washington and the selection of John E. Mansfield as the new NASA Associate Administrator for the office. The merger of two previous offices: the Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology and the Office of Space Systems Development gave greater focus to the development of advanced space technologies and future space launch systems. The changes were to take effect September 6. (NASA Release 94-137; Defense Daily, Aug 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin presented Congressman Louis Stokes with the National Association of Small Disadvantaged Businesses Meritorious Award "for his outstanding contributions in the performance of contracts at the NASA Lewis Research Center and turning NASA Lewis Research Center around." (Call and Post, Oct 20/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
NASA announced the creation of an Office of Policy and Plans at NASA headquarters, with Alan Ladwig as Associate Administrator. Previously, Ladwig had been a senior space policy analyst in private industry. (NASA Release 94-181)
A NASA delegation led by Mike O'Brien from NASA's External Affairs Division in Washington was in Moscow to present to Russian officials the draft of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) concerning the International Space Station. The MOU detailed services to be provided by Station partners and the percentage of Station resources--power, water, storage space--each would receive. Bill Shepherd, deputy program manager for NASA's Station program, was optimistic about Russian response to the MOU and also optimistic about NASA's purchase of the 20-ton FGB navigation and propulsion tug (the first Station component to be sent up) from Lockheed-Khrunichev. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 19/94)
NASA announced that in cooperation with the Civil Air Patrol and the Federal Aviation Administration it was hosting a national conference for educators on "Aviation and Space Education: America's Leading Edge" in Norfolk, Virginia, April 6-9. (NASA Release 94-46)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)
Lockheed Corporation in Calabasas, California, and Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park division of Rockwell International, teamed up to compete with other aerospace companies for $167 million in grants from NASA over the next five years to explore the feasibility of a "single-stage-to-orbit" (SSTO) rocket. It was uncertain whether the White House and the Pentagon favored such a plan, which NASA considered a cost-saving alternative to updating current rockets. (LA Times, Apr 12/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a committee to develop a plan to identify and catalogue, to the extent practicable within 10 years, all comets and asteroids that might threaten the Earth. Eugene Shoemaker, an astronomer with the Lowell Observatory, was appointed chairman of the eight-member Near-Earth Object Search Committee. The committee was formed in response to congressional direction to NASA to develop a plan in coordination with the Department of Defense and the space agencies of other countries. Gregory Benford, professor of physics at the University of California, Irvine, commented on the congressional charge by saying that publicizing such tracking would be an opportunity for NASA for "smart public relations and smart science." (NASA Release 94-128; LA Times, Aug 21/94; B Sun, Aug 24/94)
An article discussed finding other planetary systems as an inspiring new challenge for astronomy and pointed out NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's proposal that NASA's core mission might be the search for a habitable planet. Mention was made of Proxima Centauri, the nearest neighbor of a bigger, hotter, brighter star: the sun, which made it an easy star around which to look for planets. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope was used to study Proxima Centauri and recently the Hubble discovered discs in the Orion nebula, which might produce planetary systems. Although the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) was eliminated by Congress, SETI continued with private money and became Project Phoenix, scheduled to be connected with the Parkes radio telescope in Australia in early 1995 and to listen for faint radio signals from hundreds of stars. (Economist, Jul 16/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the University of Arizona's Open Sciences Forum at which professors presented overviews of their space-related work. He assured the faculty and students that NASA would continue to fund University of Arizona research projects such as the $3.6 billion Cassini Saturn probe. He urged scientists to simplify the way in which they discuss their experiments so that lay people would understand them and thus increase scientific awareness. Stressing the concept that "small is better," he mentioned the development of robots that may one day extract fuel from the moon or Mars, thus reducing the amount of propellant that would need to be stored on moon- or Mars-bound spacecraft. (Tucson Citizen, Apr 9/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California, chairman of the House Science Committee, sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin asking that NASA develop cost estimates for upgrading the infrastructure surrounding Russia's Baikonur Cosmodrome. He also requested that NASA explore options for establishing direct relations with Kazakhstan in the areas of science and technology. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
After three years of testing by NASA's Langley, Virginia research center, the airline industry, industry suppliers, and the Federal Aviation Administration, a new device was approved to alert pilots of wind shear danger. Called the Bendix RDR-4B, it was made by Allied Signal Inc. in Morristown, New Jersey and was being installed by various commercial airlines. The device complements ground-based wind-shear detection systems, known as Terminal Doppler Weather Radars, being installed at 47 major U.S. airports. (W Times, Dec 6/94)
Richard DalBello, assistant director for space programs in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that NASA's competion for a reusable rocket to replace the Space Shuttle was on hold while White House budget officials mulled over the technical, financial, and political prospects for the program. The White House Office of Management and Budget must sign off on the NASA plan before NASA officials invited the U.S. aerospace industry to submit competing designs for the rocket. Most U.S. aerospace firms already had competing blueprints for a reusable rocket. (SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave an impassioned defense of NASA to a group of aerospace executives attending an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference in suburban Washington. He described the budget fight as part of Congress's continuing effort to turn the space program into a "debating society" and said it was time for the talk to stop. He deplored the fact that NASA was not given enough money to create a space program that American youth could dream about. Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, who sat next to Goldin, in contrast spoke of "a fatally flawed space station program" on which space dollars should not be risked. (O Sen Star, May 5/94; Space News, May 9/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin paid a 90-minute visit to Rocketdyne's main factory in Canoga Park. He said the company had made some progress in correcting quality control problems that caused two shuttle launches to be aborted seconds before liftoff and two other scheduled flights to be postponed. (LA Times, Apr 1/94)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes in the Office of Space Flight (OSF) at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. These included the appointment of Bryan O'Connor, currently OSF Deputy Associate Administrator, to assume the post of Space Shuttle Program Director. O'Connor's position was to be assumed by Richard Wisniewski, who retired from NASA in 1990 after 35 years of government service. (NASA Release 94-66; WP, May 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Space Subcommittee the Space Station program was proceeding but cost and schedule savings were decreasing. NASA earlier estimated Russian participation would save two years and $2 billion. After the Systems Design Review, it appeared time would be speeded by 15 months and savings probably would be $1.5 billion. Also, Russia now wanted $650 million instead of $400 million for lease of the functional cargo block vehicle. Furthermore, agreement needed to be reached with Russia on the cost of a major component required to provide navigation and reboost capability for the Station. NASA assured the Committee that the agency would never cede control of the Station to Russian ground commanders. Goldin also said it was essential for NASA to have stable funding. (Reuters, Apr 13/94; Defense Daily, Apr 14/94; O Sen Star, Apr 14/94; H Post, Apr 14/94)
A joint statement was issued following a meeting of the heads of space agencies involved in the International Space Station: the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the European Space Agency (ESA), the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), the Russian Space Agency (RSA), and NASA. This was the first group meeting since Russia accepted the collective invitation to join the International Space Station partnership in December 1993. The heads of agencies discussed the outcome of the recently completed Space Station System Design Review. CSA, ESA, and NASDA noted the remarkable progress made to accommodate Russia as a new partner and to satisfy the interests of all the partners in the new program structure, and they commended NASA for its efforts to improve program efficiency and to clarify the potential for additional partner contributions.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced contract awards for two new "Smallsat" satellites to observe the Earth with unprecedented sensor technology. The awards went to two teams led by CTA of Rockville, Maryland, and TRW, Inc., of Redondo Beach, California. The teams were to build, launch, and operate the satellites--each no bigger than a console television set--for less than $60 million each. The satellites were to be developed, launched, and delivered on orbit in 24 months or less on a Pegasus launch vehicle. (NASA Release 94-94; AP, Jun 8/94; Reuters, Jun 8/94; NY Times, Jun 9/94; W Post, Jun 9/94; USA Today, Jun 9/94; WSJ, Jun 9/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; H Post, Jun 9/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94; W Post, Jun 14/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced agency plans to proceed with the use of the nearly completed facilities at Yellow Creek in Iuka, Mississippi, originally designed for use with the proposed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), for use with the manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. NASA and the Thiokol Corporation worked out plan implementation, which was scheduled to take approximately two and a half years. Thiokol plans to move all of its nozzle operations to the Yellow Creek facility. In view of the federal government's investment of taxpayer money in the construction of the Yellow Creek facility, NASA was committed to obtaining maximum return while seeking to mitigate the economic impact on the region resulting from the ASRM termination. (NASA Release 94-68)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
An audit report by NASA's inspector general, which was still in draft, noted that NASA could have saved almost $6 million in business travel costs in 1993 by flying available commercial flights instead of using NASA aircraft. As a result, NASA planned to rewrite rules for the use of its planes, according to Laurie Boeder, associate NASA administrator for public affairs. Jack Anderson's column contained a critical account of NASA travel concentrating on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's use of NASA aircraft in the six-month period from October 1, 1992 through March 31, 1993, which reportedly cost taxpayers $514,000 more than if he had flown a commercial airline. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; W Post, Dec 19/94)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin spoke to workers at Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems in eastern New Orleans, praising the company's new contract with NASA to make lightweight Space Shuttle external fuel tanks, calling the tanks an essential part of the Space Station. (Times-Picayune, Apr 26/94)
The pressure on California's space firms to adapt to a new mission, survival, in view of congressional budgetcutting and constant funding problems was highlighted. The role of commercial firms in the space industry as opposed to NASA was raised as was the fact that the space program no longer revolved around competition with the Soviet Union. (LA Times, Jul 6/94)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) was pushing ahead with certification of predictive wind shear systems. Robert Passman, FAA associate program manager for airborne wind shear research, said he believed airborne predictive systems worked, based on observing one on a NASA aircraft in Orlando, Florida, in 1993. He noted that the alarms from such a system correlated well with ground-based Terminal Doppler Weather Radar detection of microbursts. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
A biography of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin based on an interview with him, said that Goldin put in 15-hour days; originally, he did this seven days a week but now he did it five and a half days a week. In returning to NASA from TRW, he determined to battle the bureaucracy and did so. He expressed concern about America having become a nation of consumption, interested mainly in entertainment and recreation. His major present concern was keeping the Space Station on track. (News Register, Jul 17/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement hailing the vote in the House of Representatives that defeated an amendment to end the Space Station program. In his statement, he expressed appreciation for the leadership of the President, the efforts of the Vice President, and the hard work of Chairman Brown and Representative Walker. He also praised the collaboration of NASA with international partners, which strengthened the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 94-106)
Space News reported on the financial and other difficulties confronting the Russian space program. Few of the staff of the Russian Space Agency (RSA) were receiving pay checks; many space workers were on unpaid leave and other scientists and engineers had left RSA; unlike NASA, RSA had oversight responsibility but did not manage space projects, leading to power struggles with companies engaged in space work and with the military with whom RSA must negotiate such matters as rental fees for using military facilities for launches. (SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, and ranking member of the House Space Subcommittee, wrote NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin requesting information about U.S. dependence on Russia, payments to the Russian government, cost constraints on the Space Station in view of NASA's tight budget, and financial agreements with Station international partners. He expressed reservations over the decision to move the Station to a higher orbital inclination at the Russian request and expressed the fear that the agreement with Russia was negotiated from a position of U.S. vulnerability because of budgetary limits. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
NASA announced that 100 girls, ages nine to 15, were to join the NASA Headquarters workforce on April 28. (NASA Release 94-60; AP, Apr 20/94)
NASA officials said that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) had not been home to any secret radiation tests on humans, and no workers were unknowingly exposed to any harmful materials. "We do not do anything like that here," KSC spokeswoman Lisa Malone said. Life science research underway at the space center mostly involves growing plants and food in an environmentally controlled chamber at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station as well as some muscle fatigue research in long-term bedrest studies to simulate weightlessness. The Johnson Space Center in Houston and the Ames Research Center near San Francisco are the facilities where most medical research on humans is conducted.
NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)
Donna Shirley, director of NASA's newly formed Office of Mars Exploration at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasenda, California, discussed NASA's plans to send up to 28 orbiters, landers, and rovers to Mars within the next decade. Glenn Cunningham, program manager for NASA's Mars Global Surveyer, was quoted in connection with keeping the program within cost limits and the November 1996 scheduled launched of the Mars Global Surveyor aboard a Delta 2 rocket. (Fla Today, Aug 27/94)
Former NASA Space Station Director Richard Kohrs was a member of a team to revamp the Cassini mission for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also contacted him, reportedly asking that he look at the troubled Space Station program. (SP News, Mar 28-Apr 3/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
Preparations for the launch, the launch itself, and experiments conducted aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia received extensive media coverage. Fueling began the morning of March 4 prior to the crew's boarding. The mission commander and the pilot wore newly devised long johns with tubes that plugged into water pumps to keep them cool while awaiting takeoff and during reentry. Most of the major experiments were to be operated from the ground so that the astronauts could concern themselves with medical tests, some mechanical structures, and observation of the 12 rats used in a bone density study. On March 5, one of Columbia's three auxiliary power units registered an unusually high pressure reading, causing concern; the readings returned to normal when the crew switched to other heaters. It developed that the high pressure apparently resulted from an ice buildup in one of the auxiliary power units. Meanwhile, several articles expressed concern that budget cuts endangered the safety of NASA flights, but NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin denied this was true. As the space flight progressed, two crew members at a time took turns in taking four hours off duty in view of the lengthy nature of the mission. (W Post, Mar 4/94; AP, Mar 4/94; UP, Mar 4/94; Reuters, Mar 4/94; W Times, Mar 5/94; NY Times, Mar 5/94; W Post, Mar 5/94; B Sun, Mar 5/94; P Inq, Mar 5/94; W Times, Mar 6/94; W Post, Mar 6/94; P Inq, Mar 6/94; Daily News, Mar 6/94; UP, Mar 6/94; Reuters, Mar 6/94; NY Times, Mar 7/94; AP, Mar 7/94; UP, Mar 7/94; Reuters, Mar 7/94; NY Times, Mar 8/94; CSM, Mar 8/94; W Post, Mar 8/94; C Trib, Mar 8/94; Reuters, Mar 8/94; AP, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94)
A solid-fuel booster for Ariane-5, the new rocket designed to keep Western Europe in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the 21st century, was tested successfully in the jungles of French Guiana, according to Jean-March Artaud, Ariane-5 program director for the CNES French national space agency in Guiana. (Reuters, Dec 16/94)
A biographic account of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stressed his enthusiasm for sending humans into space combined with a tremendous work ethic. As an administrator at aerospace manufacturer TRW, he developed strong ideas about what was wrong with the space program and how to fix it. Space advisers to President George Bush found NASA unresponsive to change and decided to offer the NASA Administrator's job to Goldin. Among his management tools, Goldin said, was the creative use of chaos. (W Post, Jul 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin made a state-of-the-agency address to all staff members in which he stressed that NASA intended to become less costly and quicker during the next four years, ending with as many as 4,000 fewer workers. Kennedy Space Center Deputy Director Gene Thomas, who answered questions after the televised address, said it would be a year of "significant change." (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
NASA announced the selection by the White House of Charles R. Chappell, Associate Director for Science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to serve a one-year assignment as Deputy Director of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. Chappell was to head NASA's participation in the GLOBE program and was to report directly to the NASA Administrator. Chappell was to be assigned to the White House and together with the GLOBE Director, Thomas Pyke Jr., was to work on the design and implementation of the GLOBE program for the Vice President. (NASA Release 94-92)
Gregory Reck, Acting Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT), said that NASA had tasked an industry team with reviewing the direction of its research and development (R&D) efforts in space communications technologies. The group, which was to be composed of satellite manufacturers such as Hughes and Space Systems/Loral, ground station builders like Harris Corporation, and small aerospace firms like Orbital Sciences Corporation, was to identify future space-based systems, both in low-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, and how they might tie into the National Information Infrastructure. NASA's role in the activity was to be directed by Samuel Venneri, head of spacecraft and remote sensing in OACT. The consensus findings of the team were to be used in relation to NASA fiscal year budgets. According to the NASA officials, the key motivation behind the initiative was to minimize inroads by European and Japanese competitors into the 60 percent market share held by U.S. firms in satellite communications. (Defense Daily, Apr 7/94)
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
Jack Anderson's column indicated that the ties of Isadore Hyde, convicted in 1993 of defrauding the federal government, to Senator Trent Lott, Democrat from Mississippi, were investigated by NASA officials among others. Hyde's company received a contract in 1984 to provide security services at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi, and diverted more than $186,000 for personal use. Former Hyde employees alleged that Hyde used NASA resources to do political favors for Lott and put Lott's mother, who was 71 at the time, on the company's payroll. (W Post, Apr 25/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
The condition of the Russian space program was described in view of Russia's new space cooperation with the United States. Russian policy was to activate the control center for Space Station Mir only when the ground was in contact with Mir. Otherwise the center was closed and personnel returned to their primary employment: moonlighting jobs. The primary Russian contractor on the Space Station, NPO Energia, had made progress toward privatization, but upper management remained committed to the traditional Soviet pattern of secrecy and exclusion of outside supervision. (O Sen Star, Jul 3/94)
In September a conference on space debris was scheduled to be held at Kent University's Unit for Space Sciences in Canterbury, England. Experts from space agencies around the world were to attend the three-day conference. Kent University had become a center of expertise in the study of space debris, having mounted experiments on the subject on several spacecraft. (Times of London, Aug 21/94)
NASA announced that two companies had been recognized as minority contractor and subcontractor of the year for their outstanding contributions to the space program. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named ERC, Inc., Tullahoma, Tennessee, as Minority Contractor of the Year and BST Systems, Inc., Plainfield, Connecticut, as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 94-163)
The Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, Inc. held a legislative conference in Washington, D.C., at which NASA had the largest government career recruiting exhibit of any agency. NASA's Associate Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, Yvonne B. Freeman, said that NASA was now aggressively recruiting future black scientists as early as elementary school and paying for their training. Of the $740 million NASA spent on education each year, $70 million now went to historically black colleges and universities, up from $6 million two years previously. Representative Louis Stokes, Democrat from Ohio, who formerly criticized NASA for doing little to hire blacks or enter into contracts with black companies, said NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had really made a difference in NASA's programs. Stokes's appropriations subcommittee was responsible for NASA funding. (Plain Dealer, Sep 16/94)
