Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, less than three days after its liftoff. The mission, planned for 16 days, ended early, and the Shuttle completed the return flight without incident. Columbia weighed more than 236,000 pounds (107,000 kilograms) at landing, the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, because of its load of unused supplies for experiments. Almost immediately after the safe landing, NASA officials began to consider repeating the flight as soon as possible, to allow the Shuttle crew to accomplish its original objectives and to avoid the substantial cost of launching an entirely new mission.(William Harwood, “Columbia Lands After Aborted Mission,” Washington Post, 9 April 1997. 66)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. began talks with officials in Russia, focused primarily on the International Space Station (ISS), economic cooperation, and controlling nuclear proliferation. The talks occurred in the context of a torrent of problems aboard Russia’s Mir space station and in Russia’s failures to meet its commitments to help build the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin traveled with the Vice President to participate in the space-related discussions.(Reuters, “Al Gore in Moscow for Talks on Space, Energy,” 21 September 1997; Associated Press, “Gore Calls for Reforms To Boost Investment in Russia,” 22 September 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Rodney E. Slater, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin joined in leading an aviation safety event at Dulles International Airport in Virginia. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had invited media representatives and interested spectators to the event, to observe demonstrations of the new technologies that the agencies had developed to improve the safety of flying aboard commercial, private, and government aircraft. NASA made available one of its Boeing B-757 research aircraft, providing hands-on demonstrations of the new techniques and technologies produced by NASA’s and the FAA’s Task Force on Aviation Safety.(NASA, “Vice President To Showcase Aviation Safety Technologies Developed by NASA and FAA,” news release N97-47, 14 July 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin addressed the Experimental Aircraft Association fly-in convention, outlining NASA’s vision to “revitalize general aviation.” Goldin boldly predicted that the U.S. aviation industry would be able to deliver 10,000 aircraft annually within 10 years, and 20,000 annually within 20 years. The fly-in convention, featuring flyovers by NASA’s SR- 71, had the theme, “Boomers Turn 50,” celebrating both the 50th anniversary of the U.S. Air Force and that of the first breaking of the sound barrier. The Association announced the winner of the National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), a competition encouraging university engineering students to focus on the aviation industry. The conference also featured the unveiling of the new FAA flight- training curricula, as well as a national aviation safety initiative.(NASA, “NASA To Showcase New Activities at Upcoming Aircraft Fly-In Convention,” news release N97-51, 25 July 1997.)
A group of astronomers announced that they had used NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer to observe a black hole “literally dragging space and time around itself as it rotates.” The discovery confirmed the existence of frame dragging, an extrapolation of Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity. According to the findings, the black hole had such a massive gravitational field that nothing nearby, not even light, could escape its pull. To make the discovery, the team of researchers brought together academic scientists from Italy and the United States, as well as NASA personnel. By studying x-ray emissions, the astronomers were able to find a pattern of forces that clearly revealed the strength of the black hole’s gravitational pull. Alan N. Bunner, Director of the Structure and Evolution of the Universe Program at NASA Headquarters, called the discovery “exciting work,” encouraging scientists to test the findings. Before the discovery, frame dragging persisted as one of the last unverifiable theories of relativity, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to observe. Popular press reports touted the breakthrough as another victory for Einstein.(NASA, “First Observation of Space-Time Distortion by Black Holes,” news release 97-258, 6 November 1997; K.C. Cole, “Finding Backs Einstein’s Theory of Gravity,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Score Another One for Einstein,” Washington Post, 7 November 1997.)
Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger surprised onlookers at KSC when he bounded off Shuttle Atlantis only minutes after its landing. Physicians credited Linenger’s excellent condition after spending more than four months aboard the Mir space station to his regimen of orbital exercise. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was on hand to greet Linenger and the other astronauts returning home on Atlantis. The Shuttle’s safe landing returned Linenger to Earth after 132 days in space⎯the second longest stint by an American.(Los Angeles Times, “Returning Astronaut Surprises Even Himself; Shuttle: Four Months on Mir Sap Less Strength than Traveler Jerry Linenger Expected. He Credits the Exercising He Did in Orbit,” 25 May 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a “once-in-a-career opportunity” for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, “Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94,” news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission,” Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, “Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April,” New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission,” 1 July 1997.)
At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, “We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue.” NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASA’s announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, “I told you so.” Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved “15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers,” keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, “Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module,” New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, “Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day,” 11 April 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Roy D. Bridges Jr., retired U.S. Air Force Major General and Shuttle astronaut, as Director of KSC. Goldin called Bridges “the right person to take KSC into the next century.” As Director of KSC, Bridges assumed responsibility for the only site for launches of the Shuttle. At the time of Bridges’s appointment, about 2,000 employees worked at KSC, along with 14,000 contractors. Bridges’s appointment followed years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Air Force and NASA. Graduating with distinction from the U.S. Air Force Academy, he had served in several leadership positions in the Air Force and had received recognition as a distinguished graduate of the U.S. Air Force Pilot Training and Test Pilot Schools. Among other awards, he had received the Distinguished Service Medal, the Defense Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, the Legion of Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, the Meritorious Service Medal, the U.S. Air Force Commendation Medal, and NASA’s Flight Space Medal.(NASA, “Roy Bridges Selected as KSC’s New Center Director,” news release 97-17, 24 January 1997.)
The White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security, chaired by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., released its recommendations for reforming the United States’ aviation industry. The Commission challenged NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and the U.S. Department of Defense to combine their efforts, with the goal of reducing aircraft accident rates by 80 percent over the next five years. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin voiced immediate support for the challenge, explaining, “We’re looking for solutions that will save lives.” He pledged NASA’s commitment to interagency cooperation and committed US$500 million in NASA funds, to achieve a major reduction in aircraft-related fatalities. Both NASA and the FAA cited previous successful collaboration efforts between their agencies. The Gore Commission’s most controversial recommendation was the use of computerized databases to identify potential terrorists. Critics quickly called the plan an exercise in profiling, which would foster biased treatment, especially toward Arab Americans and passengers with Arab- sounding names. Other safety proposals included requiring children under the age of two to sit in their own seats, rather than on the lap of an adult, as the airlines had long permitted. The Commission further suggested that user fees, rather than ticket taxes, fund air-traffic control; that airports deploy a new satellite-based, air-traffic-control system, as soon as possible; and that airports make all airmail packages weighing more than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) subject to inspection. In total, the Commission recommended 53 changes to the current system.(NASA, “NASA, FAA, and DOD Challenged To Achieve White House Commission Goal To Reduce Aircraft Accidents,” news release 97-26, 12 February 1997; John Mintz, “Gore Panel Proposes Aviation Safety Steps,” Washington Post, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, “FAA Ready To Depart on ‘Clear Path of Action’,” USA Today, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, “53 Air Safety Changes Urged,” USA Today, 13 February 1997.)
Two members of Columbia’s crew, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott and Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, conducted a spacewalk, successfully recapturing the unresponsive Spartan satellite released on 21 November. After the 3,000-pound (1,400-kilogram) satellite had failed to turn toward the Sun, Columbia’s robotic arm had bumped it away from the Shuttle. NASA officials had cancelled the mission’s originally planned spacewalk to rescue the US$10 million spacecraft. Astronauts Scott and Doi later received a telephone call from President William J. Clinton congratulating them on grabbing the satellite.(William Harwood, “Satellite Designed To Study Sun Fails,” Washington Post, 22 November 1997; Associated Press, “Columbia Crew Prepares Plan To Recover Spinning Satellite,” 24 November 1997; William Harwood, “Space Walkers Grab Satellite, Wrestle It Back onto Shuttle,” 25 November 1997; Reuters, “Spacewalking Astronauts Grab Errant Satellite,” 25 November 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Calls Shuttle Crew with Thanks,” 28 November 1997.)
NASA announced the selection of four industry partners to study and develop a new Earth- imaging radar system. The proposed LightSAR system would use advanced technologies to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of radar-based satellites, which gather scientific data and provide commercial remote sensing. Project Manager Steven Bard of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pointed out the unique team approach planned for the project. NASA intended to work with industry partners from the start, to assess the potential commercial market for LightSAR products and services and to share the cost of developing the expensive new technology with private companies. The four primary contractors selected were DBA Systems Inc., Lockheed Martin Astronautics, Research and Development Laboratories, and Vexcel Corporation.(NASA, “Teams Selected for Studies of Potential Partnership with NASA To Develop New Earth Imaging Radar System,” news release 97-35, 6 March 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Columbia, consulting with NASA ground support, decided to cut short their planned 16-day mission because of the potential for an explosion in the Shuttle’s electronic generator. NASA decided to abort the mission after the crew had attempted for two days to fix the balky generator. Despite the fact that the Shuttle’s two other generators could provide enough power for the Shuttle, NASA’s procedure required the Shuttle’s return, to prevent subsequent problems. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway clarified that the astronauts faced no imminent danger and that terminating the mission was a precaution rather than an emergency. “The conservative thing to do is land on Tuesday,” Holloway said at a news conference. Columbia’s early return to Earth in Mission STS-83 was only the third time in the history of the Shuttle program that NASA had ended a mission early. The astronauts had time to complete only a few of the planned 33 experiments on the mission, which cost nearly US$500 million.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Flight Cut Short as Risk Persists,” Washington Post, 7 April 1997; Warren Leary, “Power Problem on Shuttle Forces a Tuesday Landing,” New York Times, 7 April 1997; Associated Press, “Deteriorating Generator Cuts Short Mission,” 6 April 1997.)
NASA announced the retirement of Wilbur C. Trafton, who had guided NASA’s International Space Station (ISS) planning for nearly four years. Trafton resigned from his position as Director of the Space Station Program one week after a contentious hearing, in which NASA officials informed Congress that cost overruns on the ISS had reached nearly US$1 billion. However, at Trafton’s departure, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised him, stating, “Will Trafton has met or exceeded all of the challenges I have placed before him.” During Trafton’s tenure, Russia had officially joined the ISS effort as a full partner, and the ISS had moved from planning stage to construction.(NASA Trafton Announces His Departure from NASA,” news release 97-264, 13 November 1997; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “NASA’s Space Station Chief Resigns,” Washington Post, 14 November 1997.)
Cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov and Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski made a 5-hour spacewalk outside Mir to test jetpack systems and to retrieve experiments for return to Earth. The two men, who left Atlantis while the Shuttle remained docked with Mir, became the first Russian-American team ever to conduct a spacewalk from a NASA Shuttle. The joint spacewalk was also the first in which Mir crew members used NASA spacesuits rather than those provided by the Russian Space Agency. On this busy day of operations, two of the Russian crew also successfully installed a new guidance computer, which Atlantis had transported to the station.(Robyn Suriano, “Spacewalk,” USA Today, 1 October 1997; Mark Carreau, “Atlantis, Mir Crews Prepare for Spacewalk, Computer Task,” Houston Chronicle, 1 October 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, “we don’t need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. It’s called the International Space Station.” GAO’s report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen” (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, “Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, “Space Station,” 11 June 1997.)
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
The U.S. Capitol’s Statuary Hall installed a bronze statue of Apollo 13 astronaut John L. Swigert Jr., a native of Denver, to represent the state of Colorado. Each state chooses two statues for the hall to honor its most prominent citizens. Swigert was, perhaps, most famous for uttering the words, “Houston, we’ve had a problem.” Colorado had elected Swigert to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982, but he had died of cancer before his swearing-in. Swigert’s statue took its place alongside that of fellow Coloradoan Florence Rena Sabin, who led the crusade for women’s admission to medical schools. Astronaut Thomas Kenneth Mattingly II, whom Swigert replaced only three days before the Apollo 13 launch, attended the statue dedication, along with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and other dignitaries.(Paul Leavitt, “New Statue,” USA Today, 23 May 1997; Associated Press, “Newest Congressional Statue: Apollo 13 Astronaut John Swigert,” 22 May 1997.)
After altering the spacecraft’s path to move it farther away from Mars’s violent winds, NASA launched Mars Global Surveyor from its safe elliptical orbit of the Red Planet, sending the spacecraft into the planet’s harsh atmosphere. NASA officials indicated that, because of the change in flight plans, Mars Global Surveyor would begin its mapping mission of Mars in 1999, one year later than originally planned. The change of plan highlighted both the difficulty of exploring Mars and NASA’s ability to adapt to difficult conditions. When Mars’s atmosphere had proven more hostile than previously anticipated, mission controllers had proven able to readjust Surveyor’s orbit. In effect, the move had placed Surveyor in a holding pattern, keeping it from harm. Once conditions had improved, however, NASA would not be able simply to proceed as planned. Because Surveyor ran on solar power, the mission planners must wait for Mars and the Sun to realign, to provide energy for the craft. However, although NASA would have to postpone the mission for one year, the delay would provide an added benefit, allowing NASA’s researchers to set Surveyor on a circular orbit that would actually bring Surveyor closer to the planet than originally projected.(John Noble Wilford, “Mars Map Will Come a Year Late,” New York Times, 11 November 1997; Mark Carreau, “Mars Map Still on Tap,” Houston Chronicle, 11 November 1997; A. J. Hostetler, “Surveyor Has New Course,” Times-Dispatch (Richmond, VA), 13 November 1997.)
NASA Administer Daniel S. Goldin praised the Clinton administration’s budget proposal for 1998 as a sign that NASA’s deep budget cuts were leveling off. NASA had braced itself for a budget as low as US$13.1 billion, and, therefore, found President William J. Clinton’s US$13.5 billion proposal a pleasant surprise. The request still entailed a US$200 million budget cut, and Congress might reduce the budget further. Nevertheless, Goldin responded to the proposed budget exuberantly, exclaiming, “Holy mackerel⎯this is a great program,” and remarking that for the first time during his five-year tenure, NASA could hope for budgetary stability. The proposal also projected that NASA’s budget in 2000 would be approximately US$13.2 billion, rather than the US$11.6 billion forecast in previous Clinton administration proposals. NASA planned to absorb the small reduction in funding by increasing efficiency, especially in the Shuttle program, having recently transferred management of the program to the privately held United Space Alliance. NASA officials believed that NASA could continue sending up seven or eight Shuttle missions annually, if budget trends continued to stabilize. On the day of the budget announcement, however, a NASA advisory panel warned once again that a drastic decrease in the Shuttle’s funding would compromise its safety. Nevertheless, Goldin maintained that the proposal would allow NASA to continue fostering “faster, better, cheaper” science.(Anne Eisele, “Budget Plan Brings Stability by 2000,” Space News, 10−16 February 1997; Larry Wheeler, “NASA Makes Do on Slimmer Budget, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1997; Sean Holton, “NASA Cheers Budget that Cuts Agency Only a Bit,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1997.)
The Russian Soyuz spacecraft lifted off from Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov on a mission to repair the disabled Mir space station. Russian space officials tasked the two men with restoring power to Mir after the 25 June collision with a cargo craft cut by half the orbiting research center’s energy. Regarding the importance of the mission, some observers of Russian space activity went so far as to say that the country’s piloted space program depended on Solovyev and Vinogradov’s success.(Associated Press, “2 Russians Blast Off on Mir Repair Mission,” 6 August 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his “cardiovascular system.” The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt “irregularities” while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyev’s test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyev’s place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mir’s exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mir’s challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, “Latest Mir Trouble: Commander’s Heart,” USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task,” New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, “Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities,” 14 July 1997; Reuters, “Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem,” 14 July 1997; Associated Press, “Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut,” 15 July 1997; Reuters, “NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale,” 17 July 1997; New York Times, “A Rescue Assignment for NASA,” editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs,” 19 July 1997.)
Jurgen H. Rahe, NASA’s Science Program Director for Exploration of the Solar System, died when a tree collapsed on the car he was driving during a severe storm in Maryland. Rahe, 57 years old, had enjoyed a distinguished career in the field of astronomy and at NASA. At the time of his death, he was responsible for overseeing visionary NASA programs, such as the Galileo Mission to Jupiter and the much-anticipated July 1997 landing of Mars Pathfinder. Rahe had guided NASA’s efforts to make more frequent and cost-effective exploratory missions of the solar system. According to one colleague, Rahe had presided over the planetary exploration program’s “unparalleled period of major discoveries.” Before his tenure at NASA, Rahe held tenured positions at California Institute of Technology and Germany’s University of Erlangen- Nuremberg.(Associated Press, “Obituary: Jurgen Rahe, 57, NASA Official,” 20 June 1997; NASA, “NASA Mourns Dr. Jurgen H. Rahe, Solar System Exploration Science Program Director,” news release 97-137, 19 June 1997.)
NASA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and the Federal Aviation Administration signed a joint memorandum of agreement providing guidelines for commercial spaceports. The agreement was the culmination of a long debate over how the federal government could encourage private companies and state governments to use available federal launch sites. The White House Office of Science and Technology initiative had proposed the agreement, which sought to limit the regulatory steps a private company would have to take to become a launch-site operator. The measure continued the federal government’s trend of encouraging private industry to explore space.(NASA, “NASA, DOD, and FAA Sign Joint Agreement on Spaceports Launch Guidance,” news release 97-194, 11 September 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
After a four-month mission, NASA officials announced that Mission Control had halted communications with Mars Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner. Sojourner’s batteries were nearly drained, and many of the rover’s instruments had frozen in Mars’s harsh climate. Mission controllers expected the rover simply to come to a halt on Mars’s vast plains, ceasing signal transmissions altogether. Nevertheless, NASA considered the US$266 million mission largely successful. The mission had lasted much longer than planned, transmitting, from the surface of the Red Planet to Earth, nearly 10,000 pictures of the Martian landscape, including images showing evidence of erosion, as well as more than 1.2 billion bits of data. Sojourner’s remarkable service, even in the midst of harsh dust storms and temperatures reaching
U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN) sent a harshly worded letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, decrying NASA’s chronic cost overruns and promising investigative hearings before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Although McCain and Frist both expressed support for NASA, and for space exploration in general, they wrote that “continual, unabated overruns undermine the public faith” in the space program.(Sean Holton, “Senators Blast NASA for Program Overruns,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1997.)
NASA announced that it would join an international consortium of space agencies to support the launch of a Japanese satellite designed to create the largest astronomical instrument ever. The launch of the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) Space Observatory would create a radio telescope more than twice the diameter of the Earth, giving astronomers their sharpest view yet of the universe. Astronomers praised the Japanese-led launch as a significant advance for space research. VLBI satellites would allow radio astronomers to link together widely separated radio telescopes, so that they would function as a single instrument with extraordinarily sharp resolving power. The farther apart the telescopes, the greater would be the image’s resolution. NASA equated the power of the new tool with the ability to see a grain of rice in Tokyo from Los Angeles. Scientists hoped that the new tool would allow for further exploration of active galaxies with massive black holes. Researchers also hoped that the instrument would foster understanding of the mysterious quasars, which pour out tremendous amounts of energy and host or create black holes. Creating the enormous VLBI network involved 40 radio telescopes from 15 nations. Japan’s Institute of Space and Astronautical Science led the international consortium of science agencies, including NASA’s JPL, the U.S. National Science Foundation’s National Radio Astronomy Observatory, the Canadian Space Agency, the Australia Telescope National Facility, the European VLBI Network, and Europe’s Joint Institute for VLBI.(NASA, “Launch Will Create a Radio Telescope Larger than Earth,” news release 97-24, 7 February 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 25.)
During the terminal countdown of a demonstration test of the Titan IV-B rocket designed for the Cassini mission to Saturn, engineers noticed liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen leaking from the Centaur stage of the rocket. NASA had scheduled Cassini’s launch for early October 1997. NASA officials delayed the launch until they could complete further tests, offering no immediate estimate of how long that might take. Interested scientists and engineers, however, predicted that the problem could postpone the mission by months or even years. Under the mission’s original timetable, NASA had expected Cassini to launch in October 1997, reaching Saturn in July 2004. Because of the length of the journey from Earth to Saturn, the scientific community expected that NASA would find it difficult to reschedule the flight. Moreover, experts warned that the alignment of planets providing an ideal launch date, such as that in October 1997, would not occur again for 12 to 14 years. At US$3.2 billion, Cassini was one of the last of NASA’s high- stake, multibillion-dollar missions, drawing considerable attention during the climate of steady cost reductions that characterized the 1990s.(NASA, “Countdown Test Reveals Fuel Leaks on Cassini Mission Centaur Upper Stage,” 7 August 1997; Associated Press, “Rocket Leak Could Postpone Landing on Saturn by Years,” 8 August 1997.)
