The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
At the 13th annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented five aerospace companies with the 1998 George M. Low Award, NASA’s highest “quality and excellence” award for contractors and subcontractors. The companies, representing both large and small businesses, were ILC Dover Inc. of Frederica, Delaware; Allied Signal Technical Services Corporation of Lanham, Maryland; DynCorp, Johnson Support Division of Houston, Texas; BST Systems Inc. of Plainfield, Connecticut; and Advanced Technology Company of Pasadena, California. Administrator Goldin said, “these companies exemplify excellence and outstanding achievements that prove beneficial to NASA and the [n]ation’s industry.” Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory added, “each of these companies has definitely made a positive impact on NASA’s performance goals.”(NASA, “NASA Awards Five Firms the George M. Low Award,” news release 98-74, 1 May 1998.)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASA’s new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to “recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency,” and part to the fact that NASA’s primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, “only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.”
Kenneth J. Szalai ended his 34-year NASA career to join IBP Aerospace Group Inc. as the company’s president and chief operating officer. In his last position at NASA, Szalai was Director of Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Szalai had directed DFRC since December 1990. Before becoming the Center’s director, Szalai had been head of the research engineering division at DFRC for eight years. NASA had awarded Szalai, an internationally recognized expert on flight control and flight systems, the Exceptional Service Medal in recognition of his work on the first Digital Fly-by-Wire aircraft. He had also received NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal during his NASA tenure. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Kevin L. Petersen Acting Director of DFRC, effective 1 August.(Jim Skeen, “Dryden Director To Leave NASA for Private Sector,” Los Angeles Daily News, 11 July 1998.)
On NASA’s 40th anniversary, President of the Space Frontier Foundation Richard N. Tumlinson and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about space exploration and the possibility of privatizing space ventures. Tumlinson’s organization advocated limiting NASA’s role to supporting technology and research programs. He proposed commercializing the Shuttle fleet and privatizing NASA field centers, to reduce the costs of space exploration and eventual colonization. Goldin advocated reducing costs as well, but did not respond to Tumlinson’s proposals. He also outlined new technologies that NASA was developing, to cut the cost of rockets and satellites. Goldin remarked that NASA “would form partnerships with industry for ‘cutting-edge research development’,” also emphasizing NASA’s support of government loans to fuel the growth of the space industry in the United States.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 2 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “NASA Urged To Sell Shuttles,” 1 October 1998.)
At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASA’s purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russia’s failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASA’s proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “NASA Defends Space Station Plans,” 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, “NASA Chief Concedes Space Station Delays—Has Contingency Plans If Russia Can’t Do Its Part,” San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
Michael I. Mott, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Technical), one of NASA’s top three managers, announced his decision to leave NASA to join Boeing Space Transportation in Seal Beach, California, as Vice President of Business Development. Mott had served as NASA Associate Deputy Administrator since January 1994.(NASA, “Michael I. Mott To Leave NASA,” news release 98-99, 8 June 1998.)
Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planet’s polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyor’s data; the Arizona researchers believed that a “concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes.” The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water “was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.”(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, “Mars Discovery,” 28 May 1998; Washington Times, “Minerals Suggest Life in Mars’ Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers,” 28 May 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown “his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer.” As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program,” 26 March 1998.)
The U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee responsible for allocating funding for the space program voted on a US$13.3 billion budget for NASA, US$138 million less than President William J. Clinton had requested and US$300 million less than the U.S. Senate subcommittee had approved. Subcommittee Chairperson Jerry Lewis (R-CA) stated that the House had reduced the budget allocation because NASA planned to fly fewer Shuttle missions in the next fiscal years and because of the delays in assembling the ISS. Unlike the Senate, the House did not vote to monitor the budget of the program by creating a separate account for space station funding.(Brett Davis, “House Panel Approves $300 Million Less for NASA Budget than Senate Panel,” Huntsville Times (AL), 19 June 1998.)
NASA announced it had renamed the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility the Chandra X-ray Observatory, in honor of the late Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. NASA chose the name Chandra because it was the late scientist’s preferred name among friends and colleagues, and because it means moon or luminous in Sanskrit. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented that Chandrasekhar had made “fundamental contributions to the theory of black holes and other phenomena,” which the Chandra X-ray Observatory would study. NASA also announced that it had set a new launch date for the observatory⎯no earlier than 8 April 1999.(NASA, “NASA Renames Telescope and Sets New Launch Date,” news release 98-225, 21 December 1998. 644 Bill Scanlon, “CSU Will Lead NASA Cloud Study $145 Million Project Is Designed To Improve Weather Forecasts, Study Global Warming,” Rocky Mountain News (Denver), 30 December 1998.)
Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being “one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon.” A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepard’s spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, “Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard,” news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, “Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74,” news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard,” government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shepard’s Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age,” USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, “Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: ‘Pioneer’s Pioneer’ also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon,” Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Arthur G. Stephenson, President of Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, as the new Director of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. MSFC’s previous director had retired in January, and at that time, NASA had appointed MSFC’s Deputy Director Carolyn S. Griner as Acting Director of the Center. Before his tenure at Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, Stephenson had worked 28 years for TRW Inc. of California. His last position was as Director of TRW Inc.’s Space Transportation and Servicing Advanced Programs. During his 34-year career, Stephenson had worked on various projects related to MSFC, including the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, during the 1970s and 1980s; the Gamma Ray Observatory; automated rendezvous and docking; and the space-welding inspection, extravehicular-activity tool. He had also directed the International Space Station (ISS) robotic-system engineering support to the Boeing Company.(NASA, “Arthur Stephenson Named To Head Marshall Space Flight Center,” revised news release 98-163a, 11 September 1998; Space News, “Marshall Gets Director After Eight-Month Wait,” 14–20 September 1998.)
During a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin directed MSFC officials to draw up a new plan for meeting the goals of the Bantam Program. The program’s original goal had been to develop, by 2001, a rocket capable of launching 150-kilogram or 0.15-tonne (331-pound or 0.2-ton) payloads, at a cost of no more than US$1.5 million. None of the rockets developed with NASA funding would have met that cost target. Bantam Program Manager Sherry Buschmann reiterated NASA’s commitment to “achieving a capability to launch small payloads frequently at an affordable cost,” saying that the plan would meet a “legitimate need within the science community.”(Warren Ferster, “NASA Shifts Gears on Low-Cost Launcher: Goldin Renews Commitment to Bantam Goals,” Space News, 8–14 June 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
Wesley T. Huntress Jr. announced that he would resign from NASA in the near future. As NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, Huntress had been responsible for programs in astrophysics, planetary exploration, and space physics. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin credited him with the revitalization of NASA’s Space Science Enterprise, in particular, with overseeing critical components of the program such as the HST and Mars Pathfinder. Huntress had joined NASA’s JPL in the 1960s, a research scientist specializing in ion chemistry and planetary atmospheres, and NASA had appointed Huntress to head the Office of Space Science in March 1993. In his retirement announcement, Huntress stated, “I have served in this position for more than five years now and it is simply time to move on.”(NASA, “Huntress Announces His Departure from NASA,” news release 98-31, 18 February 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
NASA officials at Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, announced the new five- year collaborative program of LERC and Case Western Reserve University. The program’s name, the Glennan Microsystems Initiative, honored the late T. Keith Glennan, the first NASA Administrator, who had served from 1958 to 1961. Glennan was also President Emeritus of Case Institute of Technology, forerunner of Case Western Reserve University. Backed with US$16 million in federal funds and US$4.5 million in state funds, the initiative planned to “develop and apply the technology known as microelectricomechanical systems for industry and for NASA.” LERC planned to develop systems for use a decade into the future, including power systems for the next space station.(Jennifer Arend, “Lewis Research Launches Effort To Develop Technology,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 20 June 1998.)
The Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, an independent task force convened at the request of NASA and charged with analyzing the cost and schedule of constructing and maintaining the ISS, released its official report. The task force concluded that “program size, complexity, and ambitious schedule goals were beyond that which could be reasonably achieved within the [US]$2.1 billion annual cap or [US]$17.4 billion total cap.” The task force concluded that “the International Space Station will be delayed by up to three years and cost as much as [US]$250 million more per year relative to the FY 1999 budget submission,” recommending that NASA “revise the current [s]tation plan so that it is achievable with the funds available.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who had appointed Jay Chabrow to lead the task force, told members of the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies that he would not accept the task force’s conclusions, because he had not yet fully reviewed the report. Goldin told the panel that everyone involved in the space station program was very concerned about cost overruns and schedule slips, but that if Congress imposed a cap on ISS funding, it could affect the schedule significantly, delaying the project up to two years. Goldin warned, “such a funding shortfall would hurt relations with the international partners.” The report also placed much of the blame for the budget and schedule issues on Russia. In 1993 the Clinton administration and top officials at NASA had advised Congress that, were Russia not involved in the project, NASA would “save an estimated [US]$2 billion, expand the station’s capabilities and enable the research station to be completed sooner.” However, the task force’s report concluded that “those assumptions were faulty.”(NASA Advisory Council, “Report on the Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force on the International Space Station,” 21 April 1998, http://history.nasa.gov/32999.pdf (accessed 24 September 2007); Larry Wheeler, “Russia’s Role in Station Has Project over Budget, Behind Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 April 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Goldin Not Sold on Report Finding Space Station Overruns,” 24 April 1998.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced the winners of the 1998 National General Aviation Design Competition, in which undergraduate and graduate students, enrolled at U.S. engineering schools “participating in a major national effort to rebuild the U.S. general aviation sector,” compete individually or as teams. A 27-member undergraduate team from Virginia Polytechnic Institute won first place for its design, called VicTor, a single-engine, four- seat, high-performance aircraft. VicTor’s special design elements included an ergonomic cockpit with adjustable, side-control sticks and dual airbags; a choice between two high-performance engines; and advanced technology instrument displays. The design also included an upgrade option, “to allow autonomous flight if it becomes a reality.” A 15-member, Pennsylvania State University team won second place for their high-performance, two-person, single-engine, composite-fuselage, tractor-prop light airplane. Third place went to 13 undergraduate students from the University of Virginia for their computer program predicting drag in the design of new small passenger airplanes.(NASA, “NASA and FAA Announce Design Competition Winners,” news release 98-140, 1 August 1998.)
A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs,” 22 January 1998.)
NASA’s Inventions and Contributions Board announced the winners of its 1998 Software of the Year Award. The first winner, Tempest, a breakthrough technology “originally developed to support the science experiments on the ISS,” had “spawned new markets,” and NASA predicted that the technology would continue to do so. NASA’s Ames Research Center had designed the second winner, Center TRACON Automation System Software, a set of three software tools for managing air-traffic–control systems at major airports, to optimize flight operations. Analyzing and predicting aircraft paths, the software created visual representations of arriving traffic flow, providing controllers with “up-to-the-second advisories of information” for pilots, thus reducing time between landings to a minimum. The Federal Aviation Administration had chosen the software for immediate implementation at all major airports.(NASA, “Space Flight, Aviation Programs Receive NASA Software Award,” news release 98-124, 15 July 1998. 543 NASA, “New NASA Facility Will Complete Worldwide Communications Coverage,” news release 98-122, 13 July 1998.)
James B. Willet, a nuclear astrophysicist who had worked for NASA, died of cancer at his Maryland home. Willet had worked for 20 years on the scientific staff of NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, and for three years as JPL’s liaison to NASA Headquarters before joining the Space Research Association in 1993. At JPL, Willet had acted as a science coordinator and team chief for the Galileo Mission. Galileo was orbiting Jupiter at the time of his death. Willet was also a field operations team leader for the Mars balloon-testing program and had conducted research in gamma-ray astronomy. Willet’s duties as liaison officer involved him in the Voyager, Ulysses, and Pioneer programs.(Buffalo News (NY), “James B. Willet Nuclear Astrophysicist,” 20 June 1998.)
After problems with one of two network-signal processors caused a 24-hour delay, Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-90) blasted off on the Shuttle program’s final Neurolab mission, carrying 26 experiments for basic research in neurosciences to “expand understanding of how the nervous system develops and functions in space.” Test subjects aboard the Shuttle included crew members, rats, mice, crickets, snails, and two kinds of fish. The Neurolab mission was the joint effort of NASA, several U.S. partners, the space agencies of Canada, France, and Germany, the ESA, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan. Crew members included Commander Richard A. Searfoss; Pilot Scott D. Altman; Mission Specialists Richard M. Linnehan, Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams, and Kathryn P. Hire; and Payload Specialists Jay C. Buckey Jr. and James A. Pawelczyk. Mission Specialist Hire was the first KSC employee that NASA had selected as an astronaut candidate. Mission STS-90 was Columbia’s 25th flight.(NASA, “Neurolab Shuttle Mission To Launch April 16,” news release N98-25, 3 April 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-90,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-90.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
The Russian Space Agency nominated veteran cosmonaut Valery V. Ryumin to fly as a mission specialist aboard Discovery during Mission STS-91 in May. In his last spaceflight in 1980, Ryumin was a member of the Soyuz 35 Mission. During that mission, he had spent 185 days in space from April through October. Ryumin had spent a total of 362 days in space in the course of his three missions.(NASA, “Veteran Cosmonaut Nominated To Fly on Final Shuttle/Mir Mission,” news release, 21 January 1998.)
NASA’s ER-2 aircraft, a “close relative” of the U-2 spy plane, officially broke the altitude record for medium-weight planes when it flew to 68,700 feet (20,900 meters), nearly twice the cruising altitude of commercial airliners, during a mission to measure components of the atmosphere. A Canadian P-42 aircraft had set the previous record of 62,500 feet (19,050 meters) in 1988. NASA officials said the craft had flown at such altitudes in the past, but this flight was the first time that scientists had documented its altitude and made it public.(Agence France-Presse, “NASA Airplane Flies High into Sky: ER-2 Able To Break Record for Altitude,” Washington Times, 23 November 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.’s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, “Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science,” news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, “Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive ‘Drizzle’,” USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The study’s principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenn’s Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenn’s crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenn’s disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, “Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight,” New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
As part of the Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA officials chose more than 300 research proposals to share US$23 million in funding. Out of 28 award categories, 21 focused on space-based applications, such as achieving routine space travel, exploring and settling the solar system, and developing new technologies in astrobiology. The range of topics indicated that research associated with high-profile space transportation and exploration efforts, curtailed because of cuts in NASA’s 1999 budget, would continue on a smaller scale.(Anne Eisele, “Small Business Grants Span Range of NASA Goals,” Space News, 23 February–1 March 1998.)
Endeavour lost power to its small forward-maneuvering jets for 30 minutes. Because the jets, which deliver 25 pounds (11 kilograms) of thrust, keep the complex stabilized as it orbits Earth, the loss of power left the Endeavour–Mir complex adrift. During this malfunction, the crew continued its main task, to transfer supplies and equipment from the Shuttle to the space station. NASA officials explained that the crew had never been in danger. However, if the Shuttle’s small maneuvering jets had not regained power, Endeavour would have had to rely on its primary jets, which deliver 875 pounds (397 kilograms) of thrust. Using the primary jets would have risked damage to Mir upon separation of the two spacecraft.(Brad Liston for Reuters, “Faulty Jets Are Fixed, and Space Complex Is Stabilized,” New York Times, 27 January 1998.)
The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was “the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center.” NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a “whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac,” the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, “so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids” to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, “X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test,” news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, “Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight,” Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
NASA officials announced that the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, which had operated the science program for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1983, would also manage the science operations for the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST). As one of the cornerstone missions of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems, a major project within its space science program, NASA expected the NGST “to provide a critical follow-on to the Hubble Space Telescope.” With capabilities unavailable in existing ground- based or space telescopes, the NGST’s purpose was to observe the first stars and galaxies in the universe, to understand better how the universe formed after the Big Bang. After consulting advisory committees, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, had decided that the “most cost-effective and scientifically sound way to proceed” would be “to expand the [Space Telescope Science] Institute’s responsibilities to include the management” of the new telescope.(NASA, “NASA Selects Home for Next Generation Space Telescope,” news release 98-96, 8 June 1998.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellites⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi⎯in outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment “an impressive feat.” NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japan’s Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating “a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi,” associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, “Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
Research scientists working on a US$33 million experiment to search for antimatter in space, spoke at a news conference, announcing that the communication-system breakdown on Space Shuttle Discovery had ruined their tests. The astronauts had been unable to repair Discovery’s main antenna system, which had broken shortly after launch, rendering the Shuttle unable to transmit high-speed data or video back to Earth. Scientists working on the project needed continuous, high-speed data to calibrate the AMS, which was searching space for rare subatomic particles known as antimatter. However, using a patchwork system, they had only been able to receive a few minutes of data each hour, which meant that, although they could see that the AMS was working, the spectrometer was not providing them with enough data to fine tune the magnet. According to Project Manager James Bates, the scientists had failed to accomplish their objectives because of the malfunction.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Physics Testing Thwarted; A Glitch Has Undermined an Antimatter Experiment,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 June 1998.)
In a vote of 66 to 33, the U.S. Senate defeated Senator Dale Bumpers’s (D-AK) amendment to the appropriations bill for the Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. The amendment would have cut the United States’ US$2.3 billion share of the FY 1999 budget for the International Space Station (ISS), cancelling the ISS program. During floor debate preceding the vote, Senator Bumpers, who had been trying to eliminate U.S. funding for the space station for the past eight years, referred to the previous month’s U.S. General Accounting Office report. The report had projected that the cost to develop, assemble, and operate the space station over several years would reach US$100 billion, in part because of recurring cost overruns. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) countered Senator Bumpers’s arguments against the space station, citing the “incredible scientific possibilities” that could result from research on the ISS, in such areas as neurology, sleep disorders, and balance.(Frederic J. Frommer for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 7 July 1998; Vickie Allen for Reuters, “International Space Station Survives Senate Vote,” 7 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “Bumpers Amendment Would Ground Space Station,” government news release, 7 July 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin publicly acknowledged for the first time that the ISS would cost more than originally proposed, with a revised cost of US$21.3 billion, and would take longer to assemble than was initially planned, with a revised completion date of December 2003. Since 1993, NASA had consistently reported that the cost of the ISS would be US$17.4 billion, and had targeted a 2002 completion date. The revised cost was 200 percent more than the original US$8 billion estimate in President Ronald Reagan’s 1984 proposal.(Larry Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun Now Pegged at $6 Billion,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 March 1998. 436 NASA, “New Global Surveyor Data Reveals Deeply Layered Terrain, Magnetic Features and Genesis of a Martian Dust Storm,” news release 98-45, 13 March 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Ghassem R. Asrar as the new Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise. Before this appointment, Asrar had served as Chief Scientist for the Earth Observing System in the Office of Earth Science Enterprise at NASA Headquarters. He led an international team in developing scientific priorities and measurements “to be obtained from a series of advanced Earth-orbiting satellites that promise fundamental new insights into the connections between Earth’s land, oceans, atmosphere, ice, and life.”(NASA, “Asrar Named Associate Administrator for Earth Science,” news release 98-19, 2 February 1998.)
NASA announced the astronaut candidate class of 1998, including 8 pilot candidates and 17 mission specialist candidates, and composed of 21 male and 4 female candidates. Among the candidate class was teacher Barbara R. Morgan, the former understudy to Christa McAuliffe. NASA had designated Morgan as Educator Mission Specialist in January 1998.(NASA, “NASA Names Astronaut Class of 1998,” news release 98-97, 4 June 1998. 142)
402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.” Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, “Space Station Accord Signed,” 30 January 1998; Associated Press, “Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station,” 29 January 1998; NASA, “Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington,” news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin submitted a 29-page report to lawmakers of the U.S. House of Representatives, officially responding to “an independent review panel’s damning assessment that the [ISS] could cost US$7.3 billion more than NASA estimated.” The panel had also reported that NASA would likely complete the ISS more than four years behind schedule. Goldin acknowledged significant budget and schedule problems but maintained that NASA’s plan remained manageable, despite its shortcomings.(Larry Wheeler for Gannett News Service, “NASA Chief Admits Space Station Project Has Major Woes,” 17 June 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
Pursuant to H. Res. 572, the U.S. House of Representatives agreed to an amended version of H.R. 1702, the Commercial Space Act of 1998.595 The legislation gave the Federal Aviation Administration the authority to issue licenses to private companies for the launch of reusable space vehicles like NASA’s Shuttle. Supporters of the measure stressed that enactment of the law would “better enable American companies to compete in an increasingly competitive international marketplace,” warning that, without this law, the United States would risk losing the space industry to overseas markets. The legislation also required NASA to submit a report and an independently conducted market study to Congress, identifying commercial opportunities and evaluating commercial interest in the development of the ISS.(Jim Abrams for Associated Press, “House Bills Help Federal Workers,” 5 October 1998; Associated Press, “House Sends Senate Bill To Allow Private Space Launches,” 5 October 1998.)
