NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Kevin L. Petersen, who had been serving in an acting capacity since August 1998, as Director of NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Petersen had joined Dryden as an aerospace engineer in 1974 and had worked on flight-research projects, including the F-8 Digital Fly-by-Wire, the HiMAT (the Highly Maneuverable Aircraft Technology), and the X-29 forward-swept wing projects. He had served as Chief of the Vehicle Technology Branch, Chief of the National Aerospace Plane Projects Office, and, since January 1996, as DFRC’s Deputy Director.(NASA, “Petersen Named Dryden Director,” news release 99-14, 8 February 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Lori B. Garver as Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Policy and Plans, effective immediately. Garver had served as Acting Associate Administrator since September 1998. She had begun working for NASA in 1996 as Special Assistant to the Administrator. Before joining NASA, she had been Executive Director of the National Space Society, since 1987, and a president of Women in Aerospace. Goldin remarked that Garver’s experience inside and outside NASA had “proven invaluable,” and that she had demonstrated the management skills and policy leadership that her new position required.(NASA, “Garver Named Associate Administrator for Policy and Plans,” news release 99-6, 25 January 1999.)
Oleksandr Serdiuk, head of the International Relations Department of Ukraine’s Space Agency, announced that Ukraine and Brazil had signed an agreement the previous week, allowing Ukraine to use Brazil’s Alcântara space complex to launch a new generation of Cyclone-4 booster rockets, medium-weight rockets capable of putting 4 tons (3,600 kilograms or 3.6 tonnes) of payload into a geostationary orbit. In 1992, when the USSR dissolved, Ukraine had retained part of the former Soviet Union’s space program, using several former Soviet factories to build rockets and selling rocket space to commercial satellite companies. Before the agreement with Brazil, Ukraine had only used launchpads in other former Soviet countries. However, Ukraine wanted to take advantage of the location of the Alcântara space complex near the equator, where spacecraft reach orbit more easily and commercial launches a
NASA announced that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin would present Simon Ramo and Bernard A. Schriever with NASA’s Distinguished Public Service Medal on 5 November at the start of a daylong conference. NASA, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, the National Air and Space Museum, the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, and the National Space Society were cosponsoring the conference, “Developing U.S. Launch Capability: The Role of Civil-Military Cooperation.” The award recognized the leadership of Ramo and Schriever during the early years of the U.S. space program. Ramo had been the chief scientist and leading civilian in the Air Force program to build the first U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile system. His work had fostered cooperation between the U.S. Air Force and aeronautics industry, the necessary foundation of the space program. Schriever had pioneered the development of the first ballistic missile for the United States; the resulting rocket technology had led to NASA’s successes in its early human spaceflight programs.(NASA, “NASA Honors Missile Pioneers at Launch Vehicle Conference,” news release N99-56, 2 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/1999/n99-056.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
Donald D. Engen, Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum, and William Ivans, an internationally known, award-winning pilot from La Jolla, California, died when the motorized glider that Ivans was piloting broke apart and crashed. Investigators were attempting to determine the cause of the accident. Larry Sanderson, President of the Soaring Society of America, remarked that “both victims were top pilots in ‘an extremely well-built aircraft. So it had to be a very unusual set of circumstances that stressed the craft’.” Both Engen and Ivans were officers of the Soaring Society, and Ivans, a pioneer in the field, had won many awards for high-altitude soaring. Engen had retired from the U.S. Navy in 1978, with the rank of vice admiral and had been a test pilot for many years. After retiring from the Navy, he had served for two years on the National Transportation Safety Board and as administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration between 1984 and 1987. He became Director of the National Air and Space Museum in 1996, following the resignation of Martin O. Harwit.
Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Iran’s missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States’ friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russia’s cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilman’s legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was “assisting Iran’s programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.” If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from “transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction.” An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, “Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency,” Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
NASA announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, as Director of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute, effective immediately. NASA had created the Astrobiology Institute in July 1998, a “virtual organization” comprising NASA’s centers, universities, and other scientific entities for the study of “the origin, evolution, distribution, and destiny of life in the universe.” The Institute, with a multidisciplinary focus, sought to bring together astronomers, biologists, chemists, exobiologists, geologists, and physicists, to search for the origins of life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the announcement of Blumberg’s appointment at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, the site of the Institute’s headquarters. Goldin stated that NASA had tasked the Astrobiology Institute with “providing the ‘intellectual underpinnings’ for building new types of instruments and space probes for finding life in the solar system and beyond.”
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named A. Thomas Young to chair the Mars Program Independent Assessment Team, charged with reviewing NASA’s approach to robotic exploration of Mars following the recent loss of the Mars Polar Lander Mission. Among the review team’s tasks were the evaluation of several recent NASA missions to deep space, including Mars Pathfinder, Mars Global Surveyor, Mars Climate Orbiter, Mars Polar Lander, Deep Space 1, and Deep Space 2. The team would analyze the projects’ budgets, content, schedule, management structure, and scientific organization, assessing how roles and responsibilities of those missions related to the missions’ safety, reliability, and success.(NASA, “Young To Lead Mars Program Assessment Team,” news release 99-147, 17 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-147.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASA’s Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiter’s moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, “recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data.” James K. Erickson of NASA’s JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileo’s instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, “If we didn’t have the automatic restart software, we wouldn’t be getting any data at the encounters.”(Michael A. Dornheim, “Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
NASA announced the student winners of the 1998–1999 National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). A team of 33 students at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Florida, had produced the winning design, “aimed at attracting customers who want to move from propeller-driven craft to jets without needing a significant increase in pilot skill.” A 13-member team from Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pennsylvania, won second place for their “Baracuda,” an acronym for Boldly Advanced and Refined Aircraft Concept Under Development for AGATE, a national, general aviation revitalization program. The team’s “conventional-layout, modern- composite airplane featuring advanced aerodynamics, systems, and avionics” was a four-place, single-engine, jet-powered aircraft. A three-university team⎯the University of Virginia, Old Dominion University in Hampton, Virginia, and Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York⎯won third place for a “highly innovative design known as the ‘Yeah Man’,” a craft with two tail booms, each with vertical tails. The aircraft, which NASA scientists had tested in the Full Scale Wind Tunnel at Langley Research Center, showed good aerodynamic characteristics.(NASA, “NASA and FAA Pick Student Aircraft-Design Contest Winners,” news release 99-87, 2 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-087.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
A large section of the outer wall of one of the Lockheed Martin X-33 rocket plane’s two liquid hydrogen fuel tanks separated 2 hours after completing pressure and structural tests at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. Lockheed intended the X-33 prototype to lead to the development of its VentureStar TM Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV), and NASA planned to replace its fleet of Space Shuttles with a fleet of Lockheed’s VentureStarTM RLVs after 2012. The latest problem potentially delayed the X-33’s first test flight at least an additional six months, essentially guaranteeing that Lockheed Martin would be unable to produce an operational VentureStarTM vehicle by 2004. NASA had “placed a huge wager” on the VentureStar TM, committing US$941 million to the X-33 program, which had been threatened by technical problems and cost overruns for more than a year. U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) examiners had criticized the project for its rising costs, warning that “delays in the prototype would harm NASA’s plans for a full-scale reusable vehicle.”(Jeff Leeds, “Test Mishap Delays Development of Lockheed’s X-33 Rocket Plane,” Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1999.)
NASA scientists lost contact with the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its Martian orbit and disappeared behind the planet, a little less than a year after the launch of its Mars mission in December 1998. Mars Surveyor Project Manager John B. McNamee said that the orbit-insertion burn, a 16-minute-long burn to slow the spacecraft down as it enters orbit, had begun on time. The team of NASA scientists observed 5 minutes of the burn before the craft went behind Mars. At that point, the craft stopped communicating. Communication did not resume at the time the team expected the craft to reappear from the far side of the planet. McNamee reported that the latest navigation results showed that the craft had entered its orbit lower than his team had planned, indicating that NASA’s navigation predictions at the tracking station may have been incorrect. Carl B. Pilcher, Science Director for Solar System Exploration at NASA Headquarters, commented that, although losing the spacecraft was very serious, the loss was “not devastating to the Mars Surveyor Program as a whole,” because the mission of Mars Polar Lander, scheduled to arrive at Mars two months after Mars Climate Orbiter, was independent of that of Orbiter.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter Believed To Be Lost,” news release, 23 September 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mcolost.html (accessed 3 March 2008); Reuters, “NASA Loses Contact with Mars Orbiter,” 23 September 1999.)
NASA officials and Mars Polar Lander Mission scientists were unable to communicate with Lander following its scheduled landing. The team had expected the first signal to arrive from the spacecraft at a tracking station in the Mojave Desert in California, approximately 30 minutes after the scheduled touchdown at 3:01 p.m. (EST). A second attempt to communicate with the craft had produced nothing. Before the craft’s landing, tracking data indicated that Lander had veered slightly off course. Flight controllers had fired its thrusters briefly to alter its approach angle slightly. Flight Operations Manager Sam Thurman had expressed his satisfaction with the new tracking data, which showed the craft heading for a point within a mile of its target.(John Noble Wilford, “Probe to Mars Becomes Silent, Its Fate Unclear,” New York Times, 4 December 1999.)
NASA released new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images of the cores of spiral galaxies like the Milky Way, and astronomers studying the images for clues about galactic development discussed their findings at a briefing at NASA Headquarters. Two complementary surveys by independent research teams had concluded that the Hubble images confirmed the evolutionary link between a disc-like cloud of dust and gas at the center of a galaxy and a bulge of millions of stars at the center of the disc-like cloud. The central bulge stabilizes a galaxy’s development, controls the birth of stars in the galaxy’s core, and “holds secrets as to how and when a galaxy formed.” Reynier F. Peletier of the University of Nottingham in the United Kingdom confirmed that central bulges of “more tightly wound spirals” formed at approximately the same time in the early universe. C. Marcello Carollo of Columbia University, who had led a team studying galaxies with small bulges and “bar-like structures that bisect the nucleus,” had discovered that such galaxies developed more recently. Both teams had used HST’s visible-light and infrared cameras to determine the stars’ true colors, a measure of the age of the stars inside the galaxies’ core.(NASA, “Starry Bulges Yield Secrets to Galaxy Growth,” news release 99-107, 6 October 1999; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Tackles Questions About Cosmic Bulges,” 6 October 1999.)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized “members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars,” awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASA’s Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeing’s Delta rocket “more and more the launch vehicle of choice.” Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had “changed the face of the space program.”(PR Newswire, “Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASA’s Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards,” 27 January 1999.)
Mission controllers indicated that chances of ever contacting the US$165 million Mars Polar Lander were “remote at best,” after they failed to detect a signal during their “last best chance” of communicating with the probe. NASA officials announced that the loss of Lander meant that NASA would need to drop the timetable for future Mars missions and rethink the entire Mars exploration program, including the scheduled launch of the next lander in 2001. NASA had already spent US$193 million on the planned 2001 launch. Edward J. Weiler, head of NASA’s Office of Space Science, indicated that NASA would convene a panel of experts to diagnose the Mars Polar Lander failure and to suggest a “new architecture” for its Mars program. Although they had set no dates, members of Congress said that they planned to hold hearings about NASA’s procedures and budget.(Down Jones Newswire, “NASA Fails To Detect Signal from Mars Polar Lander,” 7 December 1999; Peter Kendall and Vincent J. Schodolski for the Chicago Tribune News Service, “Mars Exploration Put on Hold: NASA Scraps Its Timetable, and the Launch of a $193 Million Lander Set for 2001 Is Uncertain,” Oregonian (Portland), 8 December 1999.)
NASA announced the departure of Gretchen W. McClain, a senior space station official at NASA Headquarters, naming as her replacement in an acting capacity, W. Michael Hawes, NASA’s Chief Engineer for the ISS. In 1997 NASA had appointed McClain as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station). In that position, she was responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and undertaking liaison activities with the executive branch, Congress, industry, and international partners. McClain left NASA to return to private industry.(NASA, “McClain To Leave NASA; Hawes Named Acting Chief of Space Station,” news release 99-50, 8 April 1999.)
At a scheduled 13 December ribbon-cutting ceremony, NASA announced the opening of FutureFlight Central (FFC) at Ames Research Center’s Moffett Field in Mountain View, California. NASA had designed the two-story facility⎯the world’s first full-scale, virtual, airport control tower⎯to test methods of solving, under realistic conditions and configurations, potential air and ground traffic problems at commercial airports. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration had jointly funded the US$10 million project. The design of FFC permitted “integration of tomorrow’s technologies in a risk-free simulation of any airport, airfield, and tower-cab environment.”(NASA, “NASA Opens New, Virtual Airport Control Tower at Ames,” news release 99-143, 10 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-143.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, to head the Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter had disappeared on 23 September as it entered orbit around Mars. Goldin tasked the board with independently reviewing all aspects of the mission’s failure, to verify whether it had been the result of an inadequacy in NASA’s interplanetary navigation systems. Preliminary findings from an internal peer review at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California” had caused the loss of the spacecraft. Goldin instructed the board to report its initial findings by 3 November.(NASA, “Head of Mars Climate Orbiter Investigation Board Named,” news release 99-117, 6 October 1999.)
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbia’s launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety “stand down.” NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted “full responsibility for wiring damage” found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch team’s skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, “Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, “NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panel’s Attention,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
Ukraine’s Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstan’s Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rocket’s lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.”)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin selected NASA Chief Engineer Daniel R. Mulville to replace General John R. Dailey as Associate Deputy Administrator, effective 1 January 2000. Dailey was leaving to become Director of the National Air and Space Museum. NASA had appointed Mulville as Chief Engineer in 1995, responsible for overall review of technical readiness and for execution of all NASA programs. From 1990 to 1995, Mulville had been Director of the Engineering and Quality Management Division in NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, and, from 1986 to 1990, he was Deputy Director of the Materials and Structures Division in NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Before that appointment, Mulville had served as the Structures Technology Manager at the Naval Air Systems Command since 1979, where he led the development of structural design, testing, and certification methods, as Program Manager for the Development of Composites for the AV-8B and F/A-18 aircraft, and advanced aircraft and missile programs. Mulville had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, and NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal, among other awards. Goldin expressed his pleasure at Mulville’s acceptance of the position, remarking that, as Associate Deputy Administrator, Mulville would be his most senior advisor on NASA operations and commenting on Mulville’s outstanding work as NASA’s Chief Engineer.(NASA, “Mulville Named Associate Deputy Administrator,” news release 99-146, 14 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-146.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution I. Michael Heyman announced the appointment of General John R. Dailey, U.S. Marine Corps (Retired), Associate Deputy Administrator of NASA, as Director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, effective January 2000. Dailey succeeded Vice Admiral Donald D. Engen, U.S. Navy (Retired), who had died suddenly in a glider accident in July after serving as the museum’s director for three years. Dailey had begun work at NASA in 1992, after retiring from 36 years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Marine Corps. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Dailey’s leadership at NASA had been unparalleled, and that he had “shaped and strengthened the [A]gency, and was responsible for developing an infrastructure that [would] carry NASA into the new millennium.” Secretary Heyman commented on Dailey’s selection from a strong field of candidates, describing him as “a most impressive individual,” who had earned confidence and admiration throughout the air and space community and would continue the strong, dedicated leadership expected at the museum. In addition to managing 260 employees and a US$25 million budget, Dailey’s appointment placed him in charge of construction of the museum’s new 710,000-square-foot (66,000-square-meter), hangar-style facility, expected to open at Dulles International Airport in December 2003. The Smithsonian had conceived the idea of the new facility to display its vast aeronautics and space holdings; the original National Air and Space Museum building was too small to house the additional collection of more than 180 aircraft and 100 spacecraft.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “New Director of the National Air and Space Museum To Take Office in January,” news release, 24 November 1999, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm? releaseID=97 (accessed 19 March 2008); Peter Carlson, “New Air & Space Chief: General Succeeds Director Killed in Crash,” Washington Post, 24 November 1999.)
Although crosswinds caused a late touchdown, Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely after its eight-day servicing mission to HST. NASA managers had instructed Discovery to fly an extra orbit before landing, while Mission Control monitored the weather on the ground. NASA had shortened the mission to eight days from the scheduled 10 because of numerous launch delays, and because Discovery must return to Earth before New Year’s Eve to avoid potential Y2K computer problems.(Washington Times, “Shuttle Back on Earth after Hubble Repairs,” 28 December 1999; Robyn Suriano, “‘Welcome Back to Earth’, Discovery: Shuttle Astronauts Come in for Late but Safe Landing,” USA Today, 28 December 1999.)
NASA released an image of Jupiter’s volcanic moon Io, captured at the closest range ever accomplished. The image, which NASA’s spacecraft Galileo took during a flyby of the moon on 10 October, showed a lava field near the center of an erupting volcano named Pillan, with visible new lava flows from its volcanic center. To capture most of the new images of Io, Galileo had used a fast camera mode, in which the camera preprocesses the image, averaging the brightness in its adjacent parts. However, Io’s radiation had disrupted the process, degrading the quality of the images. Radiation had not affected images, including the newly released image of Pillan, taken in other camera modes. Galileo Project Manager James K. Erickson remarked that Galileo would not use the fast camera mode during the next Io flyby.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Closest-Ever Picture of Volcanic Moon Io Released,” news release, 22 October 1999.)
Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from California’s Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Force’s Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, “collecting data on the Earth’s global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs,” as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmark’s Orsted and South Africa’s SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries’ space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earth’s magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, “Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit,” 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
NASA disclosed that a sequence of computer commands issued by flight controllers on the ground had failed to fire the ISS’s engines, placing the uninhabited space station in potential danger. The cause of the failure was human error. Flight controllers had sent commands directing the new space station to move out of the path of a piece of space junk, which posed a danger to the craft. A U.S. military organization tracking such objects had predicted that the “fairly large” piece of space junk of Russian origin would pass within 0.6 miles (1 kilometer) of the space station on 13 June. However, the debris came no closer to the new ISS than 4.5 miles (7.2 kilometers). A collision could have destroyed the uninhabited space station. NASA’s Deputy Program Manager for Space Station Operations, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., explained that, because the space station’s computers had rejected the flight controllers’ faulty commands, the station had no motion control for an entire orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 18 June 1999.)
NASA officials announced that the Galileo spacecraft was operating normally again after entering safe mode on 31 January. Galileo’s computer had become confused while flying past Jupiter’s moon Europa. David A. Senske, a member of the Galileo imaging team at NASA’s JPL, explained that the unusual angle Galileo required for studying Europa had caused the computer to malfunction.(Associated Press, “Galileo Craft Resumes Its Jupiter Mission,” 13 February 1999.)
NASA announced its decision to end a US$240 million project to land a small spacecraft on a comet, so that scientists could learn how to destroy a comet if it were on course to collide with Earth. NASA had planned to launch the probe in 2003 and to land it on the surface of Comet Tempel 1 in 2005. After landing, the probe was to drill into the nucleus of the comet, helping scientists understand the comet’s composition. Manager of the Space Technology 4 project Brian Muirhead remarked, “we know very, very little about how comets are formed and what their constituency is,” adding that anyone serious about planetary protection must learn more about comets. NASA’s JPL was in the early stages of developing the Space Technology 4/Champollion project and had only spent US$10 million. NASA had also considered canceling Mars Surveyor 2001, but had already spent US$100 million on that project. Other projects were experiencing cost overruns also, such as the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, which needed an extra US$60 million to cover last-minute development problems. NASA intended to redirect some funds from Space Technology 4 to other missions experiencing funding difficulties, such as Chandra.(Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Comet Lander,” 29 June 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to “John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field.” George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewis’s death in 1948, NACA had named the facility “Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory” to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to “Lewis Research Center” in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to “two of Ohio’s famous names⎯one an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.”(NASA, “NASA Announces Field Center Name Change,” news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
Robert S. Ruggeri, a retired NASA engineer and pioneer in de-icing research, died at the age of 75. Ruggeri had begun working for NASA’s predecessor agency in 1944, retiring from NASA in 1980. NASA had applied his findings from studying ice buildup on airplane wings in the 1940s and 1950s, to the development of rockets and Space Shuttles. When the United States sought to speed up its space program following the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik, Ruggeri had also researched the effects of cavitation⎯partial vacuums in flowing liquids⎯on cryogenic rocket pumps, looking for ways to make the pumps more efficient for rockets. Later in his career at NASA, Ruggeri’s work had focused on the design of compressors for advanced aircraft engines, as he sought ways to increase fuel efficiency, reduce air pollution, and minimize the noise of jet engines.(“Robert Ruggeri, NASA Engineer Was a Pioneer in Aircraft De-Icing,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 26 December 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
