NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event “a bittersweet day for NASA.” The spacecraft, NASA’s “gamma-ray equivalent” of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellite’s control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASA’s efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns,” news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, “Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth,” news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, “A Satellite’s Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project,” Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASA’s exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commission’s report and Collins’s response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, “NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America,” news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum for “its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built.” NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists’ knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners,” news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell, at NASA’s JPL, announced the resumption of the spacecraft’s observations. Cassini had operated without any problems, since scientists had reactivated its reaction-wheel system on 21 December.(Associated Press, “NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter,” 28 December 2000; NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Cassini Passes Through Asteroid Belt,” news release, 28 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=4 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after completing the 11-day Mission STS-97 at the ISS, where the crew had installed and deployed the station’s new solar array. Shortly before touchdown, the ISS sailed above KSC, a “reminder of the pressure” on NASA to support more flights to the ISS as the station’s assembly accelerated. Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore remarked that the successful mission of Endeavour to the ISS was “a good way to end this year⎯a very successful five missions.”(William Harwood, “Endeavour Returns from Station Work,” Washington Post, 12 December 2000.)
After nearly two years of delays and many questions regarding the Russian Space Agency’s commitment to the ISS, Russia successfully launched the Zvezda module aboard a Proton rocket. Building the 22-ton (20,000-kilogram or 20-tonne), US$320 million module, to provide living quarters for researchers aboard the ISS, had severely taxed the Russian space program. To bring the project to fruition, Russia had relied on the resourcefulness of its scientists and engineers, as well as resorting to creative financing arrangements, such as selling the U.S.-based Pizza Hut Company an advertisement for display on the side of the Proton launch rocket. Russia had insured Zvezda’s launch for more than US$1 billion. Hundreds of spectators, representing aerospace companies from Russia and Western countries, witnessed the launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Watching the launch with Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised the successful completion of the long-awaited module: “The Russians have gone through all sorts of difficulty with their economy, the political changes, and a whole variety of other problems, and they came through and did what they said they were going to do.” Koptev made clear the high stakes for future Russian space projects, based on the successful launch and linkup of Zvezda: “This is 10 years of work and the success of this launch will determine to a large extent whether the Russian space programme continues or not.” The international space community greeted news of the launch as a sign that the much-postponed ISS was nearing completion. Although Russia had plans to contribute further portals to the ISS, none of its subsequent contributions had as much potential to delay the international effort.(Associated Press, “Russian Launching Clears Way for Space Station,” 13 July 2000; USA Today, “Russia Sends Module of Space Station into Orbit,” 12 July 2000; Newsday (Long Island, NY), “Launch of Key Module for Space Station Is Set,” 11 July 2000; Reuters, “Russia Space Station Launch Insured for over $1 Bln,” 12 July 2000; Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Update 2-Russia Launches Key Module for ISS,” 12 July 2000.)
NASA celebrated the 20th anniversary of its Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP), created to encourage promising high school students, especially minorities, to pursue careers in math, science, and engineering. During the first 20 years of the program, nearly 3,000 students participated, and 3,300 NASA employees served as SHARP mentors. Most SHARP student participants had served as interns at one of NASA’s research centers during the summer months. NASA had begun the program and had continued to fund it as part of its educational mission.(NASA, “NASA’s SHARP Program Celebrates 20 Years of Excellence,” news release 00-96, 19 June 2000.)
NASA controllers began sending signals to the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to perform a series of maneuvers that would ultimately end in the satellite crashing into the Pacific Ocean. The endgame commands marked the conclusion of a successful nine-year mission, which had recorded data on more than 2,500 gamma-ray bursts. The US$670 million satellite, launched on 5 April 1991 aboard Mission STS-37, had provided researchers with never-before-seen images of explosions throughout the universe. “It will be like losing a member of the family,” remarked one NASA scientist who had worked on the program since 1979. NASA officials had decided to end the satellite’s space tenure because of the possibility that the aging satellite might become unresponsive and plummet out of control to Earth. By initiating the satellite’s demise, NASA could control the landing area of the 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) spacecraft. Some critics charged NASA with being too conservative, because it had based its decision on the 1-in- 1,000 odds that an uncontrolled descent of the satellite to Earth would result in injuries.(James Orberg, “Plan To Scrap Satellite Sacrifices Science,” USA Today, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “NASA To Destroy Compton Satellite After Nine Years,” 28 May 2000.)
In the wake of the failure of the Mars Polar Lander Mission, an independent assessment team appointed by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin assembled for the first time to begin a review of NASA’s approach to the exploration of Mars. The 16-member team included aeronautics experts from NASA, aerospace industries, the U.S. Air Force, and academia. Although NASA officials held out hope that Lander would eventually respond to signals from Earth, Goldin tasked the team with evaluating NASA’s successful and unsuccessful missions to Mars. The independent investigation continued NASA’s pattern of scrutinizing all failures to improve its proficiency in the exploration of space.
NASA named award-winning broadcast journalist Bob Jacobs as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters. Before joining NASA, Jacobs had served for four years as Projects Manager for the Washington-based Broadcast Technology Division of the Associated Press, where he helped to develop and implement newsroom management technology. Clients had included the British Broadcasting Corporation, ESPN, National Public Radio, and CBS News. Jacobs had won an Emmy award and other regional honors for excellence in journalism.(NASA, “News Chief Named at NASA Headquarters,” news release 00-150, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-150.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, 1976 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physiology and Medicine, as Senior Advisor to the Administrator, effective immediately. While continuing in his position as Director of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute, Blumberg would also provide guidance to NASA’s newly created Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR), an interdisciplinary effort combining research in biology, physics, chemistry, and engineering. Goldin also announced that NASA would begin a search, headed by Blumberg and NASA Chief Scientist Kathie L. Olsen, to fill the position of Associate Administrator for the new OBPR and other key positions. Olsen would serve as Acting Associate Administrator until NASA had filled the position.(NASA, “Nobel Prize Laureate Appointed as Senior NASA Advisor,” news release 00-164, 16 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-164.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
Lockheed Martin announced that for the third time in four years, the Air Traffic Control Association had awarded the company its Industry Award, recognizing Lockheed’s outstanding achievement in and contribution to the science of air traffic control. The award specifically recognized Lockheed Martin Air Traffic Management for its worldwide support of air traffic– control systems. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the German Civil Aviation Authority, and the United Kingdom’s National Air Traffic Services Ltd. Had all nominated the company for the award.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Receives Prestigious Air Traffic Control Association Award,” news release, 27 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinReceivesPrestigious Ai.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
The U.S. Department of Justice filed a lawsuit against Rockwell International Inc., Boeing North American Inc., and United Space Alliance for concealing millions of dollars in fraud committed by a subcontractor. According to the suit, the subcontractor had used funds from the Shuttle program to purchase homes, jewelry, and vacations. The subcontractor accused of the fraud had pled guilty to all charges five years earlier, and the culpability of the major aerospace companies in concealing the theft was the last significant legal matter to come to trial. The three companies claimed that they had cooperated with government investigations into the 180 felony fraud violations and were not liable for the actions of the rogue subcontractor.(Associated Press, “Government Sues Three Companies, Including Boeing North American, over Space Shuttle Program Fraud,” 12 January 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would merge the Office of the Chief Technologist and the Office of Aero-Space Technology, to better facilitate NASA’s technological advancements. According to Goldin, placing a range of issues, from IT operation to technology-based research, under the domain of a single leader would promote IT compatibility. Goldin appointed Chief Technologist Samuel L. Venneri to head the new Office, giving Venneri the responsibility of developing a long-term strategy to keep NASA at the forefront of technological development. Goldin also tasked Venneri with forging new relationships with companies using technologies similar to the type that NASA developed and used. Venneri had been NASA’s Chief Technologist since 1996.(NASA, “Goldin Names Venneri To Head Merged Technology, Aero-Space Office; New Chief Engineer Appointed,” news release 00-21, 7 February 2000.)
United Space Alliance finalized its investigation into the loose pin that had delayed the October launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, reporting that the pin had come from the Vehicle Assembly Building. Technicians had incorrectly installed the pin, intended to secure a platform above part of the Shuttle’s fuel tank. During the Shuttle’s transport to the launchpad on 8 September, the 4- inch (10-centimeter) metal pin had fallen 73 feet (22 meters), landing on a fuel line near one of the tank’s connections to the Shuttle. After inspectors had found the pin on 10 October, NASA officials had delayed Discovery’s launch 24 hours, so that technicians could remove the pin, preventing damage during liftoff.(Kelly Young, “Pin Found on Shuttle from VAB,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 November 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts attempted to deploy the new solar array at the ISS, but only one of the two panels unfurled as planned. Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega conducted a spacewalk to assist in attaching a 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) power assembly, while Marc Garneau maneuvered the Shuttle’s robotic arm from inside Endeavour. The spacewalkers were unable to open the latches on the storage boxes containing the folded solar panels, delaying their attempts to unfurl the array. They began to unfurl the first panel 1 hour behind schedule, but although it reached its full length in 14 minutes, the panel did not appear to have the correct tension. NASA officials decided to delay expanding the second panel for a full day, to give them time to determine the cause of the inadequate tension of the first panel. The ISS crew did not witness the deployment of the solar array, because the Shuttle crew carried out their work during the ISS crew’s sleep period.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Gets Its Wings, but Only One Is Deployed,” New York Times, 4 December 2000.)
In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellor’s Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that “in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years,” U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASA’s next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, “Red Planet Is Next Frontier,” 2 May 2000.)
NASA announced that, on 3 September 2000, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) aboard NASA’s Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) satellite had detected an 11 million-square-mile (28.5 million-square-kilometer) ozone-depletion area⎯surpassing the ozone hole’s record of 10.5 million square miles (27.2 million square kilometers) set on 19 September 1998. Scientists investigating the extent of the ozone-depletion area expressed their surprise, suggesting that early-spring conditions and an “extremely intense Antarctic vortex”⎯an upper-altitude stratospheric air current that moves around the continent⎯might partly explain the record-setting size. Jack A. Kaye of the Office of Earth Sciences, Research Director at NASA Headquarters, remarked that, although scientists expect variations in the size of the ozone hole from one year to the next, they plan to observe the evolution of the ozone-depletion area in the coming months, to compare it with previous years. Manager of NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Program Michael J. Kurylo suggested that the new data reinforced concerns about the fragile nature of the ozone layer, indicating that, although international agreements had curbed the production of ozone-destroying gases, concentrations of those gases in the stratosphere were just reaching their peak levels. Therefore, he warned that it would be decades before the depletion area in the ozone layer would no longer occur annually. Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar commented that such discoveries demonstrated the value of long-term observations.(NASA, “Largest-Ever Ozone Hole Observed over Antarctica,” news release 00-137, 7 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-137.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Chester M. Lee, who had served as Mission Director for six Apollo Missions to the Moon, including Apollo 13, died from complications of open-heart surgery. Lee had begun his 23-year career with NASA in 1965 after retiring from the U.S. Navy, specializing primarily on the Apollo Missions. He had also served as Program Director for the 1973–1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the first joint venture between the United States and the former Soviet Union.(Associated Press, “Chet Lee, Former NASA Worker, Dies at 80,” 7 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Obituaries Chester Lee; Navy Captain, Apollo Mission Director,” 9 March 2000.)
NASA and the Boeing Company announced an agreement to use Boeing’s Delta Launch Services Inc. for a variety of NASA missions. The contract, estimated to be worth at least US$168 million, included options to extend the agreement. NASA also awarded both Boeing and Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services Inc. indefinite delivery–indefinite quantity contracts for 10 years. The agreements solidified NASA’s partnerships with the two major aerospace companies. A NASA spokesperson clarified the reasons for the extension of the relationships, saying that Boeing and Lockheed “were selected based on their ability to meet NASA’s highly critical future mission requirements and their proven track records for providing a quality product.” At the time of the agreement with Boeing, the company had flown 82 missions for NASA with a success rate of 98 percent.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Delta Rockets To Launch Next-Generation NASA Space Craft,” news release, 16 June 2000; NASA, “NASA Awards Launch Services Contracts,” news release c00-e, 16 June 2000; Seattle Post- Intelligencer (WA), “Boeing Wins $168 Million NASA Order for 3 More Delta II Launches, Options,” 19 June 2000.)
NASA suspended all of Cassini’s observations of Jupiter that required the spacecraft to point⎯to take magnetic-field measurements⎯in order to capture images, after the craft developed a problem with a maneuvering system. NASA permitted Cassini to continue making observations that did not requiring pointing. On 17 December, Cassini’s No. 2 reaction wheel had begun to require extra force to turn, prompting the craft to switch from electrical power to a hydrazine- thrusting system, which Cassini needed to conserve for use in its primary Saturn mission. Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell remarked that, if tests of the maneuvering system were favorable, the craft could begin its observations again in a week to 10 days.(Los Angeles Times, “NASA Halts Spacecraft’s Observation of Jupiter,” 21 December 2000; Associated Press, “NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter,” 28 December 2000.)
NASA successfully launched the GOES-L satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The new weather satellite would provide the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with detailed readings on severe weather systems affecting the United States. NASA deemed the GOES-L satellite a top priority because of the declining returns of the aging GOES-8 satellite. NASA had delayed the US$220 million satellite project because of engine problems, causing anxiety to weather forecasters who depended on the satellites to track the powerful hurricanes that affected the United States in 1999. As Director of the National Weather Service’s Southern Region, William Proenza explained, “It is vitally important that we have continuity of data or we may be finding ourselves impaired in our ability of forecasting.” NASA had kept the May 2000 launch of the GOES-L on track, despite some calls to postpone it so that NASA could launch Shuttle Atlantis on an urgent repair mission to the International Space Station (ISS). However, NASA officials had determined that the risk of inadequate weather forecasting was too great to take a chance on delaying the launch.(Associated Press, “NASA Launches Hurricane-Tracking Satellite,” 3 May 2000; Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Weather Satellite Has Successful Launch, Heads for Orbit,” 3 May 2000.)
After completing four months of on-orbit checkout and verification, Terra, the newest in NASA’s series of Earth Observing System Satellites, became functional. NASA had developed and launched Terra to monitor Earth’s atmosphere on a daily basis. Researchers hoped that gathering frequent data would allow a more comprehensive assessment of Earth’s climate change. According to Yoram J. Kaufman, Project Scientist for Terra at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), “Terra is measuring and documenting the Earth’s vital signs, many of them for the first time.” In the midst of public and scholarly discussions of global warming and climate change, the new research satellite was a step toward understanding the causes of the changes. “The data will help us understand our planet, aid in our distinguishing between natural and human-induced changes, and show us how the Earth’s climate affects the quality of our lives,” Kaufman clarified. The satellite’s first transmitted images thrilled scientists. The satellite surveyed North America, creating images in many different layers, to reveal how different levels of population and types of vegetation affected the climate. NASA officials planned to make the images obtained by Terra available to business, scientists, and the public.(NASA, “Terra Spacecraft Open for Business,” news release 00-62, 19 April 2000; NASA, “New Views of Earth from Terra Satellite Wednesday,” news release N00-16, 18 April 2000.)
Shuttle Endeavour returned safely to Earth after a successful 11-day voyage. The scientific community and the public greeted the Shuttle’s return with even more fanfare than usual, because the crew had obtained stunning images of Earth. Endeavour’s six-person crew had worked nearly around the clock, keeping radar antennas running to compile the data for three- dimensional digital maps of Earth’s surface. The crew had gathered more than 300 digital tapes of radar data during the mission, which NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called “one of the most challenging, difficult missions we ever undertook.” The mission had successfully mapped 43.5 million square miles (113 million square kilometers) of Earth’s terrain. NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency expected that transferring the data into readable maps would take between one and two years. NASA had obtained the images primarily for the U.S. Department of Defense, to improve the accuracy of missiles and to assist in navigation for military planes and troops.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Returns with Dazzling Images of the Home Planet,” 22 February 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Astronauts End Earth-Mapping Work,” 22 February 2000; Chicago Tribune, “Mission: Map the Earth,” 22 February 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
Robert R. Gilruth, “an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo,” died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics’s Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, “his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.”(NASA, “Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies,” news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler announced that NASA had decided to send two large scientific rovers to Mars in 2003, rather than a single craft. The new plan called for the two craft to launch within weeks of each other, reaching Mars in January 2004 after their respective seven and one-half-month-long journeys. The two 300-pound (136- kilogram) rovers, exact duplicates of each other and similar to the highly successful Sojourner rover of 1997, would head to different locations on Mars. Mars Program Director G. Scott Hubbard explained that NASA had undertaken an extensive study of the two-rover option, weighing the excellent launch opportunity in 2003 against resource requirements and schedule constraints. The study teams concluded that it would be possible to successfully develop and launch identical packages, and that the new plan would not only double NASA’s scientific return but also add resiliency and robustness to the Mars exploration program. Although NASA had yet to select the two landing sites, Mars Program Scientist James B. Garvin suggested that possible locations included those with evidence of the existence of water in the past. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Principal Investigator for the rovers’ Athena science package, explained that the goal of each rover would be to learn about ancient water and climate conditions on Mars. Each craft would operate as a robotic field geologist, reading the geological record at its landing site to discover what conditions had formed the local rocks and soils.(NASA, “NASA Plans To Send Rover Twins to Mars in 2003,” news release 00-124, 10 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-124.txt (accessed 7 May 2008).)
The United States and Brazil signed a treaty giving U.S. aerospace firms access to Brazil’s Alcântara launch site, located just 3° south of the equator. The treaty was the first accord signed by the United States that allowed U.S. satellites to launch from foreign soil. The launch site’s location near the center of the globe would save money for aerospace companies, because satellites could take a shorter path to equatorial orbit, requiring less fuel. Brazil benefited from the boost to its embryonic space program and the possibility of capturing a portion of the lucrative commercial-satellite business. At the time of the agreement, U.S. firms controlled two- thirds of the annual US$66 billion commercial satellite industry.(Reuters, “Brazil: Joins Space Race with U.S. Satellite Treaty,” 17 April 2000; Peter Fritsch, “Brazil To Sign U.S. Accord To Enter Satellite Business,” Wall Street Journal, 18 April 2000.)
Laurence Vico released a study on astronauts’ loss of bone density because of time spent in space. Vico and his team of researchers had examined the bone-mineral density of 15 cosmonauts who had spent from one to six months aboard the Mir space station. They had found a “striking” loss of bone density, in some cases as serious as that experienced by paraplegic patients. The team of doctors suggested that physicians should examine astronauts more closely for susceptibility to bone-weakening conditions such as osteoporosis, before they traveled into space, and that postflight recovery periods should be much longer than previous standards dictated. The sample study found that astronauts experienced an average bone-density loss of more than 5 percent, and that the lost bone did not immediately regenerate after postflight recovery periods. Scientists had long been aware of the physical challenges posed by the lack of gravity in the space environment. Therefore, NASA and the space agencies of other countries had carefully dictated diet and exercise programs for astronauts. The study had special relevance, however, because the international space community was continuing work on the ISS and anticipating even longer stays in space.
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross reported that the Boeing Company would have to forfeit most of its profit from the ISS contract because of its nearly US$1 billion in cost overruns. NASA’s incentive-laden contract with Boeing allowed for significant bonuses for meeting timeline and cost limits. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had ordered an audit of the NASA-Boeing contract in 1999, because projected cost overages had continued to rise. Nonetheless, as Boeing neared completion of the construction of its portion of the ISS, both NASA and the aerospace giant were optimistic that cost overruns had stabilized, and that the space station hardware would perform well in space.(Tony Capaccio, “Boeing Overruns on Space Station Near $1Billion,” Los Angeles Times, 23 February 2000.)
NASA’s JPL named Thomas C. Duxbury Project Manager for JPL’s Stardust Mission, launched in February 1999 to collect a sample from Comet Wild-2 and return it to Earth. Duxbury, who had served as the Mission’s Acting Project Manager for the past year, replaced Kenneth Atkins, who had been heading a program to develop leadership for JPL’s projects. Duxbury had joined the Stardust project in 1996 as Mission Manager, responsible for navigation, mission design, the ground-data system, science-data management, and mission operations. Before working on the Stardust project, Duxbury had served on planetary mission teams, including several Mariner missions, the Mars Viking mission, Pioneer 10 and 11 to Jupiter and Saturn, Voyager 1 and 2 to the outer planets, the Soviet Phobos Mission to Mars, the Mars Observer Mission, and the Clementine Mission to study the Moon. Concurrent with his position as Stardust Project Manager, Duxbury planned to continue to serve as a member of the science teams for Mars Global Surveyor’s laser altimeter and for the ESA’s Mars Express orbiter and lander, as well as continuing as lead scientist for geodesy and cartography in the Mars Exploration Office.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recognized members of the Space Shuttle’s ice and debris inspection team for their work on 10 October, leading to the discovery of a stray 4-inch (10- centimeter) pin near the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, hours before the scheduled launch of STS- 92. In response to the find, NASA had delayed the launch for 24 hours to allow the team to retrieve the pin, thereby preventing the damage that would have ensued if the pin had been sucked into the Shuttle’s thermal protection system or into a main engine. Goldin awarded employees Gregory N. Katnik and Jorge E. Rivera NASA’s Exceptional Achievement Medal, an honor recognizing significant contributions to the mission of NASA through substantial and significant improvements in operations, efficiency, service, financial savings, science, or technology. United Space Alliance employees Michael Barber, John B. Blue, and Thomas F. Ford received NASA’s Public Service Medal, an award given to individuals who are not government employees but make exceptional contributions to NASA’s mission.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Inspection Team Rewarded for Its ‘Eagle Eyes’,” news release 00-165, 18 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-165.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
In another escalation of the increasingly tense debate over how to handle Russia’s repeated delays in building and launching the service module of the International Space Station (ISS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, if Russia did not meet a July 2000 deadline, the United States would provide a substitute module. Russia was already more than two years behind schedule, affecting the ISS’s timeline and hampering the cooperative international effort. Goldin’s decision followed Russia’s announcement of its plan to direct more resources to the failing Mir space station. Some space experts perceived Russia’s designation of scarce financial funds to Mir, rather than to the ISS, as a signal of Russia’s reluctance to participate fully in the international space consortium. In his strongest criticism to date, Goldin said of Russia’s ISS involvement: “To say we are frustrated and disappointed is an understatement . . . We want the Russians to be there, but we felt we had to be responsible custodians to keep the program on track.”(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Dictates Date for Russia on Station Port,” New York Times, 4 February 2000; Associated Press, “NASA: We’ll Launch if Russia Fails,” 4 February 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
The government of the People’s Republic of China released a document outlining its policy regarding its future human spaceflight program and satellite-launch industries. The document, which provided the outside world with information about China’s top-secret space program, described the Chinese space industry as “an integral part of the state’s comprehensive development strategy” and stated, “exploration and utilization of outer space should be for peaceful purposes and benefit the whole of mankind.” The paper provided details of China’s satellite program, stating that as of October 2000, China had developed and launched 47 satellites with a success rate of over 90 percent. China had four satellite series in operation: the Dongfanghong telecommunications series; the Fengyun meteorological series; the Shijian research and technology series; and the Ziyuan Earth-observation series, which had recently launched its first spacecraft. The paper also outlined China’s efforts toward international cooperation, notably China’s signing of an agreement with a dozen countries, including the United States, Russia, Japan, and several European countries, allowing for scientific exchange and joint development of spacecraft components, as well as for commercial launch services. To date, China had launched 27 foreign-made satellites using its Long March series of rockets.(Stephen Clark, “China Temporarily Lifts Its Veil on Its Secret Space Program,” Spaceflight Now, 24 November 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin began an official visit to Morocco to discuss space cooperation. He planned to meet with several Moroccan officials, particularly in the fields of scientific research and advanced technology, and to visit facilities in Morocco capable of launching Space Shuttles.(BBC, “Morocco: NASA Official Visits for Talks on Space Cooperation,” RTM TV (Rabat, Morocco), 9 August 2000.)
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARC’s chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASA’s astrobiology program and to establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffen’s two loves, and that “the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.”(NASA, “NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies,” news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, “Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official,” 27 November 2000.)
The National Partnership for Reinventing Government (NPR) released the results of a survey indicating that NASA employees had the highest level of job satisfaction among federal government employees. NASA employees rated very favorably in the categories of employee job satisfaction, customer orientation, making reinvention a priority, management communication, and employee participation in cross-functional teams. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the survey’s findings, stating, “I am incredibly proud of these results. They represent a strong statement of the top-to-bottom excellence of the NASA team.” NPR and the Office of Personnel Management administered the survey to understand employees’ perspectives on “reinvention and workplace issues.” When informed of NASA’s outstanding score, Keith Cowing, the editor of Nasawatch.com remarked, “I’m not at all surprised. I used to work there. I loved my job.”(NASA, “Survey Shows NASA Employees Among Most Satisfied Federal Workers,” news release 00-52, 31 March 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and H. Fisk Johnson, President of the Wisconsin-based private venture-capital company Fisk Ventures Inc. (FVI), signed an agreement to “explore a new frontier in biotechnology.” Johnson had approached NASA regarding its efforts to commercialize space activities, suggesting a partnership. NASA and FVI agreed to use NASA’s bioreactor to develop commercial medical products. The bioreactor technology creates a near- weightless environment enabling cells to grow three-dimensionally. When raised in a traditional Petri dish, growing cells are flat. FVI had formed a joint venture with In Vitro Technologies Inc., called StelSys LLC, to focus on commercializing microgravity research in areas related to biological systems. StelSys paid NASA a US$100,000 licensing fee and a royalty of 5 percent of the company’s profits, capped at US$2 million, for the rights to 13 patents for the bioreactor technology for five years. NASA planned to use the bioreactor on the ISS, and StelSys intended to use it to research infectious diseases and to develop a liver-assist device for patients in need of transplant surgery. Goldin remarked that the agreement was “a symbol of the success that can be achieved when government, private industry, and academia work together on the exploration of new frontiers for scientific, technological, and economic growth.”(NASA, “Landmark Commercial Agreement Gives Biotechnology Research a New Dimension,” news release 00- 143, 14 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-143.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Laura Heinauer, “NASA Signs First Major Contract for Private Biotech Development,” Wall Street Journal, 14 September 2000.)
William G. Fastie, known for helping establish the prestigious Johns Hopkins University space program and for inventing the spectrometer, died in Baltimore at the age of 83. Fastie, often called the father of the Hopkins space program, was one of the United States’ preeminent astrophysicists. His spectrometer, which measured the spectrum of light, helping scientists gather data about other planets, was not only innovative but also rugged enough to travel into space.(Alice Lukens, “William G. Fastie, 83, Hopkins Astrophysicist Designed Spectrometer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 17 July 2000.)
