In a letter to Acting NASA Administrator Daniel Mulville, NASA Advisory Council (NAC) issued its recommendations on the management and future development of the ISS. NAC provided the recommendations two weeks after it had received an assessment created by the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force. NASA and the OMB had created the IMCE to perform an independent external review of the ISS. In its letter, NAC stated that NASA needed to resolve budgetary and management problems with the space station. NAC also recommended that NASA clarify its scientific priorities for the ISS and focus on a reduced configuration of the ISS that could serve three crew members. However, NAC also recommended that NASA continue funding components of the ISS that could serve a larger crew, such as a lifeboat vehicle and crew quarters.(New York Times, “NASA Report Endorses Cuts at Space Station,” 21 December 2001; NASA, “NASA Advisory Council Releases Space Station Recommendations,” news release N01-76, 20 December 2001.)
The ISS Management and Cost Evaluation Task Force (IMCE) held its first meeting on 20 and 21 August at NASA Headquarters. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had created the IMCE in July 2001 to consider the ISS program’s budget and management challenges and to determine a more efficient and effective method for NASA and its partners to construct the orbiting space station. Goldin had appointed A. Thomas Young, former president of Martin Marietta, to chair the 20-member Task Force, composed of Nobel Laureates and a highly regarded surgeon. In addition, a Financial Management Team and a Cost Analysis Support Team would support the IMCE in its efforts. On 1 November 2001, the Task Force would report its findings to the NASA Advisory Council, which would, in turn, present its recommendations to the NASA Administrator for NASA’s official response.(NASA, “Space Station Program Review Team To Meet Aug. [20–21]; Reporters Invited To Attend,” news release N01-047, 16 August 2001; NASA, “NASA Administrator Announces Distinguished Team To Review International Space Station Program,” news release 01-152, 31 July 2001.)
NASA announced that it would delay Shuttle Missions STS-104 and STS-105 for several weeks because of a series of computer problems on the ISS. The computer difficulties had limited the control of the new robotic arm delivered to the ISS in April 2001. Despite the efforts of the astronauts aboard the ISS and of hundreds of experts on the ground, the malfunctions had continued to render control of the Canadian-built robotic arm impossible. NASA officials had determined that, until the situation was resolved, NASA would have to delay an Atlantis mission, scheduled for 20 June, and a Discovery mission, scheduled for 12 July, both carrying cargo that the arm must move. The delay also meant that the ISS crewYury V. Usachev, James S. Voss, and Susan J. Helmswould remain aboard ISS longer than originally planned.(Warren E. Leary, “Problems with Space Station’s Robotic Arm Delay Shuttle Visits,” New York Times, 1 June 2001; Mark Carreau, “Glitch Postpones 2 Space Station Missions,” Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2001.)
NASA announced that it had canceled the X-33 rocket development project, an endeavor that many in the space industry had hoped would produce a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. NASA ended the five-year program after having invested nearly US$1 billion in developing a reusable launching vehicle. The X-33 program, contracted to Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company, had sought to build the world’s most technologically advanced space vehicleshaped like an arrowhead and protected by a heat-resistant metallic covering. Because of its capability to ascend to space without having to drop weight by discarding boosters after launch, the new vehicle would have significantly improved on the Shuttle. NASA officials had hoped that the X- 33 would lead to development of the VentureStar vehicle, for transporting people and cargo into space. Operating at considerably less expense to NASA than the Space Shuttles, the VentureStar would permit more space missions per year. NASA’s decision to cut funding for the X-33 was part of its general effort to reduce its budget. NASA officials in charge of the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) had determined that, although the X-33 program had yielded significant new knowledge, it had not advanced to a point at which NASA engineers could readily implement the new technology. Arthur G. Stephenson, the Director of NASA’s MSFC, which had managed the program, called the decision to deny further funding “a very tough decision.”(NASA, “NASA Reaches Milestone in Space Launch Initiative Program; Also Announces No SLI Funding for X- 33 or X-34,” news release 01-31, 1 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Ends Project on Rocket Meant To Replace Space Shuttle,” New York Times, 2 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Kills $1.3 Billion Space Plane Project,” Washington Post, 2 March 2001; Los Angeles Times, “NASA Ends X-33 Project that Sought To Cut Spaceflight Costs,” 2 March 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, to honor the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks, NASA would carry American flags into space and give the flags to survivors of the attacks and families of the victims. NASA called the memorial to the people who had lost their lives in the events of 11 September “Flags for Heroes and Families.” Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to launch on 29 November 2001, would carry nearly 6,000 flags. NASA would later have the flags mounted on specially designed memorial certificates and would distribute them to survivors and to victims’ families.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Launches ‘Flags for Heroes and Families’ Campaign,” news release 01-195, 11 October 2001.)
In preparation for the final descent of the Mir space station, the Russian Space Agency negotiated a US$200 million insurance policy covering any damage that might occur if pieces of the craft landed in populated areas. Russian officials planned to fire the engines of the cargo ship attached to the space station, thereby pulling Mir from orbit and sending the space station hurtling into Earth’s atmosphere. Scientists predicted that intense heat would destroy most of the station during reentry, but that some fragments would hit Earth. Although space agencies had successfully deorbited many rockets and satellites to final resting places in the ocean, Russia faced increasing international consternation regarding the damage Mir’s reentry might cause. Japan was at higher risk from fragments of Mir than other countries, because the space station would pass over Japan in its final, low orbit.
U.S. Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta allowed privately owned and operated aircraft to use the nation’s airspace as part of a phased restoration of the national airspace system. However, the Department of Transportation would allow this category of aircraft―often referred to as general aviation―to resume flights only if they complied with certain restrictions. For example, general aviation flights would have to operate according to the Instrument Flight Rules, which required certified pilots to operate under direction from air traffic controllers subsequent to filing specific flight plans with the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). In addition, the Department of Transportation would not permit general aviation flights to fly within 25 nautical miles of New York City or Washington, DC.(FAA, “Secretary Mineta Re-opens Skies to General Aviation,” news release DOT 97-01, 14 September 2001, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsid=5432 (accessed 28 January 2010).)
John F. Yardley, who had worked at the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation, serving as the Launch Operation Manager for the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft and the Technical Director for the Gemini program before joining NASA in 1974, died at the age of 76. NASA had awarded Yardley its Public Service Medal in 1963 and in 1966 for his work on the Mercury and the Gemini. From 1981 to 1989, Yardley had been President of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Yardley “as responsible as any individual for getting the Space Shuttle Program off the ground.(NASA, “John F. Yardley, Human Space Flight Pioneer, Dies,” news release 01-130, 27 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “John Yardley, 76, Dies; Had Central Role in Space Flight,” New York Times, 28 June 2001.)
On the 15th anniversary of the launch of the Mir space station and with its doom imminent, Russian scientists and other space enthusiasts protested the plan to use a controlled descent to destroy the aging vessel. Once a point of pride for the Soviet space program, Mir had remained in use far beyond its planned lifespan and had fallen into disrepair. Russian Space Agency Chief Yuri Koptev attempted once again to explain why Mir had to come down: “The Mir has lived a wonderful life and must end it in a graceful way. We must discard it while we are still capable of controlling it, not turn its descent into roulette that threatens the entire global community.” Russia had planned to initiate Mir’s final descent in mid-March 2001.(Associated Press, “Report: Russia Puts Off Dumping of Mir for a Week,” 15 February 2001; Associated Press, “Russia Marks Mir’s 15th Anniversary by Assuaging Fears of Its Demise,” 19 February 2001; Associated Press, “Scientists Protest on Mir’s 15th Anniversary,” 20 February 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and President of the Italian Space Agency Sergio DeJulio signed a framework for cooperation agreement for the construction of the habitation module for the ISS. The ISS partners planned the module to house the ISS crew, providing a galley and a Treadmill Vibration Isolation System among other features. In exchange for designing and manufacturing the habitation module, the Italian Space Agency received a commitment from NASA to provide Italian astronauts with access to the Shuttle and the ISS, as well as to help train Italian astronauts for their time in space. The bilateral agreement continued the trend of cooperation among nations, making the ISS a truly international endeavor.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Goldin and ASI President Dejulio To Sign Framework for Cooperation,” news release N01-24, 19 April 2001; NASA Watch, “NASA/ASI International Space Station Habitation Module Project Framework for Cooperation,” http://www.nasawatch.com/iss/04.19.01.nasa.asi.hab.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
NASA, conducting a test over the Pacific Ocean, aborted a planned attempt at the speed record for aircraft when the Pegasus rocket carrying a prototype X-43A jet veered out of control. NASA had employed a B-52 to carry the X-43A and the Pegasus rocket to 45,000 feet, where the test was to begin. According to the plan, the plane would release the Pegasus, which would then carry the X-43A to 100,000 feet (30,500 meters) before releasing the jet. Instead, however, the Pegasus rocket had gone out of control almost immediately after its release. NASA spokesperson Alan Brown explained: “The Pegasus went out of control. It appeared parts were breaking off of it.” NASA ordered the Pegasus destroyed after only a few seconds, and the ensuing explosion resulted in the loss of the scramjet as well. NASA officials and flight enthusiasts had hoped that the US$185 million experimental plane would top speeds of Mach 7. Instead, engineers scrambled to determine the cause of the accident.(Peter Pae, “Hypersonic Aircraft Test Fails; Plane Is Destroyed,” Los Angeles Times, 3 June 2001; New York Times, “NASA Halts Scramjet Test,” 3 June 2001; Washington Post, “NASA Aborts Bid for Speed Mark, Blows Up Rocket,” 3 June 2001.)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASA’s global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASA’s JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deere’s NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm,” news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of Viking 1 Lander’s safe descent to the surface of Mars. The successful mission, marking the first time that humankind had sent a spacecraft to the Red Planet and the first landing of an American probe on another planet, inaugurated a series of research-oriented missions to Mars. In celebrating this banner day in its history, NASA looked forward to new challenges and opportunities for the study of Mars. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin delivered a keynote address, “Continuing the QuestCelebrating Viking and Looking to the Future of Mars Exploration,” at the National Geographic Society’s Grosvenor Auditorium in Washington, DC. Viking 1 Lander had remained on Mars for six years, gathering images and data invaluable for scientists. Following up on the success of the first probe, Viking 2 Lander had arrived on Mars’s Plain of Utopia in September 1976. The two probes had taken more than 4,500 pictures while slowly crawling over Mars’s surface. Perhaps as significant as the finds of Viking 1 and 2 on Mars was the fact that the probes did not find any evidence of life on the Red Planet. NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) had equipped both probes with biological sensors, setting a precedent for future probes to other planets to continue the search for signs of life outside of Earth. As NASA celebrated the pathbreaking Viking missions, the 2001 Mars Odyssey traveled toward the Red Planet to continue the tradition of exploring Mars’s hostile but fascinating landscape.
The Task Force assigned to assess NASA’s management of the ISS program released a report of its findings and recommendations. NASA and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) had established the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force to analyze the space station’s cost, budget, and management and to recommend how the numerous space agencies supporting the project could derive maximum benefit from their investment. The Task Force’s report stated that, although the ISS program’s technical achievements to date had been extraordinary, problems concerning the program’s budget, management, and other matters threatened future development of the ISS. In addition, the IMCE Task Force recommended numerous changes to establish a core-complete program for the ISS, including altering program management; identifying and applying additional funding; and implementing more clearly defined programs to build the ISS so that its crew would be able to conduct high-priority research at the space station. With regard to maximizing research under the proposed FY 2002 budget, the Task Force recommended establishing research priorities, implementing a plan to execute them, and allocating more ISS crew time to high-priority research.(NASA, “Report by the International Space Station Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force to the NASA Advisory Council” (report, Washington, DC, 1 November 2001), http://history.nasa.gov/youngrep.pdf (accessed 26 November 2008).)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the world’s leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the company’s missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Society’s Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, “Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist,” Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, “International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
NASA collaborated with George Washington University’s Space Policy Institute to host a symposium commemorating 40 years of human spaceflight, an era that had dawned with Alan B. Shepard Jr.’s 15-minute suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin opened the conference, followed at the speaker’s podium by astronauts and space experts. The conference, “Looking Backward, Looking Forward,” provided a valuable forum, not only for discussing the accomplishments of the United States’ space program, but also for considering space exploration’s possible future evolution.(NASA, “NASA Conference To Commemorate 40 Years of Human Space Flight,” news release N01-28, 1 May 2001; NASA and Space Policy Institute, “Looking Backward, Looking Forward: Forty Years of U.S. Human Spaceflight,” (program, symposium organized by Space Policy Institute, Elliott School of International Affairs, George Washington University, in collaboration with NASA History Office, NASA Office of Policy and Plans, American Astronautical Society, and National Space Society, Washington, DC, 8 May 2001), http://history.nasa.gov/40hsconf.pdf (accessed 29 July 2008).)
The Mars Odyssey spacecraft launched successfully aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The craft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems and controlled by scientists at NASA’s JPL, had headed to orbit Mars in search of evidence of water on the Red Planet. NASA officials expected the trip to Mars to take more than six months and the data collection to continue for more than two years. NASA had designed Mars Odysseyequipping it with a thermal-emissions imaging system, a gamma- ray spectrometer, and a radiation monitorto investigate further the question of whether Mars might have once supported life. By collecting data about the climate and geology of Mars’s surface, scientists hoped to explore theories regarding the planet’s seemingly harsh climate change. NASA and members of the scientific community watched the US$300 million craft closely, hoping for success. In 1999 Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander had both failed to accomplish their missions. Upon the successful launch, NASA’s chief Mars program scientist celebrated: “We’ve got a program! This is the next step . . . It’s kind of like setting off on the Lewis and Clark voyage across North America. We’re bound for a new frontier.”(Lockheed Martin Space Systems, “Lockheed Martin-Built 2001 Mars Odyssey Successfully Launched, Begins Journey to Mars,” news release, 7 April 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/ LockheedMartinBuilt2001MarsOdysseyS.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Harwood, “Mars Odyssey Takes Off for Red Planet; NASA’s Stalled Exploration Program Resumes with $297 Million Mission,” Washington Post, 8 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Flawless Odyssey Launch Fuels Hoe: Three-Year Mission to Mars Follows Pair of NASA Failures,” Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Succeeds in Launching Craft To Survey Mars Anxious Time Ahead for Scientists,” 8 April 2001.)
The People’s Republic of China launched a robotic spacecraft from the Gobi desert, a significant step in the country’s long-term plan to join the United States and Russia as one of the only nations capable of sending humans into space. The Shenzhou 2 craft reached orbit about 10 minutes after launch. China had shrouded its 31-year-old space program in secrecy, releasing few details about funding or about China’s future goals. People’s Daily, however, called the launch “an important step in realizing manned spaceflight.” President Jiang Zemin urged Chinese space officials to further accomplishments, saying, “I hope you will work persistently and unremittingly to achieve even greater victory.” Space experts speculated that a successful Shenzhou 2 mission could mean that China would be ready to send a man or woman to space in the next two to five years. Chinese officials remained circumspect regarding their exact plans.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program,” 11 January 2001; Associated Press, “Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth,” 16 January 2001.)
The government of France named NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin as Officer of the Legion of Honor, the country’s highest award. Napoleon had created the Legion of Honor in 1802 to honor civil and military service to France. The award honored Goldin for his contribution to the cooperation of France and the United States in space endeavors. NASA and the French space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales, had collaborated on Earth observation and Mars exploration, and French astronauts had flown on the Space Shuttle. Ambassador François Bujon de l’Éstang presented the award to Goldin at the residence of the French Ambassador.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Receives French Legion of Honor Award,” news release 01-202, 31 October 2001.)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASA’s Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silverstein’s work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States’ first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for “technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASA’s “true founding members,” who had made possible NASA’s robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, “Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies,” news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program,” New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA,” 4 June 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canada’s contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISS’s exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crew―Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakov―included astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttle’s fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, “Endeavour’s International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand,” news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, “Endeavour’s Mission Will Extend Space Station’s Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19,” news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
Spain’s Prince of Asturias Foundation granted the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation to the ISS partnership, in recognition of the cooperation among the partnering space agencies that had created the orbiting space station. The Prince of Asturias Felipe de Borbón was the heir to the throne of Spain. The foundation granted the Award for International Cooperation to recognize the cultural, humanitarian, scientific, social, and technical efforts of individuals, groups, and institutions. The prince presented the award to officials representing the space agencies participating in the ISS, namely the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. Earlier in the day, the prince had called the astronauts at the ISS to congratulate them on their efforts.(NASA, “International Space Station Receives 2001 Prince of Asturias Award,” news release 01-206, 26 October 2001; Fundación Príncipe de Asturias, “The Aims of the Foundation,” http://www.fundacionprincipedeasturias.org/ing/00/objetivos.html (accessed 28 November 2008).)
The ISS Partnership agreed to allow space tourist Dennis A. Tito to travel to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TM-32, scheduled to launch at the end of April. The agreement among the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States followed months of disagreement regarding the safety and propriety of allowing the wealthy American businessman to purchase passage into space for US$20 million. Without conferring with NASA or with other members of the ISS Partnership, the Russian Space Agency had made an agreement with Tito permitting him to take a place on Russia’s Soyuz spacecraft. NASA had protested against including an individual who was not a trained astronaut on the spaceflight at such an early point in the ISS’s development. After Russia had reached the agreement with Tito, he had undergone months of training. The ISS Partnership required Tito to sign a waiver absolving NASA of any liability for his safety and required him to promise that he would pay for anything he damaged. The ISS Partnership also announced plans to formalize the criteria for future visits to the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Deal Reported in Long-Running Dispute on Putting Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 April 2000; NASA, “International Space Station Partnership Grants Flight Exemption for Dennis Tito,” news release 01-83, 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Continues To Resist Visit by First Tourist,” 15 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Financier’s Spaceflight Gets Final Clearance,” Washington Post, 25 April 2001.)
NASA named Daniel R. Mulville as Acting Administrator, to serve until the U.S. Senate had officially confirmed a new Administrator. Mulville was to replace previous NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin while Sean O’Keefe―President George W. Bush’s nominee for the position―was awaiting Senate confirmation. Before becoming Acting Administrator, Mulville had served as Associate Deputy Administrator for NASA since the beginning of 2000. Mulville, who had a PhD in structural mechanics, had begun working at NASA in 1986.(NASA History Division, “Biographies of NASA Administrators: Daniel R. Mulville,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/mulville.htm (accessed 19 December 19, 2008).)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Sean O’Keefe as NASA’s Administrator. With the confirmation, O’Keefe replaced Daniel S. Goldin as Administrator and, at the age of 45, became the youngest person ever to lead NASA. Before becoming NASA’s Administrator, O’Keefe had served as Deputy Director of OMB, a post he had held since March 2001. O’Keefe had also served as Secretary of the Navy under former President George H. W. Bush.(Kristen Mack and Mark Carreau, “Senate Approves O’Keefe as NASA Administrator, Hammond as NEA Head,” Houston Chronicle, 21 December 2001.)
Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 572, 1 July 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx572.html (accessed 4 August 2008). The mission called for the astronauts to attach the new American-made Joint Airlock to the ISS and to conduct important repairs to the station during three separate spacewalks. The design of the new airlock permitted the ISS crew access to and from space, wearing either Russian or American spacesuits. During the days leading up to the launch, Mission Specialist Michael L. Gernhardt explained: “The term Joint Airlock means that it’s applicable to both the U.S. [space]suit, the EMU [Extravehicular Mobility Unit], and to the Russian suit, the Orlan suit. The main objectives of our flight are to install four High Pressure Gas Tanksthat would be two oxygen, two nitrogento activate and check out the airlock and then to make the first spacewalk from the Joint Airlock and demonstrate the viability of the whole process and sort of usher in the space station era of EVA.”(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573, 1 August 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx573.html (accessed 11 August 2008); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Crew To Install Airlock, Expanding Capabilities,” Washington Post, 13 July 2001; NASA, “NASA Prepares To Open a New Doorway to Space,” news release 01-138, 9 July 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin received the Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy presented by the National Space Club, one of the United States’ most prestigious space awards. Leaders from the aerospace industry, governmental space programs, and academics had selected Goldin for the award. “I am both honored and humbled by the award which validates and supports NASA’s continuing mission to pioneer the frontiers of space,” Goldin remarked upon receiving the honor.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Receives Premier Space Honor,” news release 01-61, 30 March 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his resignation, effective 17 November 2001. Goldin, who had become the head of NASA on 1 April 1992, was NASA’s longest-serving Administrator. During his tenure, Goldin had overseen numerous successes for NASA, including the launch of Mars Pathfinder, the repair of the HST, and the redesign of the ISS. Goldin stated that he was leaving for personal reasons and that he had accepted an interim position at the Council on Competitiveness, an organization promoting U.S. economic competitiveness, both at home and abroad. However, newspapers noted that Goldin had made the announcement during a time of budgetary difficulties for NASA. Moreover, media reported that White House officials had already sought candidates to replace Goldin, although, according to NASA, President George W. Bush had not yet selected his replacement.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Announces Resignation,” news release 01-191, 17 October 2001; William Harwood, “NASA Chief to Step Down,” Washington Post, 18 October 2001.)
