The Office of Space Flight at NASA Headquarters decided that Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California would no longer perform major modifications to Space Shuttle orbiters. Instead, NASA’s KSC, already responsible for preparing the Shuttles for launching, would also provide the modifications. The Palmdale facility had served as the manufacturing site for all orbiters since the Space Shuttle program’s inception, as well as providing periodic maintenance and safety upgrades. Based on cost and risk assessments, the Office of Space Flight had determined that maintaining two modification facilities for four Shuttle orbiters was no longer financially feasible, and that performing such work at KSC would minimize associated costs and risks. The change was part of NASA’s effort to absorb President George W. Bush’s proposed budget cuts. Because it overhauled one of the four Shuttle orbiters every two to three years, NASA estimated that transferring this work to KSC would save approximately US$30 million per overhaul.(NASA, “Kennedy Space Center To Perform Shuttle Modifications,” news release 02-22, 5 February 2002; Mark Carreau, “NASA To Overhaul Shuttles in Florida,” Houston Chronicle, 6 February 2002.)
NASA officials stated that NASA had used Web sites such as Yahoo! and eBay to find discontinued electronic equipment. NASA had continued to use electronic components such as 8-inch-floppy-disc drives, circuit boards, and computer chips, not in the Space Shuttles themselves, but in equipment used to service and support the Shuttles. For example, NASA had purchased outdated medical equipment to acquire the increasingly scarce Intel 8086 computer chip, a variant of the chip used in IBM’s first personal computers in 1981. NASA had continued to use the Intel 8086 chip in diagnostic equipment for the Space Shuttle booster rockets, also developed in the early 1980s. Although NASA planned to develop various systems with new hardware, some crucial systems remained dependent on antiquated electronic parts.(William J. Broad, “For Parts, NASA Boldly Goes . . . on Ebay,” New York Times, 12 May 2002.)
The White House informed NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe that it was withdrawing Major General Charles F. Bolden as its nominee for NASA’s Deputy Administrator. According to a White House spokesperson, President George W. Bush had withdrawn the nomination so that Bolden could serve the military in the war on terrorism. At the time of the nomination, Bolden, a former astronaut, was the commanding general for the Third U.S. Marine Aircraft Wing, which had nearly 11,000 U.S. Marines in Afghanistan as part of Operation Enduring Freedom.(NASA, “Deputy Administrator Nomination Withdrawn,” news release 02-49, 13 March 2002; Mark Carreau and Bennett Roth, “Nomination Is Withdrawn for Deputy’s Post at NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 14 March 2002.)
The five partner space agencies of the ISSthe Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency approved the 2002 Program Action Plan for the ISS at a meeting held in Tokyo, Japan. The partner agencies agreed to expand the station’s capabilities, to increase the number of permanent ISS crew members, and to provide additional crew rescue vehicles. They also agreed to a process for selecting an ISS configuration, once the ISS had accommodated the remaining components. In this process, each of the station’s partner agencies would make additional programmatic and technical assessments, cost estimations, and internal budget reviews. In addition, the agencies announced that they would approve a station configuration option by March 2003, select a revised configuration by June or July 2003, and agree upon a final configuration by December 2003.(NASA, “Space Station Action Plan Approved,” news release 02-241, 6 December 2002.)
NASA selected the National Consortium for Aviation Mobility (NCAM)a consortium of more than 100 public and private entities involved in transportation issuesas its partner in a joint venture to develop air-mobility technologies for small aircraft and small airports. By mid-2005 NASA and NCAM intended to create a flight demonstration, called a proof-of-concept, of NASA’s Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS). Engineers planned for the system to provide on-demand, point-to-point transportation with 4- to 10-passenger aircraft operating from nearly 5,400 public-use landing facilities. NASA officials hoped SATS would improve the affordability, efficiency, reliability, and safety of small aircraft servicing small communities throughout the United States. However, NASA wanted to determine the project’s feasibility and to share its costs through partnerships with public and private entities. NASA expected that funding from the Department of Transportation and other federal agencies, along with its own contributions, would total nearly US$40 million for research over four years.(NASA, “NASA Selects Partner for Aviation Research,” news release 02-89, 14 May 2002.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space began hearings on legislation to reauthorize NASA programs. Subcommittee chairman Ron Wyden (D–OR) expressed concern about the agency’s financial management, particularly cost overruns for the ISS. He also urged NASA to maintain the excellence of the Shuttle program while research continued on a next-generation space vehicle. Members of the subcommittee heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, who addressed them for the first time, and from William F. Readdy, Deputy Associate Administrator of the NASA Office of Space Flight. The members of the subcommittee questioned O’Keefe about his vision for NASA and his plans to reduce NASA’s budget by ending particular programs. In his prepared statement, O’Keefe discussed the status of the ISS and Space Shuttle programs.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, NASA Reauthorization, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 May 2002; Karen Masterson, “JSC Mission May Hit Detour,” Houston Chronicle, 9 May 2002.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Frederick D. Gregory as NASA’s Deputy Administrator, making Gregory the first African American to serve as NASA’s second-in-command. Before becoming Deputy Administrator, Gregory had served as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Flight from December 2001 to August 2002 and as Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance from June 1992 to December 2001. In addition, Gregory had been an astronaut on three Shuttle missions and had served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years.(Kelly Young, “Senate Names New NASA Official,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 August 2002; NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory,” http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/gregory_bio.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
NASA officials announced the delay of the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113, scheduled for 21 July. Engineers had discovered fuel-line cracks, the same problem that had previously led NASA to ground some Space Shuttles. At the time of the announcement, NASA officials remained uncertain of the new date of Endeavour’s launch, suggesting that, although the Shuttle would be ready to fly by September 2002, NASA might delay the launch until at least the end of 2002.(Warren E. Leary, “Delay Likely for Shuttle Mission with Israeli,” New York Times, 20 July 2002.)
NASA announced that it would keep all four Space Shuttles grounded until at least September 2002 because of potentially dangerous fractures discovered in the fuel lines of all four Shuttles. NASA officials also reported that engineers now considered the cracks less of a safety concern than they had feared when NASA first discovered them in June 2002.(William Harwood, “NASA Grounds Space Shuttle Fleet over Fuel Line Cracks,” Washington Post, 13 July 2002.)
In a meeting with reporters, newly appointed NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe emphasized that, although he wanted NASA to remain at the forefront of science and technology, he also wanted to address NASA’s financial and management problems. O’Keefe, who had received the U.S. Senate’s confirmation on 20 December 2001, said he would spend the next few months learning about NASA. Explaining that he wanted both to refocus NASA and to keep it within its budget, O’Keefe did not rule out the possibility of closing field centers and laying off employees to achieve his objectives. However, he stressed that he considered the budgetary problems of the ISS his immediate concern, and that he would first devote his attention to implementing the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation Task Force’s (IMCE’s) recommendation to scale back the ISS, at least temporarily, to reduce costs.(Warren E. Leary, “New NASA Administrator Says Money Troubles Are Solvable,” New York Times, 9 January 2002; William Harwood, “Panel Urges Space Station Reforms,” Washington Post, 3 November 2001; NASA, “People: Former NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe,” http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/AN_Feature_Administrator.html (accessed 31 July 2008).)
James S. Martin, former NASA Manager of the Viking missions to Mars, died at the age of 81. Martin had led the nationwide team of 750 engineers, scientists, and technicians that had developed the Viking 1 and Viking 2 spacecraft. The two craft had launched in 1975 and landed on Mars a year later, making Viking the first mission to successfully soft-land on the surface of another planet. Martin had joined NASA in 1964 as an Assistant Project Manager for the Lunar Orbiter, and in 1967 he had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for his contribution to that project. He had departed from NASA in 1976 to work for Martin Marietta Aerospace, and in 2000 NASA had asked him to leave retirement to lead its effort to restructure its Mars Exploration Program.(NASA, “Mars Viking Leader, James S. Martin Jr. Dies,” news release 02-72, 18 April 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that, after international partners had completed certain portions of the ISS, former schoolteacher Barbara R. Morgan would fly on a Space Shuttle mission to the station. NASA had selected Morgan as a mission specialist in the astronaut class of 1998. She had subsequently worked in ISS Mission Control, relaying instructions between ISS Mission Control and the crew of Expedition 4 aboard the ISS. Morgan had previously served as a backup candidate for the Teacher in Space Program, training with Christa McAuliffe and the STS-51L crew of Space Shuttle Challenger. At the time of O’Keefe’s announcement, Morgan was part of a new Educator Astronaut Program administered by NASA and the Department of Education, designed to attract students to engineering, math, and science.(NASA, “Press Briefing Scheduled with NASA Administrator and Astronaut Barbara Morgan,” news release N02-28, 15 April 2002; William Harwood, “McAuliffe’s Backup Will Go to Space in 2004,” Washington Post, 13 April 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that Peggy A. Whitson would be NASA’s first ISS Science Officer. In the future, NASA planned to assign one of its astronauts to the post for each ISS expedition crew. The objective of the assignment was to increase the ISS’s emphasis on research. According to NASA, the ISS Science Officer would focus initially on U.S. research conducted on the ISS. As the station’s research capabilities expanded in the future, NASA would discuss with the ISS’s international partners the possibility of expanding the ISS Science Officer’s role. NASA’s ISS Science Officer would be responsible for working with the U.S. research community on the requirements and objectives of ISS experiments, acting as the point- of-contact between ISS crew and NASA-sponsored principal investigators, payload developers, and other ISS stakeholders. As a crew member of Expedition 5 in June 2002, Whitson, who had a PhD in biochemistry, would become the first resident scientist on the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names Whitson First NASA ISS Science Officer,” news release 02-175, 16 September 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, which has primary jurisdiction for setting NASA’s annual funding levels. The subcommittee hearing was held in preparation for markup of FY 2003 appropriations legislation. Major media reported that subcommittee members were critical of NASA’s plans to eliminate certain programs to achieve President George W. Bush’s proposed reduction of US$1 billion in funding from NASA’s human spaceflight programs. In response to the comments of some members of the subcommittee, O’Keefe noted that, because NASA planned to complete its review of human spaceflight programs later in the year, he could not yet identify the programs that the budget cuts would affect. O’Keefe also said that NASA would provide Congress with a review of its scientific priorities by June and an independent cost assessment by August.(Karen Masterson, “DeLay Calls Plans for NASA ‘Timid’,” Houston Chronicle, 18 April 2002; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Apropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations for 2003, Part I, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 17 April 2002.)
The National Research Council (NRC), the research arm of the National Academy of Sciences, released a report on the ISS, outlining NASA’s efforts to limit cost overruns on the project. The report concluded that, if NASA proceeded with its plans to halt construction, once the ISS’s core was complete, and to limit the station’s crew, equipment, and other components, the ISS would be unlikely to become a first-class laboratory. NRC reported that capping the crew to three persons would have a highly detrimental impact on the quality of scientific research conducted on board the ISS, because a crew of such a small size would have to devote most of its time to station maintenance and operation. In addition, NRC stated that NASA had made its decision to cancel or delay equipment for experiments without assessing scientific priorities or determining which research plans the curtailments would affect most. NASA’s official representative responded that NASA was committed to building the ISS beyond the core-complete stage. Moreover, NASA intended to continue developing the ISS based on decisions concerning the station’s scientific priorities and planned to take any steps necessary to achieve those goalsfor example, increasing the size of the station’s crew.(Warren E. Leary, “Cuts Lessen Space Station’s Value to Science, Report Says,” New York Times, 20 September 2002.)
GAO released a report examining NASA’s established mechanisms for learning lessons from past failures. The report, “NASA: Better Mechanisms for Sharing Lessons Learned,” noted that NASA’s investigations of its past failures and its evaluations of its programs had led it to establish various mechanisms to ensure that NASA’s personnel had learned from past successes and failures and had applied their knowledge to future programs and projects. These mechanisms included a Web-based database of lessons learned, program reviews, and the development of a business strategy called knowledge management. However, GAO’s report also noted that, according to interviews with NASA managers, NASA’s established policies, procedures, and systems were not facilitating the use of lessons learned. GAO indicated that this was largely because managers faced challenges, such as lack of time to note, submit, and share lessons learned, and cultural barriers, such as reluctance to discuss mistakes for fear of their colleagues’ disapproval. Among the report’s main recommendations were that NASA develop a strong managerial commitment to sharing knowledge and create technological systems capable of facilitating access to this information.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA: Better Mechanisms Needed for Sharing Lessons Learned” (report no. GAO-02-195, Washington, DC, January 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02195.pdf (accessed 31 July 2002). 181 NASA, “Aging NASA Spacecraft To Reenter Earth’s Atmosphere,” news release 02-16, 29 January 2002; NASA, “EUVE Spacecraft Re-enters Earth’s Atmosphere,” news release 02-19, 31 January 2002; NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “EUVE Guest Observer FacilityThe Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Mission,” http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/euve/euvegof.html (accessed 30 July 2002).)
The Research Maximization and Prioritization Task Force (ReMAP) presented the executive summary of its external review to the NASA Advisory Council. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had created ReMAP in March 2002 to recommend strategies that NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) could use to achieve its research goals within budgetary limits. Among its recommendations, ReMAP suggested that the ISS include a chief science officer on board, and that NASA increase the ISS’s equipment, the ISS crew’s work time, and the frequency of Shuttle flights, to enable the crew to conduct first-rate research aboard the station.(NASA, “ReMaP Task Force Recognized by NASA Administrator and NASA Advisory Council Chair,” news release 02-123, 10 July 2002; Warren E. Leary, “Panel Asserts Reduced Space Station Plans Will Limit Scientific Work,” New York Times, 11 July 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced his selection of an independent task force to assess the productivity and priorities of the research produced by NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) and to provide a report to the NASA Advisory Council. O’Keefe expected the task force, designated the Research Maximization and Prioritization Task Force (ReMAP), to recommend strategies the OBPR could use to achieve its research goals and still remain within President George W. Bush’s requested budget. In addition, O’Keefe requested the task force to offer assessments and recommendations to guide NASA in maximizing the scientific returns of the ISS’s missions and of its other programs. O’Keefe selected Rae Silver, the Helene L. and Mark N. Kaplan Professor of Natural and Physical Sciences at Columbia University, as the chairperson of ReMAP.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names Task Force To Review Biological and Physical Research Programs,” news release 02-61, 29 March 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs’ budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle,” news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post,” 16 May 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although O’Keefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
Citing terrorism concerns, NASA officials stated that NASA planned to change the manner in which it released information about launch times to the public. NASA officials said that NASA would no longer publicize launch times until 24 hours before liftoff, at which time NASA would announce a 4-hour time slot during which liftoff would occur. The change was a reversal of NASA’s previous practice of announcing specific launch times months in advance of liftoff.(Steve Siceloff, “NASA To Withhold Shuttle Launch Times,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 March 2002. 64)
NASA announced the selection of TRW Inc. to lead the team to build the HST’s successor, a new space-based observatory planned to launch in 2010. NASA planned to call the new satellite the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), in honor of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Under the US$824.8 million contract, TRW and its partner organizations would build an observatory capable of viewing deeper into space than the HST. The telescope’s main mirror would unfold to a diameter of at least 20 feet (6.1 meters), thereby providing six times more light-gathering area than the HST, which had an 8-foot (2.4-meter) primary mirror. The telescope would also have instruments highly sensitive to infrared light, which would help astronomers understand the universe’s creation and evolution. In addition, NASA planned for the new telescope to orbit 940,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth, within the second Lagrange point or L2, where a spacecraft maintains a balance between the gravity of the Sun and of Earth. Although the L2 orbit would be too far from Earth to allow astronauts to service the observatory, it would enable the observatory to cool to very low temperatures without the use of complex refrigeration equipment.(NASA, “NASA Announces Contract for Next-Generation Space Telescope Named After Space Pioneer,” news release 02-171, 10 September 2002.)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearingNASA Workforce and Management Challengesto garner information about NASA’s efforts to address concerns regarding its human capital, competitive sourcing for the Space Shuttle program, and other matters. Committee members heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe; David M. Walker, Comptroller General of the United States; and Mark D. Roth, General Counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees. O’Keefe discussed NASA’s Strategic Human Capital Plan, a systemic method of managing human capital according to NASA’s vision and mission. In addition, O’Keefe announced the termination of the comprehensive Strategic Resources Review initiated during the Clinton administration to create a blueprint for NASA’s future facility, missions, and workforce requirements. Roth argued that, because NASA expected a high number of retirements in the near future, its existing and proposed personnel policies were inadequate to address the resulting loss in human capital. Walker discussed methods NASA could use to strengthen its human capital and to address its difficulties with contract management, as well as the increasing expense of the ISS program and of space exploration.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Workforce and Management Challenges, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 18 July 2002, http://science.house.gov/publications/hearings_markups_details.aspx?NewsID=1424 (accessed 21 August 2008 through Lexis-Nexis Congressional); Larry Wheeler, “O’Keefe Scraps Review of NASA,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 July 2002.)
The leaders of the space agencies participating in the ISS met at ESA’s headquarters in Paris to discuss the program’s status. The attendees included representatives of NASA, the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. All of the agencies reaffirmed their commitment to work on developing, assembling, and using the ISS for both applied and scientific research. In addition, the agencies agreed on a timeline for the next measures they would undertake to ensure that the construction and operation of the ISS met system engineering and safety requirements, so that participants could use it for various research objectives.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 02-105, 3 June 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of two proposals for space missions for its Earth System Science Pathfinder small-satellite program, developed to research Earth’s carbon cycle and the relationship of climate change and oceans. Specifically, the selected proposals would support the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO), which would provide global measurements of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and the Aquarius mission, which would map salt concentrations on oceans’ surfaces to learn how they affect ocean circulation and global heat redistribution. NASA planned to provide up to US$175 million for each of the two proposals selected for the program. NASA appointed David Crisp of JPL as Principal Investigator for the OCO mission and Chester J. “Chet” Koblinsky of GSFC as Principal Investigator for the Aquarius mission. NASA had numerous university, corporate, and international collaborators for both missions, including the Argentine Space Program, a significant partner in the Aquarius mission.
NASA announced that it had grounded all four Space Shuttles because of newly discovered mechanical problems, postponing indefinitely the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia. Previously, NASA had scheduled Columbia’s launch for 19 July 2002. According to NASA officials, engineers had found small fissures in metal liners within the fuel pipes of the main engines of Shuttles Atlantis and Discovery. If left unrepaired, the cracks could cause pieces of the liners to break off, possibly damaging a Shuttle’s engine while in flight.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded To Fix Cracks,” New York Times, 26 June 2002.)
The ISS’s international partners made several decisions during a meeting held in Houston, Texas. The meeting’s purpose was to discuss the provision of crew return vehicles (CRVs) for the ISS and plans for the station’s construction, through 2008. NASA announced that the collaborating space agencies had agreed to a modified launch schedule for components provided by Canada, Japan, and ESA. In addition, they had discussed the possibility of Russia’s continuing to provide Soyuz CRVs until NASA had completed the construction of a replacement vehicle.(John Kelly, “International Space Station Partners OK Modified Launch Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 October 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Jeremiah F. Creedon, Director of NASA’s LaRC, as the new Associate Administrator for the Office of Aerospace Technology at NASA Headquarters. Creedon had begun working at LaRC in June 1963 as an engineer, eventually succeeding Paul F. Holloway to become LaRC’s seventh director. Delma C. Freeman Jr., LaRC’s Deputy Director, became its Acting Director.(NASA LaRC, “NASA Administrator Names Langley Director Associate Administrator of Aerospace Technology,” news release 02-037, 14 May 2002; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
