The GAO presented testimony to the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space regarding the impact of the Shuttle fleet’s grounding on ISS construction and maintenance. Based on a GAO report published in September, a report that the full Senate committee had requested, GAO testified that the grounding of the Shuttle fleet would increase the cost of completing the ISS and could expose the station’s two-person crew to additional risk. NASA had originally estimated the cost of the ISS at US$10 billion, but since 1985, the U.S. Congress had appropriated US$32 billion to the project. The Bush administration had cancelled several planned ISS modules in 2001, to offset US$4 billion in cost overruns. Since the grounding of the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, several components of the station―completed and ready to launch―had reached their storage limit, necessitating their replacement or refurbishment. The inability to ferry heavy items to the ISS had hampered NASA’s ability to correct known safety concerns, such as the delivery of additional shielding to protect the ISS crew dormitory from orbital debris. Furthermore, NASA had estimated that the probability of space debris penetrating ISS living quarters increased by 1.6 percent for each year that the ISS partners postponed installing new shielding. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had requested the report from GAO. Members of Congress had repeatedly asked NASA to provide financial details about the effect of the Columbia accident on the ISS program. However, GAO’s September report stated that neither NASA nor GAO could accurately estimate the costs associated with the grounded Shuttle fleet. GAO testified that it would be able to make such an estimate once NASA had identified precisely when Shuttle flights would resume. NASA officials agreed with GAO’s findings.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Shuttle Fleet’s Safe Return to Flight is Key to Space Station Progress” (report no. GAO-04-201T, Washington, DC, 29 October 2003), 1–11, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04201t.pdf (accessed 8 May 2009); Marc Carreau, “Costs Up for Space Station, Report Says,” Houston Chronicle, 15 October 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Report: Shuttle’s Absence Hurts ISS, GAO Claims Station Is in ‘Survival Mode’,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 October 2003.)
NASA officials and a CAIB spokesperson stated that NASA had recovered intact, from a field in Texas, the Orbital Experiment Support System, an electronic box containing vital information from Space Shuttle Columbia’s descent. NASA had designed the system to activate at about 400,000 feet, when Earth’s atmosphere first affects the Shuttle. The box contained data that the Shuttle had not transmitted to NASA’s Mission Control via telemetry.(CNN, “Crucial Columbia Part Found,” 20 March 2003.)
A 66-foot-high (20-meter-high) VLS-1 O3 rocket exploded on its launchpad during tests at Alcântara Launch Center in Brazil, delivering “a serious blow to Brazil’s nascent space program.” Brazil had hoped to be the first Latin American nation to place a satellite in orbit. According to the Brazilian Ministry of Defence, the accident, which occurred three days before a scheduled launch, killed 21 people, mostly civilian technicians, injured 20 others, and destroyed two research satellites. The rocket had successfully completed two days of tests before the explosion. Brazil’s Minister of Defence José Veigas Filho stated that, for unknown reasons, one of the four main motors of the US$2.2 million rocket had ignited, leading to the explosion that destroyed the launchpad. The accident was Brazil’s third failed attempt to launch a rocket with a research satellite.(“Brazil’s Rocket Test Kills 21,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 August 2003; Stan Lehman, “Brazil Mourns Dead, Vows to Reinforce Space Program,” Houston Chronicle, 25 August 2003.)
The Partnership for Public Service announced the results of the first survey measuring employee satisfaction in the federal government, conducted several months before the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. The survey results ranked NASA first, overall, among 28 major government agencies; NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, ranked first, and its JSC in Houston, Texas, ranked second, among 200 smaller divisions. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe attended a news conference to publicize the results of the survey, describing the findings as a “proud day” for NASA. O’Keefe remarked that, although NASA was in the midst of working through the tragedy of the Columbia accident, the survey results established that NASA had a “very good foundation upon which to work.”(Mark Carreau and Megh Duwati, “Federal Employees Rate NASA Tops,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2003; Jeffrey McMurray for the Associated Press, “Huntsville Space Center Named Best Federal Place To Work,” 12 November 2003; David Lerman, “Study: It’s Good To Be at NASA Langley,” Hampton Roads Daily Press (VA), 13 November 2003.)
Senator John McCain (R-AZ), chair of the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, and U.S. Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY), chair of the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, cochaired a joint hearing of congressional leaders, focusing on the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. Recommendations resulting from the hearing prompted NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe to issue a second amendment to the charter of the Space Shuttle Accident Investigation Board, an independent panel led by retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr. and known as the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) or, informally, as the Gehman Board. The amendment removed any requirement, real or perceived, instructing Gehman to “coordinate or await approval from NASA for any dimension of the panel’s investigation.”(NASA, “Joint Congressional Hearing Results in Second Charter Amendment for Gehman Board Columbia Accident Briefing,” news release 03-069, 12 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03069.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
The CAIB questioned NASA flight managers and tank engineers about damage from launch debris―a key concern of the CAIB―during 4 hours of technical testimony at a public hearing. The CAIB sought to uncover why NASA officials had considered the recurrent problem of foam falling during launches a maintenance issue rather than a flight safety concern. NASA testimony included the description of the layers of checks, justifications, and paperwork required to certify a Shuttle for launch, as well as evidence of NASA engineers’ collective conviction that the shedding foam did not present a threat to flight safety and, therefore, was not a sufficient reason to cancel a launch. In October 2002, foam falling from the bipod area of its external tankthe area where two metal struts connect the fuel reservoir to the orbiterhad struck Space Shuttle Atlantis. The foam that had fallen from Space Shuttle Columbia striking its wing had come from the same area of Columbia’s external tank as the foam that had struck Atlantis. However, engineers and managers had examined Atlantis’s debris incident and had determined that falling foam did not present a safety-of-flight concern for Columbia. Nevertheless, because of the Atlantis incident, managers had requested that engineers responsible for the Shuttle’s external tank develop a plan to prevent debris from breaking away from the bipod area of the tank. Engineers had not completed the plan at the time of Columbia’s flight.(Todd Halvorson, “Engineers: Launch Debris Troublesome Since Start,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Foam Problem,” 8 April 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe accepted the resignation of all members and staff of the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), which the U.S. Congress had first chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire. ASAP’s function was to provide an independent body to advise NASA’s Administrator about the safety of NASA’s operations, facilities, and personnel. In her resignation letter, ASAP Chairperson Shirley C. McCarty stated that the panel had decided to resign so that the NASA’s Administrator and Congress would have an opportunity to revitalize ASAP and to reshape its charter and mission. The panel also noted its frustration that, over the years, legislation had weakened its authority and that the CAIB final report had described the ASAP as “often not very influential.” Experts had noted that NASA had often ignored warnings that the safety panel issued and that ASAP had possessed no authority to enforce its recommendations. In accepting the ASAP members’ resignations, O’Keefe pledged to strengthen the panel by studying its original concept and determining how to help its successor panel best meet the needs of NASA.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Accepts Aerospace Safety Panel Resignation,” news release 03-301, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03301_asap_resign.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Nine NASA Safety Panel Members Resign,” 24 September 2003.)
NASA filed a request for proposal with Federal Business Opportunities, inviting companies to define their schedules for Orbital Space Plane (OSP) design completion, development, testing, and delivery. NASA requested the completion of a crew-rescue vehicle by 2008 and a crew- transfer vehicle by 2012, despite congressional requests that NASA slow down its work on the OSP project. The Boeing Company and a Lockheed Martin–Northrop Grumman team had both been developing concepts for the OSP, a vehicle anticipated as the next space vehicle to ferry astronaut crews to and from the ISS. NASA had hoped to award the prime contract in August 2004 at the earliest. On 29 October, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, responsible for authorizing NASA programs, had restated its position that NASA should halt work on the OSP Program until the White House, Congress, and NASA had agreed on the direction the U.S. human spaceflight program would take after completion of the ISS. Congressional leaders had also questioned NASA’s funding profile for the program.(Jason Bates, “NASA Releases Request for Orbital Space Plane Plans Despite Congressional Concern About the Program,” Space News, 4 November 2003.)
U.S. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN), senior Democrat on the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, introduced H. R. 2450, the Human Space Flight Independent Investigation Commission Act, in an effort to ensure that future investigations of human spaceflight accidents would remain independent and “free from any perception that [NASA] is hiding something.” Gordon had wanted President George W. Bush to appoint an independent commission, free of any NASA personnel, to investigate the Columbia disastersimilar to the commission that had investigated the Challenger accident in 1986. Instead, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had to revise the charter of the CAIB three times before the Board had attained a measure of independence. Moreover, the Board still included one NASA official and relied on NASA staff, an arrangement that Gordon feared would undermine the credibility of the CAIB’s final report. H.R. 2450 proposed that, in the event of another disaster, the investigative panel would follow the Challenger model, requiring a 15-member commission, with the chairperson of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) serving as a member and the President of the United States appointing the other 14. Under the terms of the Act, commission members would have diverse backgrounds, although some would also have spaceflight and accident investigation experience. The resolution also stipulated that NASA personnel could not serve, either on the investigative panel or on its staff. The commission would have subpoena powers and would report its findings simultaneously to the President, Congress, and the public.(Leonard David, “Lawmaker Calls for Independent Space Accident Investigations,” Space.com, 16 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_gordon_030616.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of 15 organizations from industry, government, and academia to carry out 22 propulsion-technology research proposals in five areas of the In-Space Propulsion Program: aerocapture, advanced chemical propulsion, solar-electric propulsion, space-based tether propulsion, and solar-sail technologies. The goal of the program, under the management of the Office of Space Sciences at NASA Headquarters, was to make exploration of deep space more practical, affordable, and productive.(NASA, “NASA Selects In-Space Propulsion Innovations for Research,” contract release C03-q, 16 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03Q.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
NASA released its first preliminary return-to-flight plan, briefing reporters at JSC in Houston, Texas. The 158-page report, which Associate Administrator William F. Readdy called “an evolving document,” indicated that 11 March 2004 was the earliest possible date for a Space Shuttle to return to flight. However, Readdy emphasized that NASA would be safety-driven, not schedule-driven, in its efforts to launch the first Shuttle to fly since the Columbia disaster. NASA had tentatively scheduled Atlantis for a launch between 11 March and 6 April 2004. In the preliminary plan, NASA indicated that it had changed Atlantis’s original mission of ferrying supplies and a new crew to the ISS. Instead, the mission would be a developmental flight during which the crew would test the new procedures and safety equipment that the CAIB had recommended. Although the ISS would still be Atlantis’s destination, the mission would not carry ISS replacement crew. NASA’s Space Shuttle Program Manager William W. Parsons Jr. said that the greatest challenges for future Shuttle missions would be developing methods to minimize the shedding of foam from the orbiter’s external tank and to repair tile and protective heat panels while in space. In addition, NASA would have to install cameras and sensors on the Shuttles and on the ISS robotic arms, to detect vehicle damage.(John Schwartz and Warren E. Leary, “NASA Says It Won’t Rush Shuttle Back to Space,” New York Times, 9 September 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the members of the Space Shuttle Mishap Interagency Investigation Board, also known as the Gehman Board. To chair the Board, NASA had appointed retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr., who had cochaired the independent commission that investigated the attack on the USS Cole in Aden, Yemen, on 12 October 2000. Other members included Rear Admiral Stephen A. Turcotte of the U.S. Naval Safety Center; Major General John L. Barry of the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio; Major General Kenneth W. Hess of Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico; James N. Hallock of the U.S. Department of Transportation; Steven B. Wallace of the FAA; and Brigadier General Duane W. Deal of the 21st Space Wing at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado. Several senior- level NASA leaders were also named to the panel: G. Scott Hubbard, Director of NASA’s ARC; Bryan D. O’Connor, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance and a former astronaut; and Theron M. Bradley Jr., NASA’s Chief Engineer. NASA intended the Gehman Board to make a parallel investigation, complementing NASA’s own internal investigation. The Board would have access to the same scientific information and to the cooperation of the same agencies as NASA.(NASA, “NASA Announces Space Shuttle Columbia Accident Investigation Board (The Gehman Board),” news release 03-034, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-034.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); David Arnold, “Specialist Panel Convenes, Begins Search for Cause,” Boston Globe, 4 February 2003.)
Four witnesses appeared before the CAIB at its first public hearing. Director of NASA’s JSC Jefferson D. Howell Jr. and Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore spoke about workforce issues, particularly, about NASA’s concern regarding the erosion of its skill base. Keith Chong, a senior scientist at the Boeing Company, discussed Boeing’s work on the foam insulation applied to large propellant tanks such as the Shuttle’s external tank and the Boeing Delta 4 booster. Henry McDonald, former Director of NASA’s ARC, discussed the Space Shuttle Independent Assessment Team (SIAT), which he had led before leaving NASA. The SIAT report had identified problems within the Shuttle program. McDonald expressed disappointment that NASA had not implemented some of the SIAT’s recommendations. He said that he believed some of the recommended improvements, such as modernized records, could have significantly influenced decisions that NASA had based on risk assessments.(Leonard David, “Columbia Accident Hearing Probes NASA Workforce Erosion, Shuttle Safety Issues,” Space.com, 6 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/caib_hearing_030306.html (accessed 29 August 2008); Matthew L. Wald, “NASA Records in Disarray, Study Leader Tells Board,” New York Times, 7 March 2003. 385 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593, 1 April 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx593.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Reuters, “Delta 4 Sends Up Its First U.S. Air Force Satellite,” 10 March 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the appointment of the team that would lead the new NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC), chartered in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance would assume oversight of the NESC. Based at NASA’s LaRC, the NESC would coordinate and conduct testing and safety assessments in support of critical NASA projects and programs. O’Keefe had charged Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. with assembling a team to get the Center up and running. O’Keefe remarked that Bridges had “assembled a dynamic group of recognized experts in the fields of engineering analysis and risk mitigation.” The group comprised new Director of the NESC Ralph R. Roe Jr., formerly Manager of the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office at NASA’s JSC; new Deputy Director Paul M. Munafo, formerly Manager of Materials, Processes and Manufacturing at NASA’s MSFC; and new Deputy Director of Safety J. Larry Crawford, formerly Director of Research Engineering at NASA’s DFRC. Roe’s appointment as Director of
In the CAIB’s second public hearing, expert witnesses discussed what they knew about the reentry of Space Shuttle Columbia on 1 February. William H. Ailor III, Director of the Center for Orbital and Reentry Debris Studies at the Aerospace Corporation, explained to the CAIB that part of the difficulty of deciphering the precise cause of the orbiter’s breakup was that space agencies had done little work over the past years in reconstructing spacecraft breakups. The lack of a systematic effort to retrieve debris from such incidents compounded the problem. R. Douglas White, Director for Operations Requirements, Orbiter Element Department for United Space Alliance, the prime contractor for NASA’s Space Shuttle Program, provided a “dramatic portrayal of Columbia’s troubled trajectory from orbit.” He drew attention to the behavior of Columbia’s aileron, the hinged control surface attached to the craft’s trailing edge, remarking that its behavior was a first indication that “something odd was happening to the space plane.” Paul Hill, Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Director at NASA’s JSC and leader of the team piecing together the still and video images of the Shuttle’s final minutes, told the CAIB about the work of the image analysts. Hill also expressed gratitude to the public for submitting amateur photographs and videos for analysis.(Leonard David, “Columbia Board Hearing: ‘Clues, Critical Events’ Destroyed on Reentry,” Space.com, 18 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030318.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, to head NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a “natural selection to lead the Agency’s premiere center for aviation and space research,” according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred,” 13 June 2003.)
NASA announced that Administrator Sean O’Keefe had appointed three new members to the CAIB in compliance with a request from CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. The new members were Douglas D. Osheroff, the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Physics and Applied Physics at Stanford University and a 1996 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics; Sally K. Ride, a physicist and professor of Space Science at the University of California, San Diego, as well as a former NASA astronaut and the first American woman in space; and John M. Logsdon, Director of the George Washington University Space Policy Institute. O’Keefe had also appointed NASA astronaut retired U.S. Air Force Colonel Michael J. Bloomfield, in response to Gehman’s request that Bloomfield replace former astronaut Bryan D. O’Connor as Astronaut Advisor to the Board. O’Connor would return to NASA Headquarters in his role as NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “New Members Added to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board,” news release 03-097, 5 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03097.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
A reentry section of the People’s Republic of China’s Shenzhou 4 spacecraft landed in Inner Mongolia after Shenzhou 4 had orbited Earth for nearly a week. Phillip Clark, a U.K. observer of China’s space program, remarked that the Shenzhou 4 mission was key to flying Chinese astronauts in the future, noting that orbital control of the craft during this flight had been far tighter than in the two preceding tests. Furthermore, during two back-to-back Shenzhou launches, the Chinese had completed all the maneuvers necessary for a rendezvous and docking mission, indicating that China would progress quickly to an orbital docking. Clark predicted that either Shenzhou 7 or Shenzhou 8 would complete a nose-to-nose docking.(Leonard David, “After ShenzhouChina’s Space Plans Boosted Following Successful Mission,” Space.com, 5 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/after_shenzhou4_030105.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named the commander, the pilot, and a mission specialist of the next Space Shuttle mission, even though NASA had not selected any dates for future Shuttle missions since the suspension of Shuttle flights following the Columbia disaster. O’Keefe said that NASA’s target to resume Shuttle flights was the end of the calendar year. O’Keefe said that the crew―Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of Japan’s NASDA―would be “challenged with the opportunity to be the first crew to return to flight.” O’Keefe said that the ISS partners would probably fill the other three slots with a three-member crew headed for the ISS.
NASA announced the appointment of James W. Kennedy as the new Director of NASA’s KSC, effective 10 August, succeeding Roy D. Bridges Jr. On 13 June, NASA had appointed Bridges to lead NASA’s LaRC. Kennedy had served as KSC’s Deputy Director since November 2002 and, before that, he had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Kennedy had also served as Project Manager for the X-34 and DC-XA initiatives and had led KSC’s OneNASA effort to coordinate teamwork across all field centers. He had managed MSFC’s Space Shuttle Projects Resident Office at KSC in 1996, returning to MSFC later that year to manage the Solid Rocket Booster Project. In 1998 he had become Deputy Director of Science and Engineering and, one year later, Director of Engineering. In those positions, he had established and maintained a nationally recognized research and development capability in space research and technology.(NASA, “James W. Kennedy Named Director, NASA KSC,” news release 03-217, 26 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03217_Kennedy_KSC.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Kelly Young, “Kennedy Takes Over KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 June 2003.)
Japan merged its three space agencies with the goal of saving US$89.8 million a year. According to the new configuration, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) would manage the unified entities of the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, NASDA, and the National Aerospace Laboratory. Modeled on NASA but about one 10th of the size of its American counterpart, JAXA had 1,800 employees and an initial annual budget of US$1.66 billion.(Reuters, “Japan Streamlines Its Space Effort: Three Agencies Merged into JAXA; Tokyo Keeps Its Eye on Beijing,” 2 October 2003.)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz had won Discover Magazine’s Innovation Award for Space Science and Technology in the Space Explorer category. The annual awards, presented in the categories of Space Explorer, Communications, Space Scientists, Technology for Humanity, and Aerospace, honored scientists whose work had benefited the U.S. space program and all of humanity. A veteran of seven spaceflights, a record he shared with only one other astronaut, Chang-Dìaz was Director of the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory at NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where he was leading a team to develop the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) Engine. The team was working on a conceptual engine that would eventually enable humans to explore distant regions of Earth’s solar system and, perhaps, regions beyond the solar system. A native of Costa Rica, Chang-Dìaz had earned undergraduate and advanced degrees in mechanical engineering and applied plasma physics from the University of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming an astronaut in 1981. He had first traveled to space in 1986 and, most recently, had participated in the ISS assembly and crew-exchange mission in June 2002, during which he undertook three spacewalks.(NASA, “Astronaut Chang-Diaz Wins Discover Magazine Award,” news release 03-335, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03335_ChangDiaz_Award.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASA’s Deputy Chief of Staff Scott Pace announced that NASA would not seek a waiver to the Iran Non-Proliferation Act of 2000 (Pub.L.No.106-178) The law prohibited NASA from purchasing space hardware from Russia unless Russia certified that Russian aerospace companies had not aided Iranian missile programs for at least a year. If the White House did not grant a waiver, NASA would be unable to buy Russian Progress and Soyuz vehicles―the United States’ only viable means of reaching the ISS after the suspension of Shuttle flights. Pace explained that NASA would not press the White House for a waiver, because NASA did not intend “to make foreign policy,” acknowledging that the White House or the U.S. Department of State was responsible for seeking changes in the Iran Non-Proliferation Act, if appropriate.(Brian Berger, “NASA Official: Agency Won’t Seek Waiver to Iran Act,” Space News, 20 February 2003.)
The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post”; Stephen Clark, “Proton Lifts Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
Edward J. Weiler, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space about Project Prometheus, a proposed nuclear technology program. The proposal called for NASA to spend US$3 billion between 2003 and 2008, developing more powerful radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) to convert energy from the decay of radioactive material into electricity and to explore the use of fission to power spacecraft and their instruments. A strong supporter of the program, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, a former Secretary of the Navy, hoped to apply lessons learned from the nuclear submarine program to spacecraft. Weiler stated that nuclear fission was necessary for sending spacecraft to scrutinize the outer planets of the solar system, such as Jupiter, and could open the door to human spaceflight to Mars. NASA hoped to use the powerful RTGs developed in Project Prometheus for a robotic mission to Mars in 2009. NASA proposed to make a mission to Jupiter’s moons as its first use of fission technology in space exploration.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Advice to NASA Supports Nuclear-Fueled Spaceflight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 4 June 2003.)
NASA Chief of Staff and White House Liaison Courtney A. Stadd announced his resignation, effective 4 July 2003, to pursue opportunities in the private sector. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the appointment of John D. Schumacher to succeed Stadd as Chief of Staff. Stadd had led President George W. Bush’s NASA transition team and had worked with two NASA administrators to help cast NASA’s strategic direction. Schumacher brought invaluable experience and perspective to his new position. Since June 1995, he had served as NASA’s Assistant Administrator for External Relations, with responsibility for NASA’s interaction with Executive Branch offices and agencies, for international relations, and for administration of export and international technology-transfer control. In addition, he had served as a liaison with NASA’s History Office, advisory councils, and commissions.
The People’s Republic of China launched Shenzhou 5 on a Long March 2F rocket, becoming the third nation after Russia and the United States to send a human into orbit. Veteran fighter pilot Yang Liwei expected to orbit Earth 14 times before landing. The launch was the culmination of the decade-long effort of China’s secretive, military-linked space program, undertaken with the hope of improving the communist nation’s image abroad, as well as among its own citizens. Chinese officials described the Shenzhou program as homegrown, but western analysts stated that Russia had provided China with important technology and training for its taikonaut (astronaut) corps. Western analysts described the Shenzhou craft as an improvement over the Russian Soyuz design, with new solar arrays enabling the front-end orbital module to remain in space after the taikonaut compartment had returned to Earth. In addition, the craft’s improved collision-avoidance systems provided Shenzhou with enhanced capacity to avoid dangerous space debris.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; David Lynch, “China Blasts Off into Space,” USA Today, 15 October 2003; Christopher Bodeen for Associated Press, “China Launches First Manned Space Mission,” 15 October 2003.)
department that advises senior managers about shuttle safety.” He explained that the links of engineering specialists with NASA’s Space Shuttle Program had apparently been too close to permit independent review of the condition of the orbiters. In addition, he said that NASA’s Safety Organization lacked sufficient personnel. Gehman testified that, although NASA’s Safety Organization appeared perfect on paper, the procedures lacked substance in reality. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, who appeared at Gehman’s side at the hearing, assured the Senate panel that NASA would hold its officials accountable, and that NASA would correct all faults in management that the CAIB identified. However, O’Keefe did not respond to Gehman’s criticism of NASA’s safety team.(Traci Watson, “Probe Slams NASA Safety,” USA Today, 15 May 2003; Nick Anderson, “NASA Is Chided for Faults in Safety Teams,” Los Angeles Times, 15 May 2003.)
NASA launched a nationwide campaign to recruit elementary, middle, and high school classroom teachers for its astronaut corps, building on the legacy of its Teacher in Space Project of 1985. NASA had selected Christa McAuliffe and Barbara R. Morgan from among 12,000 applicants for the first project, which had ended tragically when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launching on 28 January 1986 with McAuliffe on board. McAuliffe’s backup Barbara R. Morgan had rejoined NASA in 1998 to train and qualify as a mission specialist. In December 2002, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had announced Morgan’s assignment to a November assembly mission to the ISS. NASA planned for the new recruitment campaign to extend the legacy of McAuliffe and the work of Morgan, making future educator- astronauts as much a part of the astronaut corps as test pilots, engineers, physicians, astronomers, geologists, and scientists from other disciplines. To accomplish this goal, NASA planned to train teachers with proven technical skills, making them eligible for missions ranging from 12-day Shuttle flights to months-long residencies aboard the ISS. Because of their ability to communicate with students in the classroom more effectively than traditional NASA astronauts, the educator-astronauts would be a critical part of an educational initiative to “make math and science as inspiring to youngsters as pop music and sports.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Seeking a Few Good Teachers,” Houston Chronicle, 22 January 2003.)
NASA announced the new charter and new members of its Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP). All members of the previous ASAP, which the U.S. Congress had initially chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire, had resigned in late September 2003 in the wake of the Columbia accident investigation. The original charter had intended the panel to act as an independent body to advise NASA’s Administrator on safety issues, but over the years, additional administrative procedures had governed the panel’s work. In the new charter, NASA revoked those procedures to enable the panel to develop its agenda in accordance with CAIB findings. The ASAP’s original 1967 charter formed the foundation of the new charter, with the following revisions: 1) the ASAP would make quarterly reports, instead of annual; 2) new members would have two-year terms, extendable to a maximum of six years; 3) members would have staggered terms to ensure fresh perspectives at regular intervals; and 4) the ASAP would focus on industrial and systems safety, risk management, trend analysis, and management of NASA’s safety and quality systems. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named, as new members of the ASAP, Rear Admiral Walter H. Cantrell, Vice Admiral Joseph W. Dyer, Augustine O. Esogbue, Major General Francis C. Gideon Jr., Deborah L. Grubbe, Rosemary O’Leary, John C. Marshall, Steven B. Wallace, Rick E. Williams, and ex officio member, Brigadier General Joseph A. Smith. The new members represented academic, military, and industrial sectors; no member was a current or former NASA employee or contractor.(NASA, “NASA Names New Safety Advisory Panel,” news release 03-370, 18 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03370_asap.html (accessed 5 February 2009); Patty Reinert, “NASA Safety Panel Takes Flight Again with New Members,” Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2003.)
CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. and NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe appeared before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation to discuss NASA’s return-to-flight goals in light of the CAIB’s findings. Committee members criticized the CAIB for its reluctance to assign individual blame within NASA for the Columbia disaster, but Gehman replied that the Board did not need to make judgments about individual accountability. O’Keefe added that NASA would have held individuals accountable only if someone had acted maliciously in the sequence of events that led to the loss of Columbia. O’Keefe also pointed out that all former members of the Shuttle team had either left their positions, or NASA had reassigned them. Gehman testified that the decisions and conditions that had led to the loss of the orbiter had begun years before, stating that Congress and the White House shared responsibility with NASA for creating the conditions responsible for the accident. Congress and the White House had reduced NASA’s budget by 40 percent over the previous decade, affecting the operation of NASA’s management system. When committee members asked whether NASA required additional funding for 2004, O’Keefe responded that the current budget did not cover some of the CAIB’s recommended activities, such as establishing an independent authority to oversee Space Shuttle technical requirements, recertifying the orbiters, and accelerating the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program. Committee members asked for O’Keefe’s assurance that NASA would change its culture, implementing processes that would prevent future Shuttle accidents.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Senators Rip NASA over Columbia Probe,” 4 September 2003; Brian Berger, “Lawmakers Press O’Keefe for Cost Figures,” Space News, 4 September 2003.)
Harold W. Gehman Jr. delivered the CAIB’s final report to NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, presenting its findings and recommendations. The CAIB found that a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam insulation, traveling at more than 500 miles (804.6 kilometers) per hour, had damaged Columbia’s wing during launch, ultimately leading to its disintegration during reentry. The report stated that management decisions during Columbia’s flight reflected missed opportunities, ineffective communication channels, flawed analysis, and ineffective leadership. When cameras tracking Columbia provided two grainy images showing the foam striking the wing, engineers had immediately begun to discuss obtaining further images of the Shuttle or initiating a spacewalk to check for damages. However, mission managers had “adjourned for a holiday weekend and did not discuss the foam strike.” Upon returning to work on 21 January, the managers had assessed the strike as a postlanding maintenance problem, because smaller foam strikes had left harmless dents in Shuttles during all previous missions. The CAIB’s Executive Director John L. Barry remarked that, among NASA’s competing goals of maintaining costs and meeting schedules, safety had lost out. The Board directly criticized Administrator Sean O’Keefe for increasing pressure to meet a February 2004 launch deadline, thereby creating a pattern similar to that which had led to the Challenger disaster in 1986. The CAIB recommended that NASA implement 15 actions before the next Shuttle flight, including creating an independent safety-and-engineering organization to help establish satisfactory safety margins. Upon receiving the Board’s final report, O’Keefe reiterated NASA’s intention to comply fully with the recommendations.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Accepts Columbia Accident Report,” news release 03-276, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03276_AOK_Acpt_CAIB.html (accessed 29 December 2008); Mark Carreau, “Columbia Accident Board Casts Wide Net of Blame,” Houston Chronicle, 27 August 2003; Kathy Sawyer and Eric Pianin, “Report Blames Flawed NASA Culture for Tragedy,” Washington Post, 27 August 2003. 504 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Justin Ray, “Resupply Ship Bound for the International Space Station,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2003.)
After completing a 16-day orbital science mission that NASA judged a success, the crew of STS- 107 perished when Space Shuttle Columbia broke apart above Texas during reentry. NASA’s Mission Control lost communication with Columbia at 9:00 a.m. (EST) and immediately switched to the contingency plan to preserve all flight-activity information. NASA had scheduled the landing for 9:16 a.m. (EST). NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe issued a statement describing all the steps NASA had taken after the loss of the Shuttle. NASA officials had spoken with President George W. Bush and Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge; met with family members of the crew; assembled an internal mishap investigation team; and appointed a mishap investigation board. The board comprised an external group of people independent from NASA, charged with examining all the information that Mission Control had locked down when it lost communication with Columbia.(NASA, “NASA Statement on Loss of Communications with Columbia,” news release 03-030, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-030.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); NASA, “Statement by NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe,” news release 03-032, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-032.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); Washington Post, “The Columbia Catastrophe,” 2 February 2003.)
The People’s Republic of China and ESA launched Double Star 1 from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest China. Double Star 1 was the first of two spacecraft in the Double Star mission to study Earth’s magnetic fields―the first joint project between China and ESA. Known in China as Tan Ce 1, Double Star 1 carried eight instruments for investigating Earth’s magnetosphere―five from ESA and three from the Chinese National Space Administration. ESA and China had designed the mission to study how magnetized and charged particles streaming off the Sun affect Earth. The space agencies had scheduled the second of the two craft to launch six months after the first.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 602, 1 January 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx602.html (accessed 26 March 2009); United Press International, “China-EU Launch Space Project,” 30 December 2003.)
NASA announced the Level 1 requirements for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) system, the next- generation system of space vehicles designed to transport crews to and from the ISS and to provide rescue missions. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had proposed the concept in November 2002 “as a way to take some of the pressure off the aging space shuttle fleet.” NASA had envisioned a simple craft, easier to launch and with greater maneuverability in orbit. However, NASA had not intended the OSP system as a substitute for the Shuttle, the only U.S. spacecraft able to haul heavy cargo into space. The OSP concept was to include in its first design an escape pod for the ISS, ready for use by 2010. Its second version, intended for completion by 2012 would be a craft capable of transporting people.(NASA, “Initial Requirements Set for Orbital Space Plane System,” news release 03-073, 18 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03073.html (accessed 16 July 2008); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Views Space Plane as Helpmate to Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 February 2003.)
NASA announced the replacement of its Mishap Response Team with the newly formed NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT), which would continue to support the CAIB. NASA had formed the Mishap Response Team within hours of the Columbia disaster on 1 February but had drawn criticism for the team’s composition, which included staff that had directly overseen the Shuttle’s mission. Linda Ham had led the Mishap Response Team, even though, as a senior Shuttle program manager, she had assisted in making key decisions during the 16-day Columbia mission. NASA and the CAIB intended for the NAIT to support the CAIB, and they had organized the NAIT to mirror the CAIB’s structure, with three subsections: materials, operations, and engineering. NASA had appointed Deputy Director of JSC Randy Stone to chair the NAIT.(NASA, “NASA Columbia Accident Support Activities Reorganized,” news release 03-113, 21 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03113.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Robyn Suriano, “New Team Created To Help with Shuttle Probe,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 March 2003.)
In response to the anticipated recommendations of the CAIB, NASA announced its plans to create an independent NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) at NASA’s LaRC, providing a central location to coordinate engineering and safety assessment for all of NASA. The NESC, expected to draw on the talents of 250 staff throughout NASA to conduct analysis and share technical information, would report to Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. Bryan D. O’Connor, Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, would have responsibility for policy. NASA intended for the NESC to provide independent assessment and testing of engineering, in support of critical NASA projects and programs; to conduct reviews and evaluations of engineering and safety; to provide a central location for trend analysis; to provide a structure to support engineering collaboration for problem resolution; to provide central coordination of engineering and programmatic lessons learned, technical standardization, and development of technical discipline expertise; and to provide independent inspection and validation of activities to ensure the constant maintenance of NASA safety standards.(NASA, “NASA Announces Independent Engineering and Safety Center,” news release 03-239, 15 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03239_safety_center.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Warren E. Leary, “In Response to Panel, NASA Plans Safety Center,” New York Times, 16 July 2003.)
The CAIB released its first two official recommendations, suggesting that before resuming Shuttle missions, NASA should 1) improve its inspections of the leading edge of the orbiters’ wings, and 2) ensure that U.S. spy satellites would capture detailed images of the orbiters during each mission. Although the Board had not yet begun developing its final report, the CAIB released preliminary recommendations so that NASA could begin to implement them expeditiously. The CAIB made the first recommendation because it had found that inspection techniques in place did not enable engineers to assess the structural integrity of the orbiter’s heat shield, considered a “criticality one” item. The failure of the heat shieldcomprising the reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC) panels that protect the front of the orbiter’s wings during reentry, the RCC panels’ supporting structure, and the attaching hardwarewould lead to the loss of the vehicle and crew. The CAIB made the second recommendation because it had discovered that NASA officials had cancelled an informal request that the U.S. military capture images of Columbia to check for possible damage caused by launch debris. NASA already had a new memorandum of agreement with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) to provide NASA with images of orbiting Shuttles. Previously, NIMA had only made images available upon request, but the CAIB recommended that NASA and NIMA make imaging each Shuttle flight a standard requirement.(Jim Banke, “Columbia Board Releases Two Recommendations to NASA,” Space.com, 17 April 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030417.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
NASA announced the names of three additional members of the crew of the Space Shuttle Program’s Return to Flight Mission STS-114. In 2001 NASA had named four astronauts to STS- 114―Mission Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of JAXA. The four were already training for the flight, scheduled to launch no earlier than September 2004. Astronauts Andrew S. W. Thomas, Wendy B. Lawrence, and Charles J. Camarda rounded out the mission’s crew of seven. NASA had originally planned for STS-114 to have a seven-member crew, but in the wake of the Columbia accident, NASA had changed the mission objective to focus on testing and evaluating new procedures for flight safety, rather than on ISS logistics and crew rotation. Thomas and Lawrence were veteran astronauts―Thomas was the second-highest-ranking member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, and Lawrence had flown on the Shuttle three times. Camarda was a rookie making his first orbital flight. NASA had assigned Robinson and Noguchi to conduct spacewalks on the flight.(NASA, “NASA Names Crew Members for Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” 7 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03360_STS_114_crew.html (accessed 5 February 2003); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Veterans, Rookie Fill Return-to-Flight Shuttle Crew,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 November 2003; Jim Banke, “NASA Names Additional Crew for Return to Flight Mission,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts114_ crew_)
The CAIB and members of the U.S. Congress reached an agreement giving selected members and staff of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology access to confidential interviews that CAIB had conducted with 225 witnesses, including NASA managers and others involved with Columbia’s mission. Because the most sensitive testimony about management decision making and engineering practices was contained in privileged statements, CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. had resisted unfettered congressional access, fearing the potential effect on witnesses in future investigations of accidents if the CAIB were to release privileged testimony. Gehman had argued that privacy was critical to the Board’s ability to elicit full, frank, and timely information, citing U.S. Supreme Court decisions supporting privileged interviewing, which was a common practice in military aircraft accident investigations. The agreement had granted committee members and a select list of staff access to the statements at the CAIB’s office andin limited circumstances and under the supervision of a CAIB representativeto those at congressional offices. The CAIB retained the right to refuse to make information from statements to the Board available to the public. In addition, the CAIB would keep a record of those who viewed the information.(Kathy Sawyer, “Congress To Review Shuttle Interviews,” Washington Post, 16 June 2003.)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced an agreement between NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which provided for NIMA to capture detailed satellite images of Space Shuttles in orbit. NASA had sought this agreement with NIMA because of critics’ “pointed questioning” of NASA’s decision not to capture satellite images that it could have used to check for damage to Columbia’s heat shields while the Shuttle was in orbit. The agreement would enable NASA to “employ NIMA assets during targets of opportunity” without requiring NASA to make a specific request for imaging. Before the disaster, NASA had turned down a NIMA offer to capture images of Columbia, and NASA officials had withdrawn an unofficial request for U.S. Air Force telescopes to capture images. O’Keefe stated that the agreement did not represent any NASA decision “about whether those images might have helped determine damage” to Columbia.(Associated Press, “Military To Capture Future Shuttle Flight Images,” 29 March 2003. 123)
NASA announced the selection of Donald J. Campbell, Director of GRC at Lewis Field, as Special Assistant to the Deputy Administrator for Nuclear and Alternative Power Generation Systems, effective 1 October 2003. In his new position, Campbell would lead the development and integration of high-power generation systems for propulsion, considered fundamental building blocks for sustained robotic and human exploration in outer space and deep space. Campbell had directed GRC since January 1994. Local political and community leaders had criticized Campbell for his leadership style, which had not galvanized the GRC workforce or fully leveraged the Center’s economic potential. NASA named Deputy Director of GRC Julian M. Earls to succeed Campbell as GRC’s Director.(NASA, “Glenn Research Center’s Donald J. Campbell Selected as NASA Deputy Administrator Special Assistant,” news release 03-260, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/ HQ_03260_Campbell.html (accessed 29 December 2008); NASA, “Dr. Julian M. Earls Selected To Lead NASA Glenn Research Center,” news release 03-261, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03261_Earls.html (accessed 29 December 2008); John Mangels and Michael O’Malley, “NASA Glenn Chief Leaves; Deputy Gets Job,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 9 August 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of David A. King as the new Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, effective 15 June. NASA would reassign Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson, in preparation for his planned January 2004 retirement from NASA. King had been MSFC’s Deputy Director since November 2002, assisting Stephenson in managing a range of propulsion, space science, and materials research, as well as development work. NASA had also dispatched King to Lufkin, Texas, within hours of the Columbia disaster, to serve as the senior on-site NASA official in the search-and-recovery effort. In that capacity, he had created critical, initial work processes; established effective working relationships among federal and state government agencies; and set the foundation for the two subsequent NASA officials who would share responsibility for leading effective recovery efforts. Before serving as Deputy Director of MSFC, King had been Deputy Director of Shuttle Processing, Launch Director of six Shuttle missions, and Director of Shuttle Processing at NASA’s KSC. As Director of Shuttle Processing at KSC, he had managed and coordinated all Space Shuttle processing, launch, and landing operations and had made the final determination to launch during the three-day countdown process.(NASA, “David A. King Named Marshall Space Flight Center Director,“ news release 03-181, 23 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/03181_king_msfc_director.html (accessed 20 November 2008); Patty Reinert, “Marshall Space Flight Center Chief Will Leave Post in January,” Houston Chronicle, 21 May 2003.)
NASA announced the resignation of Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore. A 26-year veteran of NASA, Dittemore had supervised the Space Shuttle Program for more than four years. Dittemore had joined NASA in 1977 as a propulsion-systems engineer, working on orbital maneuvering and reaction-control systems for the Space Shuttle before his selection as a Space Shuttle Flight Director in 1985. In 1993 NASA had appointed him Deputy Manager for the Space Shuttle Program Integration and Operations Office in the Space Shuttle Program Office. He had also served as Manager of Space Shuttle Program Integration and as Chairperson of the Space Shuttle Mission Management Team before his selection in 1996 to manage the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office. He had become Space Shuttle Program Manager in 1999, assuming responsibility for the overall management, integration, and operation of the program. In announcing his departure, Dittemore remarked that, before the Columbia tragedy, he had been struggling over whether to leave NASA and had decided to resign in the spring of 2003. However, after the Columbia accident, he had immediately postponed his departure. Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program Michael C. Kostelnik and NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe credited Dittemore with keeping communications open between NASA and the public in the wake of the tragedy. Dittemore planned to remain in his position until the CAIB had finished its work and established a return-to-flight program, to enable NASA to make a smooth management transition.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post,” news release 03-149, 23 April 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/apr/HP_news_03149.html (accessed 19 September 2008); Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Shuttle Director Dittemore To Leave NASA,” 23 April 2003.)
NASA released a flight-deck videotape, which the crew of STS-107 had recorded on 1 February between 8:35 and 8:48 a.m. (EST). NASA had recovered the videotape from the Shuttle’s crash site near Palestine, Texas. The video showed flight-deck activity as Columbia passed over the south central Pacific Ocean at an altitude of approximately 500,000 feet. Filmed with a small on- board camera, mounted to the right of Pilot William C. McCool and then passed to Mission Specialist Laurel B. Clark, the videotape showed Commander Rick D. Husband, Pilot McCool, Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, and Mission Specialist Clark on the flight deck during reentry. The astronauts were conversing among themselves as they worked through routine checklist activities with flight controllers at NASA’s Mission Control.(NASA, “NASA Releases Columbia Crew Cabin Video,” news release N03-23, 28 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_n03023.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
Progress M-47 launched atop a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome one day after the loss of Space Shuttle Columbia “threw future missions to the orbiting complex in doubt.” The launch, scheduled long in advance, took place as “stunned Russian space officials offered condolences to their American colleagues.” Russian officials also expressed concern that the loss of Columbia and the ensuing suspension of Shuttle missions might place Russia’s “cash-strapped space program under more pressure to deliver crews and supplies to the station.” Sergei Gorbunov, a spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency, explained that Russia had no reserve of Soyuz spacecraft. He pointed out that if the U.S. space program intended to use Russian craft to transport crews to the ISS, NASA would need to buy Russian Soyuz TMAs, the type of craft designed to carry cosmonauts to the ISS. Russia had routinely built only two Soyuz spacecraft per year.(Associated Press, “Russians Send Supply Ship on Way to Space Station,” 2 February 2003.)
