A prototype of the Phoenix reusable launch vehicle (RLV), a joint project of European public and private funders, successfully completed its first atmospheric test flight. According to major media sources, European space agencies hoped eventually to use the Phoenix to launch payloads. The vehicle prototype was approximately 23 feet (7 meters) long and weighed 2,640 pounds (1,200 kilograms). During the test flight, a helicopter released the vehicle prototype from an altitude of 8,000 feet (2,400 meters). The Phoenix landed 90 seconds later at an airport in Vidsel, Sweden. EADS Space Transportation, along with German aerospace company OHB-System AG, the German Aerospace Center, and the government of Bremen, Germany, had funded the Phoenix.(Frank Morring Jr., “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 20 (17 May 2004): 17; Frank Morring Jr., “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 11 (15 March 2004): 17; Mattias Karen for Associated Press, “Europeans Test Space-Shuttle Prototype,” 9 May 2004.)
NASA officials announced that the crew members of the ISS were experiencing a food shortage and would have to eat less until a Russian supply capsule could bring additional food supplies. Russia had scheduled the resupply capsule to arrive at the ISS on 25 December 2004, but if it missed the delivery, crew members Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov would have to return to Earth aboard the Russian Soyuz capsule docked at the ISS. NASA also noted that, if the crew members had to evacuate the space station, Russia and the United States could continue to operate the ISS from Earth. Officials cited a number of reasons for the supply shortage on the ISS, including the postponement of regular supply missions after the Columbia accident and the necessary removal of some food supplies from an August 2004 resupply flight, to make room for equipment to monitor air quality in the ISS.(Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Endures Food Shortage,” Houston Chronicle, 10 December 2004.)
Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASA’s JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSC’s Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASA’s JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, “Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director,” Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, “NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy,” news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
ESA’s Science Programme Committee approved a proposal to extend the operation of the Ulysses spacecraft―a joint project of ESA and NASA―until March 2008. NASA had already approved continuing the spacecraft’s operations. The two space agencies had designed the spacecraft to study the heliosphere, a region of space influenced by the Sun and its magnetic field. Scientists of the agencies hoped that the continued operations of Ulysses would help them better understand the Sun. Since the 1990 launch of Ulysses, ESA and NASA both had launched additional fleet of solar and heliospheric spacecraft: NASA’s Cassini, ESA’s four Cluster satellites, and another collaborative project between ESA and NASA, the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO).(ESA, “Ulysses Mission Home: Ulysses Mission Extended,” http://sci.esa.int/science- e/www/object/index.cfm?fobjectid=34647 (accessed 4 February 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, O’Keefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
.html (accessed 14 January 2009); Justyn R. Maund et al., “The Massive Binary Companion Star to the Progenitor of Supernova 1993J,” Nature 427, no. 6970 (8 January 2004): 129–131. billion from existing space programs over the next years to fund the development of the technology to travel to the Moon and Mars. President Bush also extended an invitation to other countries to cooperate in attaining the objectives of the Vision. Major newspapers described the Vision for Space Exploration as a response to the Columbia disaster and a means of regaining public support for continued space exploration.(Patty Reinert, “Bush Aims for ‘Worlds Beyond Our Own’,” Houston Chronicle, 15 January 2004; David E. Sanger and Richard W. Stevenson, “Bush Backs Goal of Flight to Moon To Establish Base,” New York Times, 15 January 2004; NASA, “The Vision for Space Exploration,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 55584main_vision_space_exploration-hi-res.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the immediate appointment of James B. Garvin as NASA’s new Chief Scientist. Garvin had previously served as Chief Scientist for NASA’s lunar and Mars exploration programs. As Chief Scientist for all of NASA, Garvin would be responsible for ensuring the scientific merits of NASA’s programs, including formulating the programs’ scientific requirements. Garvin replaced former astronaut John M. Grunsfeld, who had served in the post since September 2003. NASA had selected Grunsfeld to train as an astronaut for a future long-duration mission.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Chief Scientist,” news release 04-349, 21 October 2004.)
NASA’s MSFC and KSC provided law enforcement agencies with analysis of video and imagery relevant to their investigation of the abduction of an 11-year-old girl in Sarasota, Florida. When law enforcement officials asked the two centers to examine security camera footage showing the girl’s abduction by an unknown individual, MSFC provided assistance using its Video Image Stabilization and Registration System (VISAR), an image-stabilization software program developed for space program research. KSC examined the security camera footage using its Image Analysis Facility, which NASA had developed for visual analysis of Space Shuttle launches. Although this was not the first time that the two centers had assisted law enforcement in this manner, the case garnered major press coverage throughout the United States.(NASA, “NASA Technology Helps Investigators in Florida Abduction Case,” news release 04-055, 5 February 2004; Fred Barbash, “Fla. Police Find Body of Abducted Girl,” Washington Post, 7 February 2004.)
ESA’s Mars Express orbiter relayed information between ground-based NASA engineers and NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Spirit, the first in-orbit communication between ESA and NASA spacecraft and the first successful international communications network outside of Earth. As part of their general efforts to cooperate in space exploration, the two space agencies had planned the information relay to enable future cooperative use of their communications technologies during Mars missions. In this particular communication sequence, Spirit’s operation personnel at NASA’s JPL transferred commands for the rover to ESA’s Space Operations Centre in Germany, which then transmitted the instructions to the Mars Express. The Express successfully commanded Spirit and, subsequently, relayed telemetry information from the rover to JPL via the Space Operations Centre.(NASA, “International Interplanetary Networking Succeeds,” news release 04-060, 12 February 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe presented the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to the families of the crew members of Space Shuttle Challenger. O’Keefe presented the honor in the name of the U.S. Congress and on behalf of President George W. Bush. The seven astronauts on board Challenger had died when the Shuttle exploded soon after launching on 28 January 1986.(NASA, “Challenger Crew Honored with Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” news release S04-238, 23 July 2004.)
Major media reported details of a NASA internal document, which stated that a proposed plan to use the ISS as a safe haven for Space Shuttle astronauts would likely have a high risk of failure. The NASA document was a response to a proposal that the ISS should temporarily house the Shuttle crew if a problem arose that prevented an orbiting Shuttle from returning its crew to Earth safely. In the internal document, NASA objected that the ISS had neither sufficient supplies nor support systems to keep both ISS and Shuttle crew members alive longer than a few months. NASA officials responded to the publication of the document, stating that the provisional contingency plan had been one of many ideas considered for improving Space Shuttle safety.(John Schwartz, “NASA Rescue Plan Is Reported To Have High Risk of Failure,” New York Times, 9 July 2004.)
NASA’s Genesis space capsule returned to Earth but experienced a problematic landing, which NASA officials feared might have damaged the capsule’s scientific cargo. NASA had launched Genesis in August 2001 to collect particle samples from solar winds, samples that scientists hoped would provide information about the solar system’s chemical composition during its formation stages. To return Genesis to Earth, NASA had designed the capsule to release a rectangular parachute, which helicopters would grab, gently lowering the spacecraft to Earth. However, the parachute failed to deploy, and Genesis crashed into a desert area of Utah at nearly 200 miles per hour (322 kilometers per hour). Although NASA officials were uncertain about the extent of damage to the spacecraft’s cargo, their initial prognosis was that researchers could still use some of the samples in scientific analyses.(Guy Gugliotta, “Spacecraft Crashes with Solar Data,” Washington Post, 9 September 2004; NASA JPL, “Genesis: Mission History―Launch,” 23 June 2008, http://genesismission.jpl.nasa.gov/gm2/mission/launch.htm (accessed 7 May 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space concerning NASA’s budget request for FY 2005. NASA had requested US$16.2 billion for FY 2005, an increase of 5.6 percent over its budget for FY 2004. Much of O’Keefe’s testimony and the Senate subcommittee members’ questions were concerned with the likelihood of NASA’s achieving the objectives that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration, announced in January 2004. Those objectives included human flights to the Moon and replacing the Space Shuttles with a new space-exploration vehicle.(NASA, “Administrator O’Keefe’s Senate Testimony,” news release, 1 April 2004; Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Chief Faces Lawmakers’ Queries,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 April 2004.)
Representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States―the nations participating in the ISS project―met to discuss their cooperative activities for the station. At the meeting at ESA’s Technical Centre in the Netherlands, ESA officials reviewed ISS operations and plans, unanimously endorsing a new technical configuration for the space station that would incorporate components from each of the ISS partner space agencies. Upon completion, the ISS would have improved research capabilities and would accommodate more crew members than the current maximum of three.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 04-237, 23 July 2004; Warren E. Leary, “More Astronauts Approved for Space Station,” New York Times, 24 July 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe submitted his resignation in a handwritten letter to President George W. Bush. In his resignation, O’Keefe stated that he would continue serving as Administrator until Bush had named a successor, but that he would prefer to leave by February 2005. O’Keefe cited family commitments and his interest in pursuing better economic opportunities as the reasons for his resignation. Major media speculated about candidates to replace O’Keefe, but the White House provided no details about its choice for a successor. Before becoming NASA’s Administrator in December 2001, O’Keefe had worked for the OMB.(Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Chief Formally Steps Down,” Washington Post, 14 December 2004; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Leader Cites Finances and Submits His Resignation,” New York Times, 14 December 2004.)
NASA re-extended the missions of its Mars rovers by an additional six months. The two mobile robotic geological laboratories, Spirit and Opportunity, had landed on Mars in January 2004. The robotic rovers had successfully completed their primary three-month mission in April 2004, and NASA had extended their mission by five months. Because the rovers remained operable and continued to provide important scientific data on Mars, NASA officials had decided to provide funding to cover an additional six months of rover operations.(NASA, “Rovers Missions Renewed as Mars Emerges from Behind Sun,” news release 04-307, 21 September 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe provided testimony concerning NASA’s FY 2005 budget request to the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies. In his testimony, O’Keefe highlighted NASA’s planned efforts to achieve the goals that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration. According to major media, although several House subcommittee members were supportive of NASA’s goals, they also expressed doubts about whether Congress would give NASA its requested FY 2005 budget, which included an increase of 5.6 percent over its FY 2004 budget.(NASA, “Administrator O’Keefe’s House Testimony,” 21 April 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/ speeches/okeefe_house_testimony_042104.html (accessed 23 march 2009); Patty Reinert, “Lawmakers Warn NASA Fund Boost May Be Modest,” Houston Chronicle, 22 April 2004.)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the station’s management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASA’s other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISS’s hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the station’s operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the station’s exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program,” New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Safety Problems Noted,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
Cassini-Huygens became the first spacecraft to successfully navigate Saturn’s rings and to orbit the planet. A joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA, the mission comprised two spacecraft: the orbiter Cassini and the probe Huygens. The space agencies had planned for Cassini to conduct 76 orbits of Saturn during a four-year survey of the planet and its moons. They had designed the Huygens probe to analyze the atmosphere of Titan, Saturn’s largest moon. If the probe survived its descent to Titan, it would analyze the moon’s surface, as well.(ESA, “Cassini-Huygens Enters Orbit Around the Ringed Planet,” ESA news release 36-2004, 1 July 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Cassini First To Orbit Saturn,” Washington Post, 1 July 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that, effective 1 August 2004, NASA would restructure its organization to render it better able to implement President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration. Among many other announced changes, NASA planned to restructure its Earth Science, Space Science, and other Strategic Enterprises into four Mission Directorates―Aeronautics Research, Exploration Systems, Science, and Space Operations―with clearer organizational roles and responsibilities. In addition, to improve communication and clarify responsibilities, functional offices of NASA Headquarters and its field offices―including the office of the Chief Financial Officer―would become mission support offices.(Warren E. Leary, “New Look for NASA for the Next Space Age,” New York Times, 25 June 2004; NASA, “Administrator Unveils Next Steps of NASA Transformation,” news release 04-205, 24 June 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and families of the Space Shuttle Columbia crew unveiled a commemorative monument for the Columbia crew at Arlington National Cemetery. The crew had died when Columbia broke apart during reentry into Earth’s atmosphere on 1 February 2003. The marble monument was 66 inches (1.7 meters) tall, 48 inches (1.2 meters) wide, and bore two bronze plaques portraying the crew and the shoulder patch they had worn on the mission.(NASA, “NASA Dedicates Space Shuttle Columbia Memorial,” news release 04-049, 2 February 2004.)
