The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
NASA and the FAA brought a demonstration of the Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) to Foley Square in downtown New York City. SATS represented one aspect of a public- private partnership focused on developing technology that would enable more people to fly directly to their destinations at their own convenience. The ultimate goal of the SATS project was for people to be able to access air travel in much the same way that they hail a cab. NASA’s SATS Project Manager Jerry N. Hefner described a scenario in which a person would board a plane in his or her neighborhood to fly to a destination 500 miles away, without changing planes and without going through a hub. Instead, SATS would fly into and out of underused rural and suburban airports, reducing congestion at larger airports and easing traffic on interstate highways across the country. SATS Project Manager for the FAA Peter C. McHugh commented that those involved in the project believed that, as the travel population using SATS aircraft grew, minimal interference or intersection with the larger airline system would occur.(Roger Clark for NY1 Cable TV, “NASA Tries To Change the Way Americans Fly,” 16 March 2005. 234)
Shana L. Dale became Deputy Administrator of NASA, replacing Frederick D. Gregory, who had announced his resignation from NASA in September 2005. Before joining NASA, Dale had worked at the Office of Science and Technology Policy, serving as Chief of Staff, General Counsel, and, finally, as Deputy Director for Homeland and National Security. In addition, Dale had served as Staff Director for the House Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics from 1995 to 2000.(NASA, “Dale Sworn In as NASA Deputy Administrator,” media advisory M05-186, 29 November 2005; NASA, “Griffin Applauds Confirmation of Dale as NASA Deputy Administrator,” news release 05-386, 4 November 2005.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had been in his new position for only one month, appeared as the sole witness before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, and Science, to testify regarding NASA’s FY 2006 budget request. Key issues that the panel discussed with Griffin included several related to the Space Shuttle Program: the four-year gap between the planned decommissioning of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and the first scheduled flight of the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) in 2014; the United States’ obligation to complete the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle; and servicing the HST. In his responses, Griffin stated that, in mid-July, he would release a plan for the first flight of the new CEV. He suggested that, if the ISS partners postponed some scheduled on-board scientific research, they could complete the ISS before the Shuttle’s retirement, without cancelling any research programs. Regarding the HST, Griffin stated his opposition to a robotic servicing mission and said that he wished to assess the first two Shuttle flights before making a decision. The panel also discussed recommended cuts in Earth Science research. Griffin responded that NASA had listened to the concerns of the scientific community and was reexamining that area. Griffin clarified that NASA would not cut science programs to fund the spaceflight program.
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) announced that it considered the Space Shuttle Discovery safe enough to fly again, even though NASA had not undertaken some steps recommended by the CAIB to ensure the Shuttle’s safe launch. NASA had planned to launch Discovery as the first Shuttle flight since the Columbia accident in 2003 and had established the Task Group to review NASA’s compliance with the CAIB’s critical recommendations. Task Group members stated that, although NASA had not complied with all of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations, the Space Shuttle was ready to resume flight, and NASA was responsible for making the final decision to launch the Shuttle. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin was unclear about how the Task Group’s findings would influence Shuttle launch plans.(Traci Watson, “Safety Panel: NASA Failed To Fix Critical Issues with Shuttle,” USA Today, 28 June 2009. 252)
The NASA Advisory Council (NAC), responsible for providing counsel and policy advice to the NASA Administrator on important programs and issues, held its first meeting after its organizational restructuring. NASA had restructured the NAC to provide it with better support as NASA implemented the Vision for Space Exploration. Under the reorganization, the NAC had incorporated standing committees that it had previously chartered. The six committees composing the restructured Council were Aeronautics, Audit and Finance, Exploration, Human Capital, Science, and Space Operations. Each committee was responsible for examining particular subject areas and providing findings to the full Council, which would consider the findings and supply specific recommendations to the Administrator. Former U.S. Senator and Apollo program astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt chaired the 24-member NAC, which also included former Apollo program astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first person to walk on the Moon.(NASA, “New NASA Advisory Council Holds Inaugural Meeting,” news release 05-416, 29 November 2005; NASA, “NASA Advisory Council (NAC),” 19 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/offices/nac/home/ index.html (accessed 22 July 2009).)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns,” news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, “NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
NASA announced that scientists had finally agreed that Voyager 1, launched in 1977, had reached the solar system’s final frontier, passed through the termination shock region―the point at the edge of the solar system where the solar wind slows abruptly, and entered the heliosheath―a frontier of unknown thickness defining the border with interstellar space. In November 2003, the Voyager team had announced unusual events in the mission’s history, signaling that Voyager 1 had reached the edge of the solar system. However, scientists disagreed as to whether the craft had actually encountered termination shock or was merely approaching the region at the edge of interstellar space. NASA explained that scientists had based the evidence that Voyager 1 had encountered termination shock on the craft’s measurement of a sudden increase in the strength of the magnetic field carried by the solar wind, combined with an inferred decrease in speed, which happens when the solar wind slows down. Additionally, Voyager had observed an increase in the number of high-speed, electrically charged electrons and ions, as well as a burst of plasma-wave noise, which scientists had expected to occur when Voyager 1 passed the termination shock. Eric Christian, Discipline Scientist for the Sun-Solar System Connection Research Program at NASA Headquarters, remarked that Voyager’s observations over the past few years had shown that termination shock is far more complicated than previously thought. When Voyager 1 entered the heliosheath, the craft was 8.7 billion miles (14 kilometers) away from Earth, the farthest any human-made object had traveled.(NASA, “Voyager Spacecraft Enters Solar System’s Final Frontier,” news release 05-131, 24 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05131_Voyager_agu.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Guy Gugliotta, “Voyager at Edge of Solar System,” Washington Post, 25 May 2005.)
NASA announced that it had approved the extension of operations for the twin Mars Rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, for up to 18 months. The robotic craft had already surprised engineers and scientists, having completed 11 months of extended activity beyond their successful three- month primary missions. Opportunity had driven more than three miles since arriving at Mars, eight times the distance originally planned, and, in March 2005, had set a new record of 722 feet (220 meters) in a single day’s drive. Spirit had driven a shorter distance but was working in a much rougher terrain than Opportunity. Both rovers were exhibiting signs of wear and exposure, and scientists recognized that either mission could end suddenly because of a random part failure. James K. Erickson, Project Manager for the rovers at NASA’s JPL, remarked that, despite the wear and the effects of exposure, both rovers remained in exceptional shape. Erickson said that NASA would work to get as much benefit as possible for as long as the craft were capable of producing worthwhile scientific results. Director of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program J. Douglas McCuistion added that the rovers’ successes had strengthened NASA’s commitment to achieving the ambitious goals of returning samples from Mars and eventually sending a human expedition to the planet.(NASA, “Durable Mars Rovers Sent into Third Overtime Period,” news release 05-091, 6 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05091_mer_extension.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
During its 179th meeting, held at the European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt, Germany, the ESA Council elected Sigmar Wittig as its Chair, effective 1 July 2005. Wittig, head of the German delegation to ESA and the Chair of the Executive Board of the German Aerospace Center (Deutsche Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt), replaced Per Tegnér of Sweden, whose term of office was ending on 30 June 2005. The ESA Council is ESA’s governing body and provides policy guidelines for ESA’s space programs.
NASA announced the establishment of the DART Mishap Investigation Board to determine why the DART spacecraft had failed to complete its mission on 15 April. Initially, NASA had believed that DART had come within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the target satellite before low fuel readings prompted it to abort its mission. However, NASA spokesperson Kimberly D. Newton later explained that new data had indicated that DART had bumped the satellite, boosting its orbit by as much as 5.75 miles (9.3 kilometers). However, DART had abandoned its target approximately halfway through its 24-hour mission. The Board consisted of seven voting members from NASA’s MSFC, NASA’s GSFC and ARC; the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; and the U.S. Air Force Space Command. NASA assigned eight federal employees to serve as advisors to the Board―six from MSFC, and one each from NASA’s JSC and NASA Headquarters. NASA selected Scott D. Croomes of MSFC to chair the Board and Kerry L. Remp of GRC to serve ex officio, to assure that board activity conformed to NASA’s procedural requirements.(NASA, “NASA Announces Dart Mishap Investigation Board Members,” news release 05-105, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05105_DART_mishap_board.html (accessed 29 June 2009); NASA Engineering and Safety Center, NESC Review of Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) Mission Mishap Investigation Review Board (MIB) (NESC Request No. 05-020-E, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, December 2006), http://klabs.org/richcontent/Reports/Failure_Reports/dart/ 167813main_rp-06-119_05-020-e_dart_report_final_dec_27.pdf (accessed 18 November 2009); Chris Kridler, “Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
France and the United States agreed to establish a Space Shuttle landing site in southern France. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and French Ambassador Jean-David Levitte signed the agreement, which covered NASA’s Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the agreement, France would permit Shuttles encountering problems during launch to land at Istres Air Base 125, near Marseilles, and allow the U.S. government to conduct additional support activities for Space Shuttles on French soil, such as weather monitoring and search-and-rescue operations.(NASA, “U.S. and France Agree To Establish NASA Shuttle Landing Site,” news release 05-143, 7 June 2005. 803 Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Safety Issues Unresolved,” Houston Chronicle, 9 June 2005; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Near to Meeting Safety Requirements for Launching in July,” New York Times, 9 June 2005.)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) released its final report on NASA’s efforts to meet the CAIB’s recommendations for resuming piloted Shuttle flights. Former NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had established the task group to provide an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations. In the final report, the CAIB concluded that NASA had met or exceeded 12 of the 15 recommendations and had made substantive progress on the remaining three. The task group explained that the final three recommendations were of a type that would be nearly impossible to complete. However, major media highlighted an appendix of the document in which seven of the 28-member task group provided a highly critical assessment of NASA’s management. These seven task force members claimed that some of the same organizational behaviors of NASA managers that had contributed to the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia had also jeopardized the July 2005 Space Shuttle Discovery mission. They stated further that NASA had failed to address the problem of Discovery’s loss of foam insulation from its fuel tank and had failed to take steps to protect the Space Shuttles from the damage caused by such debris.(Return to Flight Task Group, Final Report of the Return to Flight Task Group (Washington, DC, July 2005); John Schwartz, “Minority Report Faults NASA as Compromising Safety,” New York Times, 18 August 2005.)
William W. Parsons replaced Thomas Q. Donaldson as Director of NASA’s SSC. Parsons had served as Director of SSC from August 2002 to May 2003 before leaving SSC to serve as Space Shuttle Program Manager from May 2003 to September 2005. Donaldson had left SSC to serve on a Federal Emergency Management Agency special assignment concerning recovery efforts for areas affected by Hurricane Katrina in August 2005.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 9 July 2009); NASA, “NASA Names New Stennis Center Director,” news release 05-260, 13 September 2005.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASA’s detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
The American Academy of Arts and Sciences released “United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities,” a research paper highly critical of the Vision for Space Exploration. In the paper, former Director of NASA’s JSC George W. S. Abbey and former White House science advisor Neal F. Lane stated that the Vision for Space Exploration does not address major obstacles to the United States’ progress in space exploration and science. Those problems include predicted shortfalls in the U.S. engineering and science workforce and declining international cooperation on existing and planned space missions. Abbey and Lane also stated that the United States would be unlikely to realize the Vision’s objectives because of the diminishing U.S. commitment to the country’s commercial space industry and the declining role of basic science in the U.S. space program and in the national economy. NASA officials did not comment on the paper, stating that they had not yet seen it.(John Schwartz, “Report Says Space Program Is Lacking Money and Focus,” New York Times, 23 June 2005; George W. S. Abbey and Neal F. Lane, “United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities” (Occasional Paper, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA, 2005), 1–2.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
