NASA announced the crew for International Space Station (ISS) Expedition 13, scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in March 2006. Russian cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov would command the mission, and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams would serve as Flight Engineer and NASA Science Officer. Expedition 13 would also include the first Brazilian astronaut to fly in space, Marcos Cesar Pontes, who would engage in scientific experiments aboard the ISS for approximately one week. Williams had flown aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-101 as Mission Specialist in May 2000, performing a spacewalk that lasted almost 7 hours. As Flight Engineer for the 1997 mission to the Russian Mir space station, Vinogradov had completed five spacewalks. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 13: American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Fyodor N. Yurchikhin.(NASA, “NASA Announces Next International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-002, 5 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06002_Expedition_13_crew.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 5 January 2006, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/060105_exp13_crew_announcement.html (accessed 28 June 2010).)
Heads of the national space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at NASA’s KSC in Florida to review plans for completing assembly of the ISS by the end of 2010. Since the grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet in 2003, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, the ISS had operated with two-member crews. However, the ISS partners planned to increase the crew to three members with the next Space Shuttle Discovery flight, scheduled for May 2006, and to increase the crew of the station to six members in 2009. Furthermore, NASA announced its plan to launch 16 Shuttle flights to allow completion of the ISS before the planned retirement of the Shuttles in 2010. To advance the assembly schedule, the Shuttles would transport ESA’s Columbus laboratory module and JAXA’s experiment module Kibo to the ISS during four missions in 2007 and 2008. The ISS partners issued a joint statement that “affirmed their plans to use a combination of transportation systems provided by Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States in order to complete ISS assembly in a timeframe that meets the needs of the partners and ensures full utilization of the unique capabilities of the ISS throughout its lifetime.”(NASA, “Joint Statement by International Space Station Heads of Agency,” news release 06-084, 2 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06084_HOA_statement.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Warren E. Leary, “Schedule To Complete Space Station Is Advanced,” New York Times, 3 March 2006; Irene Klotz for Reuters, “NASA Has New Plan To Complete Space Station,” 2 March 2006.)
At the National Space Society’s International Space Development Conference, NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale announced NASA’s sponsorship of the Lunar Lander Challenge competition, with prizes totaling US$2.5 million, to develop rockets capable of landing on the Moon. The X Prize Foundation would manage the competition and award the Lunar Lander Challenge prizes at the presentation of the X Prize Cup in October 2006. The challenge would have two levels of difficulty, with prizes awarded at each level. Level 1 would require a vehicle to take off from a designated launch area, rocket to an altitude of 150 feet (50 meters), hover for 90 seconds, and land on a pad 100 meters (320.08 feet) from the launch point. Level 2 would require the same launch altitude and the same distance between launch and landing pad, but the rocket would have to hover for 180 seconds and to land on a rocky site simulating the lunar surface. California entrepreneur Peter H. Diamandis, founder of the X Prize competition, stated that “entrepreneurial companies can build the lunar space ships [necessary for achieving NASA’s goal of returning people to the Moon in the next decade], and a Lunar Lander Challenge can stimulate the required technology in an efficient and rapid fashion.”(Maggie McKee, “Lunar Lander Is NASA’s Biggest Challenge,” New Scientist, 5 May 2006; X Prize Foundation, “X Prize Foundation and NASA Offer $2.5 Million Lunar Lander Challenge Competition To Take Place at ’06 X Prize Cup in Las Cruces,” 4 May 2006, http://www.xprize.org/llc/press-release/x-prize-foundation-and-nasa-offer- 2-5-million-lunar-challenge-competition-t (accessed 23 March 2010).)
In Bangalore, India, NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and G. Madhavan Nair, Chair of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), signed two Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs), agreeing to cooperate on India’s first uncrewed lunar mission—Chandrayaan 1— scheduled to launch in late 2007 or early 2008. The mission would fly two NASA scientific instruments—the Moon Mineralogy Mapper, to track the mineral and chemical composition of the Moon, and the mini synthetic-aperture radar (Mini-SAR) to map ice deposits in the Moon’s polar regions. Chandrayaan 1 would also carry three scientific instruments from European research centers. At the signing ceremony, Griffin said that he hoped that “as we extend the reach of human civilization throughout our solar system, the United States and India will be partners on many more technically challenging and scientifically rewarding projects.”(NASA, “NASA Agrees To Cooperate with India on Lunar Mission,” news release 06-219, 9 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06219_griffin_india.html (accessed 1 October 2009); Gavin Rabinowitz for Associated Press, “Indian Mission To Carry NASA Devices,” 10 May 2006; Paul Watson, “U.S. To Piggyback on India’s Mission To Orbit the Moon,” Los Angeles Times, 10 May 2006.)
President George W. Bush submitted his US$2.77 trillion budget for FY 2007, which included US$16.8 billion to fund NASA, a 3.2 percent increase over FY 2006. According to NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, the priorities established by this budget reflected NASA’s commitment to implement the Vision for Space Exploration, to complete the assembly of the ISS with the fewest possible spaceflights, and to deliver an operational Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) no later than 2014. The budget provided for a reduction in funding for the Shuttle program, from US$4.78 billion in FY 2006 to US$4.06 billion in FY 2007, and a 3 percent increase in funding for the ISS, to US$1.81 billion. NASA had requested funds of US$3.98 billion for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, a 30 percent increase from the previous fiscal year. The Directorate would develop the CEV, two new launchers, and the lunar landers needed to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA had estimated the cost of completing ISS assembly with the minimum number of Shuttle flights, while ensuring the safety of Shuttle flights, and had calculated a budget shortfall of US$3−5 billion. To make up this shortfall, the FY 2007 budget would cut funding for aeronautics research by 18 percent, to US$724.4 million. In addition, the budget would cap the increase for NASA’s science budget, which funded deep- space probes and Earth-observation satellites, at 1.5 percent in FY 2007, and at 1 percent annually for the following four years.(NASA, “NASA Administrator’s Statement About FY 2007 Budget,” news release 06-056, 6 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06056_Budget_Statement.html (accessed 10 September 2010); Warren E. Leary, “Unexpected Costs Force NASA Cuts,” New York Times, 7 February 2006; Brian Berger, “NASA Seeks 30-Percent Increase For Explorations Programs,” Space News, 6 February 2006.)
The first successful launch at a commercial spaceport in the United States took place when the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport launched a rocket called the Minotaur, carrying two satellites. The state governments of Virginia and Maryland had funded the spaceport to serve the commercial space launch market. Other institutions contributing to the venture included Old Dominion University and several aerospace companies. The facility was located on land leased from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) near Chincoteague, Virginia. Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, had built the rocket. One of the satellites it carried was a U.S. Air Force tactical surveillance satellite called TacSat-2. The other was a 10-kilogram (22-pound) NASA satellite called GeneSat 1, designed for experiments on E. coli bacteria.(Michael E. Ruane, “At Va. Spaceport, Rocket Launches 1,000 Dreams,” Washington Post, 17 December 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 638, 1 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx638.html (accessed 1 July 2010).)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing on NASA’s FY 2007 budget proposal, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. Griffin reiterated NASA’s budgetary priorities, which he had outlined on 6 February when President George W. Bush submitted the federal budget to Congress. NASA had proposed using money previously allocated for science, lunar exploration, and aeronautics programs to fund the programs that would now take precedence, according to the Vision for Space Exploration. Priorities would include supporting human spaceflight programs, completing the assembly of the ISS, and placing the CEV in operation by 2014. Committee chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) and ranking member Bart Gordon (D-TN) were equally critical of the proposed budget. Boehlert stated that the budget was “bad for space science, worse for Earth science, perhaps worse still for aeronautics. It basically cuts or de-emphasizes every forward looking, truly futuristic program of the agency to fund operational and development programs to enable us to do what we are already doing or have done before.” Although he expressed support for the Vision for Space Exploration, Boehlert said that he saw no need to accelerate the deadline for an operational CEV to a date earlier than 2014. Gordon criticized the Bush administration for sending Congress a budget request for funding that was inadequate to implement NASA’s exploration initiative and other programs.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA’s Fiscal Year 2007 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 16 February 2006, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath= 109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG-109hhrg25937&packageId=CHRG- 109hhrg25937&fromBrowse=true (accessed 30 December 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, “NASA’s Stated Goals Don’t Match Budgetary Realities,” press release, 16 February 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1044 (accessed 12 July 2010); Brian Berger, “Congress Criticizes NASA Budget Request,” Space.com, 16 February 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060216_griffin_ nasa.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space. Griffin outlined highlights of NASA’s FY 2007 budget request and discussed “the strategic direction for NASA in implementing the priorities of the President and Congress within the resources provided.” Griffin stated that NASA’s first priority must be to honor its March 2006 commitment to its international partners on the ISS. NASA had pledged to conduct an adequate number of Space Shuttle flights to complete the assembly of ISS by the end of the decade. Toward this end, NASA had reallocated funds budgeted for its scientific and exploration missions for fiscal years 2007−2011, transferring the projected funds to the budget for the Space Shuttle and the ISS. Griffin urged that NASA’s second priority should be constructing the new CEV, which would transport humans to the ISS after NASA retired the Space Shuttles in 2010. Griffin said that the CEV must be operational “not later than 2014 and possibly much sooner.” According to Griffin, NASA would have to delay several new scientific missions because fulfilling NASA’s commitment to the ISS and the CEV was a higher priority. Redirecting funds budgeted for Exploration Systems, in order to provide additional funds for aeronautics research or science
NASA and the U.S. Air Force signed an agreement to create an aeronautics research partnership. According to the MOU, which NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Secretary of the U.S. Air Force Michael W. Wynne signed, the two organizations would freely exchange research information, strive to reduce the duplication of research, and enhance their long-term research planning. The agreement covered several areas of aeronautics research, including advanced aircraft design, aviation safety, materials development, and propulsion management.(NASA, “NASA, Air Force Agree To Aeronautics Cooperation,” news release 06-289, 7 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06289_air_force.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
To raise money for the Russian space program, ISS crew member Mikhail V. Tyurin drove a golf ball off the ISS during a spacewalk, an event that comprised a small, but highly publicized, part of the 5.5-hour spacewalk. Tyurin and American astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria spent most of the spacewalk conducting serious tasks, such as installing a proton detector to monitor solar eruptions. NASA beamed imagery of the event to Mission Control, showing Tyurin using a 6- iron to drive a lightweight replica of a golf ball off a special spring-loaded tee. Element 21 Golf Company of Toronto, Canada, had paid the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos an undisclosed fee for the golf outing, and NASA had approved it after determining that the ball posed no threat to the ISS. NASA expected the ball to enter Earth’s orbit and to incinerate in the upper atmosphere within a few days.(Mark Carreau, “After Sending Golf Ball into Space, It’s Down To Business,” Houston Chronicle, 23 November 2006; Stefano S. Coledan, “From Outer Space, a Cry of Fore!” New York Times, 23 November 2006.)
06191_Crossfield_death.html (accessed 25 September 2009); David Stout, “Scott Crossfield, Fabled Test Pilot, Dies at 85,” New York Times, 21 April 2006. missions, would directly affect “NASA’s ability to effectively and efficiently transition the workforce and capabilities from the Space Shuttle to the new CEV system.”(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science and Space, NASA Issues and Challenges, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 25 April 2006, 2−4 (statement of NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin), http://commerce.senate.gov/pdf/griffin-042506.pdf (accessed 21 January 2010).)
Speaking at the 22nd National Space Symposium, in Colorado, Vice Administrator of China National Space Administration (CNSA) Luo Ge reviewed the landmark achievements of the People’s Republic of China and outlined its ambitious future space exploration plans. Luo Ge recapped China’s accomplishments to date—46 consecutive successful launches since 1996, including 23 satellites and six Shenzhou spacecraft, the most recent of which were crewed missions. He stated that China’s total annual investment in space programs was equivalent to US$500 million. China planned to achieve a lunar flyby in 2007, to develop a nonpolluting launch vehicle by 2010, to land a rover on the Moon’s surface by 2012, to establish an orbiting space laboratory by 2015, and to launch robotic lunar-sample-return missions by 2017. Furthermore, Luo Ge stated that China expected to launch approximately 100 Earth-orbiting satellites over the next five to eight years, ranging from oceanographic, navigation, and telecommunications satellite systems to constellations of Earth-observing and disaster-mitigation spacecraft. (Leonard David, “China Unveils Ambitious Space Plans at National Space Symposium,” Space.com, 5 April 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060405_nss_china.html (accessed 24 June 2010); Xinhua News Agency, “China Reveals Space Exploration Plans,” 6 April 2006.)
GAO released a report stating that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) needed to correct its unrealistic cost estimates for its major space acquisition programs. Analyzing six of the U.S. Air Force’s ongoing space programs, GAO had found that the programs’ estimated costs had increased by US$12.2 billion, 44 percent over initial cost estimates. The report attributed this cost growth to the DOD’s practice of commencing programs before determining whether sufficient financial resources would be available to complete them. GAO suggested that this practice had developed because of pressures on the DOD to secure program funding. The report also stated that the DOD’s unrealistic cost estimates had exacerbated its problems with acquisitions for the Air Force’s programs. For example, the DOD had frequently had to move funds between programs to cover the costs of poorly performing programs. This had led to inefficiencies in meeting programs’ costs and schedules. The DOD agreed with the report’s findings and outlined specific steps it planned to take to make the Air Force’s cost estimates more accurate.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Acquisitions: DOD Needs To Take More Action To Address Unrealistic Cost Estimates of Space Systems” (report no. GAO-07-96, Washington, DC, 17 November 2006), 1–6, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0796.pdf (accessed 29 April 2010).)
NASA announced that it had misplaced the original recordings of the first Moon landing, along with other tapes containing data from that same mission. NASA had initially transferred the tapes to the U.S. National Archives, later storing them at NASA’s GSFC. NASA officials noted that NASA still had copies of all of the data on the tapes, including the footage of Neil A. Armstrong’s historic first steps on the Moon. However, they also noted that the images on the copies were of lower quality than those on the original magnetic tapes, because NASA equipment had been incompatible with television technology when the first human mission to the Moon took place. NASA had displayed the original transmissions of the Moon landing on a monitor and pointing a television camera at the monitor to broadcast the images on television. NASA was continuing to look for the tapes.(Robert Colvile, “One Giant Slip-Up for Mankind, NASA Has Mislaid the Original Footage of Neil Armstrong’s Historic Moon Landing,” Daily Telegraph (London), 14 August 2006; Washington Post, “Tape of 1st Moon Landing Missing,” 15 August 2006.)
The National Research Council (NRC) released a study of civil aeronautics research and technology priorities that NASA and other government agencies should pursue in the coming decade. The U.S. Congress and NASA had requested the NRC to produce a report identifying aeronautics technologies that would support and improve the U.S. air transportation system. In its report, the NRC stated that NASA and other agencies should pursue aeronautics research and technology that advances the U.S. air system’s capacity, safety, reliability, efficiency, and performance, and reduces the system’s energy consumption and environmental impact. The report also suggested that civil aeronautics R&T should support the U.S. space program and take advantage of synergies with defense. In addition, the NRC outlined five areas of high-priority aeronautics R&T, areas that researchers at NASA and other U.S. agencies should pursue to attain the identified strategic objectives. Those areas included 1) aerodynamics and aeroacoustics; 2) propulsion and power; 3) materials and structures; 4) dynamics, navigation and control, and avionics; and 5) intelligent and autonomous systems, operations and decision making, human integrated systems, and networking and communications.(National Research Council, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006).)
NASA announced major personnel changes at three of its centers, Ames Research Center (ARC) in California, Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida, and Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. G. Scott Hubbard, Director of ARC, announced his resignation, stating that he had agreed to assume the Carl Sagan Chair for the Study of Life in the Universe at the SETI (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California. Hubbard had worked at Ames since 1987, serving as Director since 2002, and had previously served on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board and as the first Director of the NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA appointed William W. Parsons Jr., Director of Stennis since 2005, as Deputy Director of KSC. Parsons’s tenure at NASA had spanned 16 years. As Space Shuttle Program Manager after the Columbia accident, he had directed NASA’s return-to-flight efforts, which had culminated, in the summer of 2005, in the successful flight of Discovery in STS-114. Parsons had also led NASA’s recovery efforts after Hurricane Katrina. NASA appointed Richard J. Gilbrech, who had worked at Stennis since 1991, as Director of SSC. He had served as Deputy Director of LaRC in Virginia, as Deputy Director of NASA’s Engineering Safety Center, and had worked at various NASA flight centers.(NASA, “NASA Announces Senior Management Changes,” news release 06-031, 23 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06031_personnel_changes.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Picayune Item (MS), “NASA Announces Management Changes at Stennis Space Center,” 25 January 2006.)
CNSA launched the Sino Satellite Communications Company’s (SinoSat’s) satellite on a Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center at 16:20 (UT). The communications satellite, SinoSat-2, represented a major technological advance for the Chinese space program. The domestically developed satellite, capable of providing both analog and digital television broadcasts, was China’s first satellite based on the Direct-From-Home-4 system, or DFH-4 bus. The DFU-4 bus enables individual households to receive television signals using their own satellite-dish antennas. SinoSat hoped that the satellite would improve the capacity and reliability of Chinese television broadcasting and help China serve the international spaceflight market. In addition, CNSA officials stated that the satellite’s technology could prompt the Chinese government to eliminate regulations prohibiting Chinese citizens from installing their own satellite-dish antennas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636; Xinhua News Agency, “5th Ld-Writethru-China Exclusive: China Launches High- Power Communications, Broadcast Satellite,” 29 October 2006.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin announced that NASA would conduct a fifth and final crewed servicing mission to the HST, an expedition that would help extend and improve the observatory’s capabilities through 2013. Griffin’s announcement reversed previous NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe’s decision to cancel the servicing mission. The mission’s main objective was to install two new instruments, the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (COS) and Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3). The COS would survey the universe’s large-scale structure, known as the cosmic web. The gravity of dark matter and the spatial distribution of galaxies and intergalactic gas determine the structure known as the cosmic web. The WFC3 would observe objects in the solar system and in distant galaxies, providing scientists with information that would help them determine how those objects had formed. NASA announced that the mission’s crew members would be Commander Scott D. Altman, Pilot Gregory C. Johnson, and Mission Specialists Andrew J. Feustel, Michael T. Good, John M. Grunsfeld, Michael J. Massimino, and K. Megan McArthur. NASA had tentatively scheduled the mission for 2008. The mission was controversial because it posed risks to astronauts. However, O’Keefe’s cancellation had also engendered controversy, because failing to service the HST would have meant the end of the HST’s mission by 2008.(NASA, “NASA Approves Mission and Names Crew for Return to Hubble,” news release 06-343, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06343_HST_announcement.html (accessed 5 April 2010); Mark Carreau, “NASA to Repair Hubble Despite Potential Risks,” Houston Chronicle, 1 November 2006.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing to address the results of the statutorily mandated Nunn-McCurdy review of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS). NOAA, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) jointly managed NPOESS, which would provide data and imagery to help weather forecasters, climatologists, and the military map and monitor changes in weather, climate, the oceans, and the environment. The Nunn-McCurdy amendment to the Defense Authorization Act of 1983 (10 U.S.C. 2433) provided that Congress must review any DOD-funded program that was more than 25 percent over budget, to determine whether and in what manner it should continue. In January 2006, the Secretary of the Air Force had notified Congress that the NPOESS program would exceed the 25 percent Nunn-McCurdy threshold. The three NPOESS managing agencies had reviewed the program and determined that it should continue. However, NPOESS must reduce the number of its satellites from six to four and eliminate five sensors, including three for climate research. The agencies would postpone the first NPOESS satellite launch until 2013 and discontinue work on the key weather sensor known as Conically Scanning Microwave Image/Sounder (CMIS). The United States would temporarily rely on Europe for the data that CMIS would have collected, including ocean wind speeds. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified regarding NASA’s compliance with the mandates of the Nunn-McCurdy recertified NPOESS program, emphasizing that NASA would continue to provide cost-effective technologies for two key components of this program—the NPOESS Preparatory Project (NPP) and the continuity of long-term climate measurements.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NPOESS: Results of the Nunn-McCurdy Review of NOAA’s Weather Satellite Program, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 June 2006, 3−6, 22−25, http://www.gpo.gov/ fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG- 109hhrg27970&packageId=CHRG-109hhrg27970&fromBrowse=true (accessed 20 December 2010); NOAA, Center for Satellite Applications and Research (STAR), “STAR Acronyms,” http://www.star.nesdis.noaa.gov/star/ acronyms.php (accessed 5 October 2010).)
The National Research Council Space Studies Board released its study, An Assessment of Balance in NASA’s Science Programs, concluding that NASA “does not have the necessary resources to carry out the tasks of completing the ISS, returning humans to the Moon, maintaining vigorous space and Earth science and microgravity life and physical sciences programs, and sustaining capabilities in aeronautical research.” Study chair Lennard A. Fisk, University of Michigan space scientist and former NASA Associate Administrator, stated that the study committee was “particularly concerned that the shortfall in funding for science has fallen disproportionately on small missions and on funding for basic research and technology. These actions run the risk of disrupting the pipeline of human capital and technology that is essential for the future success of the space program.” The conference report (H. Rep. No.108- 792), which accompanied H.R. 4818 (Pub. L. No.108-447), the bill appropriating FY 2005 funds for NASA, had mandated the study.(Guy Gugliotta, “ NASA Underfunded, Panel Reports,” Washington Post, 5 May 2006; National Academy of Sciences, Office of News and Public Information, “NASA Lacks Resources To Sustain Vigorous Science Program,” news release, 4 May 2006, http://www8.nationalacademies.org/ onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=11644 (accessed 16 March 2010); National Research Council, Space Studies Board, An Assessment of Balance in NASA’s Science Programs (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), 29, http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php? record_id=11644 (accessed 16 March 2010).)
Bruce T. Lundin, who had joined the Lewis Research Center (LeRC) in Ohio in 1943, and had served as its Director from 1969 to 1977, died at the age of 86. At Lewis, Lundin had conducted research on aircraft engine–cooling heat transfer; directed the development of turbojet engines, chemical rockets, and electric thrusters for spacecraft propulsion; and helped to develop electrical power–generating systems for spacecraft, using chemical, solar, and nuclear energy sources. According to NASA officials, Lundin’s work during his tenure as the chief of the Engine Research Division had contributed to the increased performance and reliability of modern-day commercial transport and supersonic aircraft engines. Lundin had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal twice.(Wally Guenther, “Bruce Lundin, 86, Was Director of NASA Lewis Research Center,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 30 January 2006.)
