STS-118 Mission Specialist Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson made the fourth and final spacewalk of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours, the pair installed the antenna of the External Wireless Instrumentation System, attached a stand for the extension boom of the Shuttle’s robotic arm, and retrieved two materials experiment containers for return to Earth aboard Endeavour. Mission Control had cancelled approximately 2 hours worth of tasks from the EVA to enable the crew to close the hatch between the ISS and the Shuttle in preparation for an early departure. NASA managers had rescheduled the return flight to enable Endeavour to land a day early, in case Hurricane Dean headed toward Houston. The hurricane could have forced an emergency relocation of flight controllers from Houston to a makeshift control center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. A temporary control center would have been neither as organized nor as large as the Houston operation.(NASA KSC, “STS-118”; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Hurriedly Complete Spacewalk,” 19 August 2007.)
Four years behind its original schedule, JAXA successfully launched Kaguya, also called the Selenological and Engineering Explorer (SELENE), aboard an H-2A solid-fuel rocket from Tanegashima Island at 1:31 (UT). The 2.9-tonne (2,900-kilogram or 3.2-ton) lunar orbiter carried various instruments that would enable it to obtain detailed data about the lunar topography and surface-mineral composition. JAXA had promoted the mission as the most significant lunar expedition since America’s Apollo program of the 1960s and early 1970s, in terms of its scope and ambition. JAXA claimed that the mission would outpace the former Soviet Union’s Luna program, NASA’s Clementine mission of 1994, and NASA’s Lunar Prospector mission of 1998– 1999. Kaguya’s launch occurred at a critical time for the Japanese space agency, which was facing accusations that it lacked a vision capable of challenging the ambition of the People’s Republic of China to lead East Asia in space exploration. At the time of the launch, JAXA also lacked popular and political support. Japan’s citizens had such poor regard for the civilian space program that JAXA had to negotiate with the local fishermen of Tanegashima for acceptable launch times. Because September was one of two launch windows that Tanegashima fishermen’s unions had offered JAXA, Kaguya’s launch took place during typhoon season. Kazuto Suzuki, a specialist in global space issues at Tsukuba University in Tokyo, explained that JAXA was only beginning to realize that, to enhance the political importance of Japan’s space initiatives, it would need to market Japan’s space program to appeal to the Japanese public.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647, 1 October 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx647.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Bruce Wallace, “After Long Delay, Japan Launches Lunar Orbiter,” Los Angeles Times, 14 September 2007; Associated Press, “Japan’s Space Agency Launches Lunar Probe,” 14 September 2007.)
The heads of space agencies from Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at the ESA headquarters in Paris to review International Space Station (ISS) cooperation. The ISS partners discussed the significant accomplishments and milestones in implementing the ISS’s configuration and assembly sequence, as endorsed at the previous meeting of the partners in March 2006. Milestones for the ISS included reestablishing a three-person crew, reinitiating station-assembly activities, and completing three extremely challenging Space Shuttle missions, which included the extravehicular accomplishments of American, Canadian, European, and Russian astronauts.(NASA, “Heads of Agency International Space Station Joint Statement,” news release 07-013, 23 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_07013_HOA_Joint_Statement.html (accessed 14 October 2009). 11 Edward Cody, “China Confirms Firing Missile To Destroy Satellite,” Washington Post, 24 January 2007; Jason Dean, “China Verifies Antisatellite-Missile Test,” Wall Street Journal, 24 January 2007.)
Boeing completed a developmental heat shield for NASA’s Orion CEV. In 2006 NASA’s ARC had awarded Boeing Advanced Systems a contract to develop a demonstration Thermal Protection System (TPS) Manufacturing Demonstration Unit (MDU) for the Orion capsule. Thomas Andrews, Boeing TPS Program Manager, stated that the TPS MDU had met NASA’s risk-reduction objectives “to move the Orion heat shield program toward full-scale development in preparation for CEV missions.” Boeing had fabricated the TPS MDU from Phenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) material. With PICA’s proven performance on NASA’s Stardust spacecraft heat shield, NASA was considering the material for Orion’s heat shield. Boeing’s integrated concept for the TPS MDU used multiple PICA components, with each piece sized significantly larger than the typical Space Shuttle tiles, greatly reducing the number of the shield’s parts, as well as its complexity.(Boeing Company, “Boeing Completes Prototype Heat Shield for NASA Orion Spacecraft,” news release, 13 November 2007, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2007/q4/071113a_nr.html (accessed 12 November 2010). 169 William Harwood, “Harmony Module Detached in Critical Relocation Operation,” CBS Space Place, 14 November 2007; Patrick Peterson, “Live in Orbit: 16 Bolts Driven, Mating Permanent,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 November 2007.)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Kenneth J. Krieg had signed the National Partnership for Aeronautical Testing (NPAT) Agreement. NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) would use the integrated national strategy NPAT to manage their respective aeronautical test facilities, including wind tunnels, propulsion-test facilities, simulation facilities, and open-air ranges. The agreement fulfilled one element of the two agencies’ response to the National Aeronautics Research and Development Policy, which President George W. Bush had signed in December 2006. In addition to expanding the dialogue beyond the test-and-evaluation communities, to include industry, academia, and the science and technology programs of NASA and DOD, the agreement established a council responsible for developing projects to streamline and economize management of aeronautical test facilities. Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator of NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, and John B. Foulkes of DOD’s Test Resource Management Center would cochair the council.(NASA, “NASA and Department of Defense Partner for Aeronautical Testing,” news release 07-52, 26 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07052_DoD_MoU_aero.html (accessed 14 October 2009); United Press International, “NASA Signs Defense Department Agreement,” 28 February 2007.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC on an 11-day mission, designated STS-117, to continue construction of the ISS. The crew consisted of Commander Frederick W. Sturckow; Pilot Lee J. Archambault; Mission Specialists James F. Reilly II, Patrick G. Forrester, Steven R. Swanson, and John D. Olivas; and Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson, who would replace Sunita L. Williams on board the ISS as a member of ISS Expeditions 15 and 16. The launch was nearly flawless. Only one potential problem occurred several minutes into the flight, when on- board cameras captured an image that appeared to show foam flaking off the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, just after the solid rocket boosters (SRBs) had separated from the orbiter. According to Shuttle Program Manager N. Wayne Hale Jr., NASA’s preliminary analysis of the incident indicated that the foam had not struck the craft. NASA planned further analysis.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-136, 8 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07136_Atlantis_launch.html (accessed 13 April 2010); NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight),” NASAfacts, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/177714main_STS-117.pdf (accessed 21 May 2010), John Johnson Jr., “Flawless Launch, At Last, For Atlantis,” Los Angeles Times, 9 June 2007.)
NASA announced that, for the fifth time, it would extend the missions of the Mars Exploration Rovers Spirit and Opportunity. The twin rovers had landed on Mars in January 2004, embarking on missions originally planned to last 90 days. John L. Callas, Mars Rover Project Manager at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, remarked that, although Spirit and Opportunity were showing some signs of aging, they remained “in good health” and capable of continuing to collect scientific data. At the time of the announcement of the missions’ extension, Spirit had driven 4.5 miles (7.3 kilometers) and had returned more than 102,000 images. Opportunity had driven 7.2 miles (11.6 kilometers) and had returned more than 94,000 images.(NASA, “NASA Extends Operations for Its Long-Lived Mars Rovers,” news release 07-208, 15 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_072088_Mars_Rovers_Funding_Ext.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) released a study conducted over two years, examining the United States’ Earth-observing satellite missions. The study, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond, was the first 10-year plan to recommend a path forward that would restore U.S. leadership in Earth science and prevent the collapse of the U.S. system of Earth- science satellites. The report recommended that, to accomplish this goal and to rebuild the aging network of environmental spacecraft, the U.S. government should fund 17 Earth-observing-satellite missions between 2010 and 2020. To fund these missions, NASA would need to resume spending US$2 billion per year on Earth science, and the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) would need to maintain funding levels at US$1 billion each year. According to the report, NASA’s budget for Earth science had decreased 30 percent since 2000, while NOAA had experienced major cost overruns and schedule delays in its primary mission to study weather and climate. Without reinvestment, the number of NASA’s satellites monitoring the Earth’s climate could decrease by 2017 from 25 to 7, leaving the United States without scientific information to analyze severe storms and to determine changes in the Earth’s climate.(Brian Berger, “Report Urges Reinvestment in U.S. Earth Science Satellites,” Space.com, 16 January 2007, http://www.space.com/aol/businessmonday_070122.html (accessed 4 March 2010); Marc Kaufman, “Cutbacks Impede Climate Studies,” Washington Post, 16 January 2007; National Research Council, Space Studies Board and Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007), http://www.nap.edu/catalog. php?record_id=11820#toc (accessed 5 November 2009).)
The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) published a final rule, effective 5 June 2007, governing experimental permits for launching reusable suborbital rockets for space tourism. Under the rules, which the U.S. Congress had mandated in the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492), a single experimental permit would cover multiple vehicles of a particular design and allow an unlimited number of launches. The FAA would identify the type of design changes that it would permit the licensed launch company to make without invalidating the permit; renew the one-year permit after conducting a review; prohibit companies conducting test flights covered by an experimental permit to carry passengers for compensation or hire; establish criteria for the physical area in which a company could operate a vehicle with an experimental permit; and require a vehicle developer applying for a 47 permit to provide a program description, flight-test plan, and operational-safety documentation.
Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the second EVA of STS-120, disconnecting cables from the P6 truss, to remove the P6 truss from the Z1 truss. Tani and Parazynski made progress outfitting the new Harmony module, mating the power and data grapple fixture, and reconfiguring connectors on the S1 truss, in preparation for the later deployment of the radiator on S1. Tani also inspected the SARJ, collecting fine metal shavings on part of a wheel with solar panels attached to it. The discovery of the metal shavings enabled engineers to identify the source of friction that had caused the wheel to begin slowing down in September. Engineers had designed the wheel to spin freely so that the solar panels pointed toward the Sun; the panels generated electricity to operate the ISS’s computers, oxygen- producing machine, and other systems. Tani reported that, in addition to collecting the metal shavings, he had observed that parts of the wheel’s surface appeared discolored, a possible sign of corrosion. To prevent further damage to the wheel, engineers stopped it from spinning, thereby reducing the amount of electricity that the panels generated. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 33 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120”; Traci Watson, “Damaged Component Could Thwart Space Station Plans,” USA Today, 29 October 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronauts Discover Damage to Space Station,” 29 October 2007.)
The Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee held a hearing to discuss planned budget cuts to weather and environmental satellite programs, reductions that could significantly affect scientists’ ability to study Earth’s climate. Antonio J. Busalacchi, Director of the Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center of the University of Maryland, spoke extensively about the causes of the delays and cost overruns in the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS), a joint project of DOD, NASA, and NOAA. The partner agencies, intending for NPOESS to replace NASA’s QuikSCAT satellite, which had launched in 1999 with a three- to five-year life expectancy, had originally scheduled NPOESS satellites to begin launches to replace aging satellites in 2008. However, at the time of the hearing, the partners had postponed the launches, now scheduled to occur during 2013−2026. Busalacchi characterized the status of the program as “one giant leap backward for mankind,” and Commerce Committee Chair Clarence William “Bill” Nelson (D-FL) called the implementation of the NPOESS program a disaster. David A. Powner of the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) testified that, although the initial cost estimate for the program had been US$6.5 billion for six satellites, the projected cost had since reached US$12.5 billion, with two satellites and some instruments dropped from the program. The report also found that the agencies had not coordinated effectively and had not filled critical NPOESS jobs. Mary Ellen Kicza, Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services at NOAA, testified to the committee that the agencies had already addressed many of the problems that GAO had identified.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, U.S. Weather and Environmental Satellites: Ready for the 21st Century? 110th Cong., 1st sess., 11 July 2007; see also statements of Ellen Kicza, David A. Powner, and Antonio J. Busalacchi, http://commerce.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?p=Hearings (accessed 29 October 2010) ; Wes Allison, “Politics Aging Satellite Won’t Cripple Storm Trackers,” St. Petersburg Times (FL), 12 July 2007; Jessica Gresko for the Associated Press, “Senate Committee Hears Recommendations on Weather Satellites,” 11 July 2007.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin named Richard J. Gilbrech as Associate Administrator for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, succeeding Scott J. Horowitz, who had announced in July his intention to leave NASA by 1 October. The Directorate was responsible
Four teams competed at NASA’s Regolith Excavation Challenge to dig a minimum of 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of simulated lunar soil—regolith—within 0.5 hours, using no more than 30 watts of power. However, none of the teams succeeded in winning the US$125,000 first prize. The top performer was the entry from Technology Ranch of Pixmo Beach, California, the only machine to run for a full 30 minutes in its first attempt and to scoop up 75 kilograms (165 pounds) of regolith. The Regolith Excavation Challenge was the seventh centennial challenge NASA had held since 2005. However, the only person who had won any of the competitions was Peter K. Homer, who had won US$200,000 for his entry in the Astronaut Glove Challenge on 3 May. Kenneth Davidian, Program Manager of NASA’s Centennial Challenges Program, stated that NASA would add the unawarded prize money to the winnings for the 2008 Regolith Excavation Challenge, increasing the value of the prize for that competition to US$375,000. Davidian said that he expected the number of teams competing in the challenge would double and that many more NASA engineers would observe the competition in the future.(Dana Mackenzie, “No One Scoops the Prize at Moon Digger Contest,” New Scientist, 14 May 2007.)
NASA to present a credible plan and accompanying timetable for implementing the NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee’s recommendations, including the most controversial one, related to the allegations that some astronauts had drunk alcohol shortly before flight. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had compared the alcohol allegations to urban legends, testified that NASA was already in the process of addressing the committee’s concerns. At the time of the hearing, NASA was preparing an anonymous survey to assist in identifying its employees’ continuing concerns about safety issues and about other review committee findings.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “Subcommittee Questions NASA on Health Care of Astronaut Corps,” news release, 6 September 2007, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science+ and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&packageId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA’s Astronaut Health Care System—Results of an Independent Review, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2007; Eun Kyung Kim, “Fear May Be NASA Problem,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 September 2007.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from KSC in Florida at 11:38 a.m. (EDT) on STS-120, a 14- day mission to continue ISS construction. The STS-120 crew consisted of Commander Pamela A. Melroy; Pilot George D. Zamka; and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, Stephanie D. Wilson, Daniel M. Tani, and ESA astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli. Mission Specialist Tani would join Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Yuri I. Malenchenko, replacing Clayton C. Anderson, who had lived aboard the ISS for five months. Mission goals included installing the Harmony connecting module (Node 2) and moving the P6 segment of the ISS truss, with its solar arrays, to a permanent position at the end of the
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Roskosmos head Anatoly N. Perminov signed agreements in Moscow allowing two Russian scientific instruments to fly aboard NASA spacecraft. According to the agreement, the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) would fly aboard NASA’s LRO, which was scheduled to begin a yearlong mission in October 2008. In addition, the Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN) instrument would travel to Mars aboard NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory (MSL), a robotic rover scheduled to launch in 2009. Designed to search for evidence of water ice, LEND would map concentrations of hydrogen at the lunar surface, or just below it. The DAN instrument would conduct similar investigations on Mars— measuring hydrogen to analyze the interaction of neutrons with the Martian surface.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft To Carry Russian Science Instruments,” news release 07-219, 3 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07219_combined_Russian_MOU.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
NASA announced that it had signed a MOU with the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), entering into an agreement that would enable American scientists to access the ISS to pursue research about human health and disease. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and NIH Director Elias A. Zerhouni stated that the partnership could pave the way for research advances in cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, osteoporosis, and other medical conditions. The MOU marked the first time that NASA had formed a partnership with another agency to use the U.S. segment of the ISS as a national laboratory.(NASA, “NASA and NIH Partner for Health Research in Space,” news release 07-190, 12 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07190_NASA_NIH_MOU.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Michelle Mittelstadt, “NIH, NASA Finish Deal for Research Lab in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 13 September 2007. 135 X Prize Foundation, “Google Sponsors Lunar X Prize To Create a Space Race for a New Generation,” news release, 13 September 2007, http://www.googlelunarxprize.org/lunar/press-release/google-sponsors-lunar-x-prize- to-create-a-space-race-for-a-new-generation (accessed 9 August 2010); John Schwartz, “$25 Million in Prizes Is Offered for Trip to Moon,” New York Times, 14 September 2007.)
Progress M-62, a Russian cargo spacecraft, docked with the ISS to bring the Expedition 16 crew supplies—1.26 tonnes (1,260 kilograms or 1.4 tons) of food and water, fuel, and other cargo, such as research equipment and Christmas and birthday presents. The crew had detached Progress M-61 from the ISS on 22 December to make room for M-62’s arrival. Instead of sending M-61 directly back to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere, Russian space program officials had decided to use it first as a platform for technical experiments. Roskosmos had also used Progress M-60 for research after undocking the craft from the ISS.(RIA Novosti, “Russian Cargo Spacecraft Docks with ISS,” 26 December 2007.)
“Alvin” Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffe’s backup during NASA’s teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavour’s payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavour’s 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavour’s time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavour’s heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, “STS-118: Endeavour,” NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, “Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter,” NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, “Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off,” New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
STS-118 Mission Specialist Richard A. Mastracchio and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson undertook the third EVA of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours and 28 minutes, the pair relocated the S-band antenna subassembly from the P6 truss to the P1 truss, installed a new transponder on P1, and retrieved the P6 transponder. The spacewalk ended early when Mastracchio’s spacesuit was damaged. The suit had a cut in the left thumb of the glove. Mission Control instructed Mastracchio to return to the ISS airlock as a precaution against further damage that could potentially allow air to rush out of the suit. Anderson quickly finished the task he had been working on and followed Mastracchio to the airlock.
NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale and Canadian Space Agency (CSA) President and Chief Executive Officer Laurier J. Boisvert signed the official agreement defining the terms of cooperation on the JWST, an international cooperative effort among NASA, CSA, and ESA. As the successor to NASA’s HST, the JWST would investigate the origin and evolution of galaxies, stars, and planetary systems. Under the agreement, NASA would build the spacecraft, the telescope, and the platform hosting the instruments. NASA would also be responsible for the overall management and operations of the mission. CSA would provide the fine-guidance-sensor instrument, which would give the JWST the stability needed for capturing sharp images.(NASA, “NASA and Canada Sign Agreement for Future Cooperation,” news release 07-155, 16 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07155_jwst_csa_mou.html (accessed 9 June 2010).)
Aeronautical engineer Jerome B. Hammack, who was one of the seven inventors of NASA’s Mercury capsule and had been instrumental in creating the recovery team to retrieve Mercury astronauts from the ocean, died of cancer at the age of 85. After playing a key role in the Mercury program, NASA’s first human space program, Hammack had carried out similar duties in the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, and Shuttle projects. In 1958 Hammack had joined National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor organization, and, in the early 1960s, he had been one of the 35-member group that came to Houston to establish the institution that became NASA’s JSC.(Lynwood Abram, “Hammack, Helped [Design] Vehicles for Space Program,” Houston Chronicle, 24 August 2007.)
likely broken into pieces too small to detect. Thomas C. Duxbury, EPOXI Project Manager,
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASA’s SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSC’s A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, “NASA’s Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration,” news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolev’s name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmos’s announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russia’s space scientists, reminding them, “the launch of the Earth’s first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age.” The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, “Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.”(Agence France-Presse, “Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 2007.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely at NASA’s KSC after the 13-day STS-118 assembly mission to the ISS. Although the Shuttle had sustained damage during launch, including a small gouge in the protective tile on the orbiter’s underside, inspections during orbit had revealed no critical damage to the craft, and NASA managers had declared Endeavour’s thermal protection system safe for reentry. Endeavour had landed a day early because of NASA’s concern about Hurricane Dean. The hurricane had ultimately followed a track that did not threaten Houston, the home of NASA’s Mission Control. During the mission, Canadian astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams had undertaken three of the four spacewalks of STS-118, setting a new spacewalking record for Canada. Williams had surpassed the record held by Canadian Chris A. Hadfield, who had performed two EVAs during a single mission in 2001.(NASA, “Shuttle Endeavour Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-177, 21 August 2007; Andy Blatchford, “Canadian’s Record Spacewalk,” Toronto Star, 19 August 2007; Traci Watson, “Shuttle Coming Home Early as Dean Nears,” USA Today, 20 August 2007.)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing on NASA’s fiscal year (FY) 2008 budget request, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. On 5 February, President George W. Bush had presented to Congress NASA’s proposed US$17.3 billion budget for FY 2008, as a component of the federal budget, including US$4 billion for five Space Shuttle flights and US$2.24 billion for ISS activities. Administrator Griffin urged Congress to fund NASA’s FY 2008 Exploration Systems request fully, enabling NASA to develop the Orion and the Ares-1 crew vehicles. He cautioned that NASA was unlikely to succeed in bringing new exploration capabilities online by 2014 because of several factors, including the cost of retiring the Space Shuttle and making the transition to the new vehicle, the cost of supporting the ISS, and the impact of the overall reduction in funding for NASA mandated by the FY 2007 Continuing Resolution. However, Griffin stated that NASA would continue to “transition the workforce, infrastructure, and equipment from the Space Shuttle to new Exploration systems.” Committee Chair Bart Gordon (D-TN) criticized the Bush administration’s failure to recommend the funding levels necessary to support the exploration initiative, the ISS, the termination of the Space Shuttle program, and the upgrade of the aging Deep Space Network.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s Fiscal Year 2008 Budget Request,” 110th Cong., 1st Sess., 15 March, 2007, 28, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg33803/ pdf/CHRG-110hrg33803.pdf (accessed 20 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s ‘Lean’ Budgetary Outlook Will Have Wide-Ranging Impact on Agency Programs,” press release, 15 March 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1724 (accessed 28 September 2010).)
Associate Administrator for NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missions—STS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASA’s efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitz’s resignation, praising the former astronaut’s tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASA’s decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttle’s reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, “Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA,” news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, “Scott J. ‘Doc’ Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former),” http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family,” Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
Florida police released on bail Lisa M. Nowak, a NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy captain. The police had arrested Nowak the day before, after she threatened Colleen M. Shipman, a captain in the U.S. Air Force. Nowak had perceived Shipman as a romantic rival. NASA placed Nowak on 30-day leave and removed her from her mission duties. Nowak had flown her only mission as a crew member on STS-121 in July 2006, aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. NASA spokesperson Nicole Cloutier-Lemasters explained that, according to its past policy, NASA had screened crew members assigned to the ISS, before, during, and after missions, but had not screened Shuttle crews flying for two-week stints. Although Cloutier-Lemasters said that NASA did not plan to conduct an investigation of Nowak, NASA’s Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that NASA had begun a review of its screening policy. NASA hoped to determine whether it had overlooked indications for concern in Nowak’s case. Dale explained that NASA intended the review process to reveal whether or not astronauts were receiving adequate psychological and medical care and attention.(Mike Schneider and Erin McClam, “Astronaut Charged with Attempted Murder,” Associated Press, 7 February 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronaut’s Arrest Spurs Review of NASA Testing,” New York Times, 8 February 2007.)
NASA announced the names of the committee members tasked with conducting a comprehensive review of the health care systems and medical policies that NASA provided for the benefit of astronauts, as well as the standards and certification NASA required of astronauts. The review included an examination of behavioral health care services available to astronauts. To chair the group of external experts, NASA named Richard E. Bachmann Jr. of the U.S. Air Force, an expert in aerospace medicine with experience providing medical support to people conducting operations in extreme environments. NASA appointed James M. Duncan, NASA Chief of Space Medicine, and Wayne R. Frazier, an executive from the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, to serve on the committee in an ex officio capacity. The arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February had prompted the review.(NASA, “NASA Announces Medical Review Team Members,” news release 07-75, 26 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07075_Medical_Review_Members.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Jeanna Bryner, “NASA Sets Team To Review Astronaut Mental Healthcare,” Space.com, 26 March 2007, http://www.space. com/news/070326_nasa_healthcare.html (accessed 27 January 2010).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin selected Christopher J. Scolese to succeed Associate Administrator Rex D. Geveden, who would leave NASA at the end of July to accept the position of President of Teledyne Brown Engineering in Huntsville, Alabama. Geveden had joined NASA in 1990 and had served as Associate Administrator, the number three position in NASA, since August 2005. Before Geveden’s appointment, the position had been vacant for several decades, but Griffin had reestablished it, to provide programmatic integration between NASA’s mission directorates and field centers. At the time of his appointment to succeed Geveden, Scolese was serving as NASA’s Chief Engineer. Scolese had joined NASA in 1987 and had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s GSFC and Deputy Associate Administrator in NASA’s Office of Space Science. In the Office of Space Science, he had directed NASA’s Space Science Flight Program, mission studies, technology development, and the overall contract management of NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California.
NASA announced the official appointment of William W. Parsons Jr. as Director of NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Parsons became KSC’s ninth director, succeeding James W. Kennedy, who was retiring from NASA. Parsons had served as KSC’s Deputy Director since February 2006. After the Columbia tragedy in 2003, Parsons had led NASA’s Return to Flight effort as Space Shuttle Program Manager at KSC and had contributed to the success of STS-114 in 2005. Parsons had also served as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi and as Deputy Director of NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin remarked that Parson’s experience as a program manager and center director, in addition to his knowledge of NASA’s human spaceflight community, made him the “right person to take Kennedy Space Center through the end of the Shuttle era and into the era of lunar exploration.”(NASA, “Parsons Assumes Role as NASA’s Kennedy Space Center Director,” news release 07-01, 4 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_0701_Parsons_KSC.html#at (accessed 14 October 2009); Aero- News Network, “Upgraded: Parsons Tapped as Kennedy Space Center Director,” 8 January 2007.)
