NASA announced the restructure of its Advisory Council (NAC). During the NAC’s 29 October 2009 meeting at NASA’s ARC, NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. had added four new committees to the council: the Commercial Space, the Education and Public Outreach, the Information Technology Infrastructure, and the Technology Innovation. Bolden stated that these four new committees reflected NASA’s evolving mission under the Barack H. Obama administration. Bolden appointed Bretton Alexander, Executive Director of the Commercial Spaceflight Federation, to lead the Commercial Space committee, which would help NASA gain greater insight into the entrepreneurial marketplace. He appointed Albert J. Edmonds, former Director of the Defense Information Systems Agency, to lead the Information Technology Infrastructure committee and to advise NASA on cybersecurity issues. Bolden appointed Miles O’Brien, former CNN anchor and space correspondent, to chair the Public Outreach committee and Esther Dyson, a space travel enthusiast and investor in major commercial space firms, to lead the Technology Innovation panel.(NASA, “NASA Announces Advisory Council Chairs and Committee Structure,” news release 09-256, 2 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-256_NAC.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Debra Werner, “Bolden Adds New Voices to NASA Advisory Council,” Space News, 30 October 2009.)
JAXA’s HTV 1 arrived safely at the ISS. NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott used the ISS’s robotic arm to capture the 18-ton (16.33-tonne, or 16,329-kilogram) cargo craft as it hovered at a distance of 30 feet (9.14 meters), marking the first time that the ISS had captured a robotic craft from orbit. Russian and European supply craft used a docking method to arrive at the space station, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk berthed the craft at NASA’s Harmony module. The space agencies had scheduled HTV 1 to remain berthed at NASA’s Harmony module until November, when the ISS would release it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Crew Grabs New Cargo Ship From Orbit,” 18 September 2009; “ISS Crew Snares Robot Ship,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 September 2009.)
After the SST entered standby mode at 3:11 p.m. (PDT), NASA announced the end of its primary mission and the start of its “warm” mission. NASA had designed SST to conduct a two- and-a-half-year mission to detect infrared light from cool cosmic objects, a mission that required maintaining the telescope’s three instruments at -456°F (-271°C), the coldest temperature theoretically attainable. SST’s liquid helium, used as cryogen, had lasted twice as long as projected—more than five-and-a-half years—but Spitzer’s supply of the coolant had finally depleted. The telescope would remain cold, at -404°F (-242°C), but that temperature would be too warm to allow Spitzer’s infrared spectrograph and its longer wavelength, multiband imaging photometer to detect cool objects in space. SST Project Manager Robert K. Wilson at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that, with its coolant depleted, Spitzer would be “reborn,” with a mission to tackle new scientific pursuits. During its so-called warm mission, Spitzer would continue to see through the dust that permeates our galaxy, blocking visible-light views, and two channels of one of its instruments would continue to operate at full capacity. Spitzer’s two infrared-array camera detectors with short wavelengths would continue to function as designed, picking up the glow from a range of objects, such as asteroids, dusty stars, planet- forming discs, gas-giant planets, and distant galaxies. Spitzer’s new projects would include refining estimates of Hubble’s constant; searching for galaxies at the edge of the universe; assessing how often potentially hazardous asteroids might impact Earth; and characterizing the atmospheres of gas-giant planets that astronomers expected NASA’s Kepler mission would discover.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Telescope Warms Up to New Career,” news release 09-099, 6 May 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-099_Spitzer_Warms_Up.html (accessed 20 June 2011); NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Spitzer Space Telescope Mission Status,” JPL news release 15 May 2009, http://www.jpl. nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-086 (accessed 30 June 2011).)
The U.S. Department of Transportation’s Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced the finalization of amended certification standards requiring makers of transport category aircraft to have automatically activating icing-protection systems or to provide a method of alerting pilots to turn on the aircraft’s icing-protection system. FAA Administrator J. Randolph “Randy” Babbitt explained that the new rule added another level of safety to prevent the occurrence of a situation in which the pilots of an airplane were unaware of ice accumulation on the craft or did not think ice accumulation on the aircraft was significant enough to warrant activation of ice- protection equipment. The fatal crash of an American Eagle ATR 72 near Roselawn, Indiana, in 1994, had initiated a decade of research by the FAA, NASA, and other entities, leading to the new rule. Ice build-up on the American Eagle’s wings had caused the crash.(U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, “FAA Mandates Timely Activation of Ice Protection Systems for New Designs,” FAA news release, 3 August 2009, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 10679 (accessed 12 September 2011); John Croft, “FAA Toughens Icing Protection Standards,” Air Transport Intelligence, 4 August 2009.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed retired U.S. Marine Corps general and former astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. as NASA’s twelfth Administrator, marking the first appointment of an African American as NASA’s Administrator. During his 34-year career with the Marine Corps, Bolden had spent 14 years as a member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, which he had joined in 1980. As an astronaut, he had traveled to orbit four times aboard the Space Shuttle, between 1986 and 1994. On two of those trips he had served as Commander of the Shuttle. His missions had included the deployment of the HST and the first joint U.S.-Russian Shuttle mission. While he was an astronaut, Bolden had fulfilled many technical assignments, serving as Astronaut Office Safety Officer; Technical Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations; Special Assistant to the Director of JSC; Lead Astronaut for vehicle test and checkout at KSC; Chief of the Safety Division at JSC, where he oversaw safety efforts for the return to flight after the 1986 Challenger accident; and Assistant Deputy Administrator at NASA Headquarters. In May 2006, NASA had inducted Bolden into the Astronaut Hall of Fame. The Senate also confirmed Lori B. Garver as NASA’s new Deputy Administrator. Like Bolden, Garver was returning to NASA for a second period of service. Between 1996 and 2001, she had served as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and Senior Policy Analyst for the Office of Policy and Plans, before becoming Associate Administrator of that office.(NASA, “Bolden and Garver Confirmed by U.S. Senate,” news release 09-165, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-165_Bolden_and_Garver.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Bolden Confirmed as NASA Administrator,” 16 July 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that NASA had continued to experience cost overruns and delays in implementing large-scale projects or those budgeted at US$250 million or more. GAO had audited 18 NASA projects, with a combined life-cycle cost of more than US$50 billion. Of those 18 projects, 13 had entered the implementation phase. Ten of the 13 had experienced significant cost growth or schedule growth or both. Development costs had increased by an average of 13 percent from baseline cost estimates, and projects had an average launch delay of 11 months. GAO reported that many projects had faced challenges in developing new technologies or retrofitting older technologies, as well as difficulty managing contractors. However, GAO found that, despite these problems, NASA had improved its ability to manage and to estimate the cost of major projects. Nevertheless, GAO suggested that NASA needed to make additional improvements. The report noted that, although NASA’s budget represented less than 2 percent of the federal government’s discretionary budget, NASA was increasingly receiving requests to expand its portfolio to support important scientific missions, such as the study of climate change. GAO found that, to meet these increased demands, NASA would need to work even harder to manage its resources as effectively and efficiently as possible.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA: Assessments of Selected Large-Scale Projects” (report no. GAO-09-306SP, Washington, DC, 2 March 2009), http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-306SP (accessed 11 May 2011); Mark Matthews, “GAO: NASA’s Big Projects Take Too Long, Cost Too Much,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 March 2009.)
After the SST entered standby mode at 3:11 p.m. (PDT), NASA announced the end of its primary mission and the start of its “warm” mission. NASA had designed SST to conduct a two- and-a-half-year mission to detect infrared light from cool cosmic objects, a mission that required maintaining the telescope’s three instruments at -456°F (-271°C), the coldest temperature theoretically attainable. SST’s liquid helium, used as cryogen, had lasted twice as long as projected—more than five-and-a-half years—but Spitzer’s supply of the coolant had finally depleted. The telescope would remain cold, at -404°F (-242°C), but that temperature would be too warm to allow Spitzer’s infrared spectrograph and its longer wavelength, multiband imaging photometer to detect cool objects in space. SST Project Manager Robert K. Wilson at NASA’s JPL remarked that, with its coolant depleted, Spitzer would be “reborn,” with a mission to tackle new scientific pursuits. During its so-called warm mission, Spitzer would continue to see through the dust that permeates our galaxy, blocking visible-light views, and two channels of one of its instruments would continue to operate at full capacity. Spitzer’s two infrared-array camera detectors with short wavelengths would continue to function as designed, picking up the glow from a range of objects, such as asteroids, dusty stars, planet-forming discs, gas-giant planets, and distant galaxies. Spitzer’s new projects would include refining estimates of Hubble’s constant; searching for galaxies at the edge of the universe; assessing how often potentially hazardous asteroids might impact Earth; and characterizing the atmospheres of gas-giant planets that astronomers expected NASA’s Kepler mission would discover.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Telescope Warms Up to New Career,” news release 09-099, 6 May 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-099_Spitzer_Warms_Up.html (accessed 20 June 2011); NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Spitzer Space Telescope Mission Status,” JPL news release 15 May 2009, http://www.jpl. nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-086 (accessed 30 June 2011).)
NASA announced that the Ares I-X booster rocket tested on 28 October 2009 had sustained damage when it fell into the Atlantic Ocean. A deflated parachute had caused a poor landing, resulting in the damage. NASA officials stated that the test launch itself had succeeded, but one of the three parachutes had failed. All three parachutes had opened, but only one had fully opened. One had deflated for unknown reasons, wrapping around a partially opened parachute, which had caused the booster to land in the ocean with extra force. The recovery crew had captured photographs showing what appeared to be a large crack in the casing on the first stage, in an area called the forward segment, as well as a fractured actuator bracket on the side of the rocket.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA: Booster Rocket Damaged in Test Flight,” 30 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Live at KSC: Ares I-X Parachutes Fail During Flight,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 October 2009.)
At NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the field of space transportation. The agreement would allow the two space agencies to exchange technical information and personnel, providing NASA with assistance in several key areas. These key areas included composite material technology, development of payload shrouds, and management of propellants in spacecraft propulsion systems used for transit to and from lunar orbit. Bolden reflected on NASA’s long history of participating with ESA in human spaceflight activities, remarking that the agreement underscored NASA’s intention to continue building that relationship. Dordain added that the exchange of technical information enabled under the terms of the agreement would benefit both agencies, facilitating work toward future launch systems, human spaceflight, and exploration missions.(NASA, “U.S. and Europe Agree on Civil Space Transportation Cooperation,” news release 09-208, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-208_NASA_ESA_MOU.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA announced that it had designated 2009 as the International Year of Astronomy, to commemorate the anniversary of the beginning of modern astronomy in 1609, when Galileo first used a telescope to view the heavens. As part of the yearlong celebration, NASA planned to release images from its Great Observatories—Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), and Chandra X-ray Observatory—to museums, nature centers, planetariums, and schools across the country. NASA would make the images public between 14 and 28 February 2009, in conjunction with Galileo’s 15 February birthday. Selected sites would also unveil a large 9-square-foot (2.7-square-meter) print of the spiral galaxy Messier 101. NASA had created the print by combining images of Messier 101—HST’s optical view, SST’s infrared view, and Chandra’s x-ray view. Describing the image created from the three views, Hashima Hasan, Lead Scientist for the International Year of Astronomy at NASA Headquarters, said that one might see such an image if one could use one’s eyes, night-vision goggles, and x-ray vision simultaneously. The selected sites would also display individual images from each observatory. HST’s visible-light view of Messier 101, known as the Pinwheel Galaxy, revealed the swirls of bright stars and glowing gas that had earned the galaxy its nickname. Spitzer’s infrared-light image peered into those spiral arms, showing where dense clouds collapse to form stars. Chandra’s x-ray image uncovered high-energy features of Messier 101, such as remnants of exploded stars or matter moving around black holes.(NASA, “NASA’s Great Observatories Celebrate International Year of Astronomy,” news release 09-026, 10 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-026_IYOA.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and JAXA President Keiji Tachikawa had signed an agreement defining the terms of the two space agencies’ cooperation on the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) mission. NASA intended the GPM mission to build on the success of the NASA-JAXA TRMM. GPM would begin to measure global precipitation, a key factor in climate. NASA described GPM as a cornerstone of the multinational Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Precipitation Constellation. The GPM mission’s spaceborne core observatory would provide the reference standard, unifying the measurements of a constellation of multinational research and operational satellites carrying microwave sensors. Using a Dual-Frequency Precipitation Radar (DPR), operating at Ku- and Ka-band frequencies, and a multichannel Global Precipitation Measurement Microwave Imager (GMI), operating at from 10 to 183 GHz, the GPM mission would provide uniformly calibrated precipitation measurements globally, every 2 to 4 hours, contributing to scientific research and societal applications. Additionally, for the first time, the observatory’s sensor measurements would make detailed observations of precipitation-particle-size distribution. The agreement made NASA responsible for the GPM core-observatory spacecraft bus, the GMI that it would carry, and a second GMI. A Low-Inclination Observatory provided by a partner agency would carry the second GMI. JAXA would supply the DPR for the core observatory, an H-2A rocket for the core observatory’s launch, and data from a conical-scanning microwave imager that would deploy on the upcoming Global Change Observation Mission satellite.(NASA, “NASA and Jaxa Sign Agreement for Future Earth Science Cooperation,” news release 09-177, 30 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_177_NASA_JAXA_Agreement.html (accessed 10 August 2011).)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA honored four veteran aerospace journalists and a public affairs officer at a ceremony at KSC for their work chronicling the nation’s space program. NASA unveiled five new gold plates with the names of the late Milt Salamon, who had worked as a local columnist at Florida Today and its predecessor paper for three decades; Sue Butler of the Daytona Beach News Journal and the Associated Press; the late Jerry B. Hannifin of Time magazine; the late Rudy P. Abramson of the Los Angeles Times; and the late Frank J. Colella, the first Manager of Public Affairs at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California. The new plates joined 57 others that comprised the Roll of Honor, called the Chronicler’s Wall, at the NASA News Center at the Launch Complex 39 Press Site. The Chronicler’s Wall recognized career achievements of writers, journalists, broadcasters, and communicators who had covered NASA at KSC for at least 10 years. In an additional ceremony, NASA recognized Milt Salamon for his role in writing about the ordinary people who worked at KSC and lived on the Space Coast. Salamon, who had died in January 2002 at the age of 75, had worked as an engineer for Lockheed Martin in California and at Cape Canaveral before starting his writing career. He had worked at the National Enquirer before starting at Florida Today in 1974.(Todd Halvorson, “KSC Honors Columnist,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 2009. 23)
Richard E. Halpern, a senior NASA official who had served as Science Manager on Spacelab, the ISS, and other human spaceflight and robotic NASA projects, died of heart ailments at the age of 78. Halpern had served in the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s and had held a fellowship at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University in 1968 and 1969. Before joining NASA in 1963, he had worked at the Naval Ordnance Laboratory. After joining NASA, Halpern had become Director of its High Energy Astrophysics Program during the early planning stages for the ISS. In the late 1970s, he had served as Program Manager for three launches of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory. He had served as Director of the ISS utilities and operations division from 1986 until his retirement in 1989. NASA had awarded Halpern its Exceptional Service Medal in 1978 and its highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, in 1980.(Matt Schudel, “Obituaries: Richard E. Halpern NASA Official,” Washington Post, 7 December 2009.)
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASA’s MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttle’s main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicle’s Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSC’s propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFC’s Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, “Lightfoot Named Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the system’s artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Division’s Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASA’s Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
