Astronomer Carl Sagan told the Senate Commerce committee that a U.S. Mars mission would be the best cure for USA's "sagging" space program. According to Sagan, some 20,000 U.S. scientists have written to Congress urging a Mars mission. He recommended that NASA consider a possible joint mission with the Soviet Union, which had stepped up efforts to land on Mars. (NY Times, Feb 20/87; USA Today, Feb 20/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
The Soviet newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya reported that two Soviet cosmonauts grew taller while in space. According to the paper, cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko grew fourtenths of an inch taller during his record ten and a half months in space, and his crewmate Alexander Alexandrov grew sixtenths of an inch. The gain in height was because of lack of gravity in space. (NY Times, Dec During December: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher reviewed Agency activities during 1987 and declared that "NASA is on the road to recovery." He believed, "the United States can maintain a leadership role in space,...but only if the Nation stays truly committed to the space program." (NASA Release 87184) Industry officials said that the U.S. aerospace industry recorded the most profitable year in its history in 1987. (P Inq, Dec 17/87)
In a major organizational shift, NASA announced the adoption of new postChallenger era commercial activity policies. The released decision memoranda, covering the new policies, were signed by Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers. The new policies resulted from the report of the Commercialization of Space Reviewh)0*0*0*Task Force and covered such general activities as joint endeavor agreements, microgravity research, secondary payloads on the Space Shuttle, expendable launch vehicles, and commercial activities. According to the new policies, the Office of Commercial Programs would henceforth determine, in coordination with concerned Headquarters offices, whether NASA should participate in any proposed joint program. Responsibility for programs utilizing the microgravity environment was transferred from the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology to the Office of Space Science and Applications. Secondary payload space would be carefully allocated by the Deputy Administrator and implemented by the Office of Space Flight to accomplish specific NASA objectives. To encourage and facilitate as much as possible the private domestic access to space, NASA's Office of Space Flight would contract private industry for launch of Expendable Launch Vehicles. Finally, the Office of Commercial Programs would, to the fullest extent possible, facilitate the utilization of space for commercial purposes. (NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Responsibility for Programs Utilizing the Microgravity Environment, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Secondary STS Payloads, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV's) Policy, June 12/87; NASA Decision Memorandum on Commercialization Policy, June 12/87; LA Times, June 13/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain and strengthen the existing Space Shuttle processing arrangement at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, with Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida. The decision was recommended by a senior review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. The group was chaired by Roy S. Estess, Deputy Director, National Space Technology Laboratories, Mississippi, and included representatives from NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 8726)
NASA officials, who met in Moscow with their Soviet counterparts December 713 to discuss cooperation in space, said the Soviet Union planned to launch a spacecraft to Mars in 1992. In addition, the Soviets asked the United States to modify an American spacecraft to help relay data from another Soviet mission to Mars set for launching in 1994. (CSM, Dec 21/87; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 19/87)
A report sent to President Ronald Reagan by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle would have an escape hatch. But a decision on the rocket assist system necessary to eject the crew safely in emergency had not yet been made. The escape hatch was one of many significant changes made in the Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch in June 1988. Twentyone major changes were made in the Shuttle's main engines alone, in order to increase operating life, safety, and reliability. These and other changes listed in the NASA report to the White House reflected recommendations made by the Rogers Commission, following their H&investigation of the Challenger accident. (C Trib, July 2/87; LA Times, July 1/87; NY Times, July 1/87) During June: General Dynamics Corporation said that it would build 18 rockets over the next 5 years to launch communicationsh)0*0*0*satellites. According to a company spokesman, General Dynamics would spend $100 million to start production of the AtlasCentaur rocket. General Dynamics became the third U.S. company, together with McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, to attempt to move into launch vehicles production after the Challenger accident. (WSJ, June 16/87)
Willis H. Shapley was selected for NASA's newly established position of Associate Deputy Administrator (Policy), effective March 9, 1987. Shapley held the third ranking position, created in response to the reorganization recommended by the NASA Management Study Group. Shapley began Government service in 1942 with the Bureau of the Budget, Executive Office of the President, where he specialized in research and development, national defense, and space programs. From 1965 to 1975, he was NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator. In July 1975 he was the senior NASA representative in the Soviet Union during the joint USUSSR ApolloSoyuz space mission. Shapley retired from NASA in 1975 to become a consultant to a number of private institutions and Government agencies, including NASA. (NASA Release 8724)
Dr. Lew Allen, Director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), announced that construction of JPL's new Microdevices Laboratory would start January 21, 1987. On the same day, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Dr. Marvin Goldberger, President of the California Institute of Technology, signed a memorandum of understanding for a Center for Space Microelectronics Technology to be established at JPL. The Center would be the successor to the Advanced Microelectronics Program established at JPL in 1983 and headed by Dr. Carl Kukkonen. The Center for Space Microelectronics Technology will be governed by a Board of Governors chaired by Dr. Lew Allen. Dr. Carl Kukkonen was named Center Director. (NASA Release 873; StarNews, Jan 20/87; The Foothill Leader, Jan 21/87)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Dr. Lew Allen selected a Virginia site for a Space Station Program office. The 110,000 square feet of leased space in Reston, Virginia, would house NASA's Space Station Program director and some 400 JPL and NASA personnel. Initial occupancy was planned for summer 1987. (NASA Release 8749)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, in Columbia, Maryland, for negotiations on a contract for continuation of maintenance and operations of the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN). The DSN provides tracking and data acquisition for planetary spaceflight missions and for NASA's crewtended and untended space programs. The fiveyear contract, with an option for an additional five years, was expected to begin April 2, 1987. (NASA Release 879)h)0*0*0*February 5: Jesse W. Moore resigned from NASA, effective February 8, 1987. Moore joined NASA in 1966. Among the varied positions he held included Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science (19781979); Director of Space Flight Division (19791981); Director of the Earth and Planetary Exploration Division (19811983); Acting Associate Administrator of Space Flight (April 1984August 1984); and Associate Administrator of Space Flight (August 1984January 1986). He was named Director of the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston, Texas, in January 1986, and in October 1986 he moved to Headquarters as a Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Policy and Planning. (NASA Release 8710; NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87)
NASA announced formation of a group of scientists to examine potential Space Station activities, with the aim ofh)0*0*0*reducing the time between experiment concept development and publishable results. Chaired by Dr. David C. Black, NASA Headquarters Space Station chief scientist, the group was made up of scientists and researchers from NASA, the National Science Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, universities, and the private sector. (NASA Release 8727)
NASA announced that 5 civilians and 10 military officers were selected as new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. Of the 15, 7 were chosen as pilot astronaut candidates and 8 as mission specialist candidates. The elite group also included the first Black woman, Dr. Mae C. Jemison, to be chosen for the program. (NASA Release 8793; NY Times, June 6/87; LA Times, June 6/87; H Chron, June 6/87)
Dr. Robert Watson, NASA Chief Scientist for the Airborne Antarctic Ozone project, reported that, midpoint of the project, both aircraft involved were performing very well and that mission scientists were very pleased with the quality of data being returned by the instruments. The Antarctic Ozone Project employed two NASA aircraft, a modified flying laboratory DC8, and an advanced highaltitude ER2. The goal of the project was to study the cause and nature of the ozone layer depletion. (Untitled release from NASA Headquarters, Sept 17, 1987; NY Times, Sept
NASA announced that a more detailed examination of the results of the December 23 cold weather testfiring of the redesigned booster rocket revealed that an outer ring which anchors the booster's nozzle came apart during the test. The nozzle steers the Space Shuttle during the first two minutes of flight. The setback forced NASA to cancel the June 2, 1987, launch of the Space Shuttle. NASA officials said they were confident the launch would be delayed about three months, since the critical elements of the booster rocket, the redesigned field joints, functioned perfectly during the test. (B Sun, Dec 30/87; NY Times, Dec 30/87; WSJ, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87; W Times, Dec 30/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher issued a statement in response to Senator William Proxmire's request in Congress to abolish the Space Station program. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the Space Station proposal has been repeatedly debated in Congress and each time has received bipartisan congressional support. He stressed that by abolishing the Space Shuttle program, the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new scientific and technological advances and would "provide infrastructure for future exploration of the solar system by manned spacecraft." (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in Response to Senator Proxmire's Statement Asking for Abolishment of the Space Station, August 27, 1987)
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Canadian Science Minister Frank Oberle approved the agreement on Canadian participation in the U.S. Space Station program. The terms of the preliminary agreement were spelled out in a memorandum of understanding worked out by negotiators from NASA and the Canadian Ministry of State for Science and Technology. The agreement called for cooperation between the two nations in the detailed design, development, operation, and use of the Space Station. The agreement would then be submitted for approval to the governments of the two countries. (NASA Release 87182; NY Times, Dec 12/87)
Appearing before the Los Angeles World Affairs Council, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that building the Space Station was critical to the United States regaining initiative in space. "It is no longer a question of whether we should have longterm goals in space," Fletcher said. "The question is can we afford not to lead." (LA Times, Nov 7/87)
The Pentagon released a Defense Intelligence Agency study which claimed that the Soviet Union had spent $80 billion on military space programs during the last decade. As a result, the Soviet Union was dramatically expanding its ability to boost payloads into space. The study said the Soviet Union operated about 50 types of space systems for military and civilian uses, had successfully tested a heavylift booster rocket in may 1987, and routinely launched five times as many rockets each year as the United States. (P Inq, Nov 15/87)
NASA officials declared that Space Station deployment, scheduled for 1994, could be delayed up to two years or the Station could be scaled down. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher said that the cost of the Space Station, once estimated at $8 billion, was now estimated at between $13 and $14.5 billion. Fletcher, who said that the United States was lagging behind the Soviet Union in human space flight, predicted that a U.S. crewtended Space Station would help the country catch up to the Soviets. Testifying before the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Dr. Fletcher stressed that the Space Station program retained high priority with the Reagan administration. (LA Times, Feb 4/87; USA `"Today, Feb 4/87; NY Times, Feb 5/8)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the promotion of Dr. John M. Klineberg, Deputy Director of Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, since July 1979, to Director of the Center, effective immediately. Dr. Klineberg went to Lewis from NASA Headquarters, where he had served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. An internationally recognized expert in the field of transonic flow, he first joined NASA in 1970 at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 8786)
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehicle, Soyuz TM2, toward a rendezvous with the orbiting Mir space station. This was the first crewtended Soviet space launch since July 1986 and only the second launch in the Russian human space program to be shown live on Soviet television. Western experts speculated that the two astronauts would aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin link up operations with the Mir space station on February 7. NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C Trib, Feb
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced thath)0*0*0*Isaac T. Gillam, NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, would retire effective September 1, 1987, and that Lawrence Herbolsheimer, Deputy Assistant Administrator in the Office of Commercial Programs, would serve as the Acting Assistant Gillam had served in a number of positions at NASA. In June 1978 he was appointed director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center in Edwards, California. Prior to that appointment, he was Dryden's Deputy Director and Director of Shuttle Operations. He subsequently served at NASA Headquarters as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and then moved on to head the Office of Commercial Programs. (NASA Release 87126)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Chairman ofh)0*0*0*France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales JacquesLouis Lions signed a memorandum of understanding for a joint satellite oceanographic mission. The mission, called TOPEX/POSEIDON, which would chart ocean topography and observe ocean circulation on a global scale, was scheduled for a late 1991 launch. The TOPEX/POSEIDON mission would be part of the international World Climate Research Program. (NASA Release 8741)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
NASA released a long awaited report of a task force, headed by Dr. Sally K. Ride, set up to assess NASA's future space policy in the wake of the Challenger disaster. The 63page report, delivered to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher the preceding week, urged that the United States build a permanent outpost on the Moon as the first step toward the ultimate goal of "exploring, prospecting, and settling Mars." Ride emphasized, however, that while settling Mars should be "our eventual goal," it should not be "our next goal." She recommended a strategy of "natural progression which leads step by step, in orderly, unhurried way, inexorably toward Mars." (LA Times, Aug 18/87; NY Times, Aug 18/87; W Post, Aug 18/87; W Times, Aug 18/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and European Space Agency (ESA) Director General Reimar Luest announced that the Space Shuttle would be used for the launch of the joint NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the Sun in October 1990. At the same time, they announced that the launch, also from the Space Shuttle, of the Galileo mission to Jupiter had been moved up to October/November 1989. Since the distance to the Sun is considerably shorter than to Jupiter, the Ulysses spacecraft would begin to transmit data in 1994, a year earlier than the Galileo spacecraft. (NASA Release 8751) 0*0*0*April 6: NASA selected Boeing Computer Services Company, Seattle, Washington, for negotiating a technical and management information system contract in support of the Space Station program. (NASA Release 8752)
In an effort to reduce reliance on the U.S. Space Shuttle, NASA would rely more heavily on untended rockets, declared Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. He said that the primary goal was to "accelerate the deployment of the Nation's backlog of spacescience missions." NASA hoped to launch as many as five satellites and space probes by untended rockets by 1992. WSJ, May 18/87)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and General Kabbaj, the Inspector of the Royal Moroccan Air Force, signed an agreement permitting the United States the use of Morocco's Ben Guerir Air Force Base for emergency landing of the Space Shuttle. The facility would be ready for such an emergency in February 1988. (NASA Release 876)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
A NASA report, titled "Space Science Operations Management Concepts Study," was submitted to the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. The report, prepared by a 60member study team of personnel from NASA Headquarters, field centers, other Federal agencies, and university officials, examined options for the management of Space Station science. (NASA Note to Editors, Oct 1/1987)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers announced that James T. Rose had been selected as Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, effective October 5, 1987. He would be responsible for NASA's commercial programs, the use of space by the U.S. private sector, the use of NASA technology by private industry, and NASA's support of innovative research by small business firms. James T. Rose joined NASA in 1957 as a research engineer for the Vanguard Program experiments. In 1962 he became head of the Manned Spacecraft Center's Mission Planning Office for the Gemini flights. From 1964 to 1974, Rose held a series of key positions at the McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. He returned to NASA in 1974 as Director, Space Shuttle Engineering, in the Office of Space Flight. From 1976 to 1986, he was Director of McDonnell Douglas' Space Manufacturing Initiatives. In June 1987, he again returned to NASA to become the Director of Space in NASA's Office of H&Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 87145; Huntsville Times, Oct 1/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced NASA planned to develop an advanced solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8747)
The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive "Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21st century. The release of the space policy had been delayed for several days because of a dispute among NASA, the President's Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of the commercial space initiative. The most controversial component of the initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), an orbiting, Shuttletended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by some members of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward the permanently crewtended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a "minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council's recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF from Space Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response to the Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statement recommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and a reconfiguration of the facility as a crewtended laboratory. A draft of the 39page commercial space initiative included a report by the National Security Council on national security implications of commercializing space, and legislative and administrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Among other key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicle industry and the establishment of limits on the amount of thirdparty liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. President Reagan also announced a program to develop the technologies needed to conduct humanassisted exploration of the solar system, including a mission to Mars. The program, labeled Project Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year 1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the Moon and Mars. (Presidential Directive on National Space Policy: Fact Sheet, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; NY Times, Jan 24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher voiced alarm over the House of Representative's resolution for funding of NASA's fiscal year 1989 budget. Speaking in Washington before a symposium on "Science Education: A Challenge for Excellence in America's Future," Dr. Fletcher issued his toughest warning yet about the consequences of reducing the NASA funding levels proposed by the Administration. The Administrator warned that "the civil space program will be stopped in its tracks" if the House funding figure of $10.2 billioncut by over $1 billion from the Administration proposalwere to be passed. More specifically, Dr. Fletcher predicted the reduced budget would kill the Space Station program and lead to the abrogation of several international commitments in space science and applications. (NASA Release 8860).
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. Fletcher appointed Kenneth S. Pedersen to be Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective immediately. Pedersen would be responsible for congressional, intergovernmental, international, and industry relations, educational activities and relations with educational institutions, and the NASA History Office. (NASA Release 88160)
A localized electrical fire occurred on board the Magellan spacecraft during a power systems check at the Kennedy Space Center's (KSC) Spacecraft Encapsulation Facility (SAEF2). The fire, which occurred while a technician worked within the spacecraft, was quickly extinguished without injuries and with only minor damage to Magellan. The KSC fire department also responded but was not required to enter the SAEF2 clean room environment. The incident was being investigated by NASA. (NASA Releases 88141 and 88153).
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received the International Technology Institute's (ITI) William F. Rockwell, Jr. Medal at the International Congress on Technology and Technology Exchange banquet, in Pittsburgh. The Rockwell Medal, awarded annually to a maximum of three individuals from different continents, recognizes contributions toward the generation, transfer, and application of technology for the betterment of mankind. (NASA Release 88139)'%0*October 20: Two of the three cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station took a fourhour spacewalk to replace a faulty component on an xray telescope attached to the station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, on a yearlong endurance mission aboard Mir, wore a new spacesuit design intended to increase flexibility. C Trib, Oct 21/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
An experimental jetliner being developed by McDonnell Douglas Corporation debuted in a 1hour flight from the Douglas Aircraft Facility in Long Beach, California. The aircraft, with one unducted fan (UDF) engine and one ordinary jet engine, was a forerunner of the planned MD91 and MD92 passenger jets that McDonnell Douglas was actively marketing to airlines. The UDF engine, developed by GE, had demonstrated significant reductions in fuel consumption over conventional jet engines. McDonnell Douglas' MD91 and MD92 airliners were being developed to meet the expected demand among airlines for alternative, fuelefficient aircraft during the latter 1990s. "This is as big a jump in technology as going from propellers to jets," said Walt Orlowski, program manager for the experimental aircraft. "We are at the forefront of aviation technology." (LA Times, Feb 3/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the Moon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./U.S.S.R. humanassisted missions. "Going to the Moon together would give the two leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for further cooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission to Mars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crewtended mission. Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year0*in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted the notion that American space leadership was lost. Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budget request for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr 14/88; NASA Release 8852)
After several delays, the Soviet Union successfully completed an automated orbital flight test of the Space Shuttle Buran. The untended Soviet orbiterwhich is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiterswas launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198foot Energia rocket with two strapon boosters in a configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlike the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's engines for ascent to orbit. According to Soviet sources, the Soviet shuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landinga capability the U.S. Shuttles lack. After completing two orbits, Buran landed successfully on a 2.7mile runway at the Baikonur facility, ending the 31/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agency hailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude to crewtended Shuttle flights. In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBISSOV88222,''0*Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A; AP, Nov 15/88; UPI, Nov 15/88; NY Times, Nov 16/88; WSJ, Nov 16/88; W Post, Nov 16/88; LA Times, Nov 15/88; W Times, Nov 16/88; B Sun, Nov 16/88; P Inq, Nov 16/88; C Trib, Nov
Engineers at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah concluded that a design flaw had led to the failure of a previously untested Space Shuttle booster part during a fullscale test firing December 23. NASA officials delayed the flight schedule after they discovered that a portion of the booster's nozzle assembly, which guides the vehicle, had fallen apart during testing, a month Engineers finished taking the booster motor apart and recovered all six missing pieces of the failed nozzle part. Known as the outer boot ring, the failed part anchored the booster's nozzle to a flexible rubbery "boot" that allowed the nozzle to swivel. One purpose of the boot ring was to shield the metal and rubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intense heat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster's nozzle was deliberately moved to the maximum seven degreessome three degrees beyond what would be required during a normal Shuttle flight. NASA was looking into the possibility that the extreme steering might have caused the boot ring to come apart or A group of officials at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, developers of the original design test requirements for an extreme swiveling of the nozzle, studied whether the maneuver should be repeated in future tests of whatever design is adopted, or whether a less severe maneuver would be an adequate test under the more stringent, postChallenger standards. The test failure would probably force a delay of 6 to 10 weeks in the resumption of Space Shuttle flights, delaying the STS26 flight of Discovery to no earlier than August 1988. (NASA Release 87190; UPI, Jan 4/88; W Post, Jan 5/88; NY Times, Jan 6/88) 0*January 11: Speaking at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics supported Aerospace Sciences Conference, Ross M. Jones, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, presented a proposal to launch very small, low cost scientific probes to various destinations in the solar system by using Earthorbiting electromagnetic launchers or railguns. Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong electromagnetic forces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities, were being developed by the U.S. military for use both on the ground and in space. (NASA Release 884; M News, Jan 11/88; W Times, Jan 11/88; LA Times, Jan 11/88; LA Star News, Jan 12/88)
NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the new Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, effective immediately. Abbey had been Special Assistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November 1987. He began his NASA career in 1967 as Technical Assistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program. He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Director of Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight Crew Operations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and service awards. (NASA Release 8836)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on the agency's proposed 1989 budget. He stressed that 1989 would be a crucial year for NASA, a year that would "make or break" the Nation's space program. The proposed budget included funds to increase the rate of Shuttle flights in 1989 in order to "fly off" the backlog of vital defense and science missions. A build up of funding for Space Station hardware development was also requested. Dr. Fletcher testified that the requested additional funds for the Space Station were the minimum necessary to avoid the disbandment of development teams and the indefinite deferral or cancellation of that program. He also warned that if funds for advanced technology were not approved, the necessary technological foundation for future achievements would not be built, and the goal of longterm U.S. space leadership would "become an idle dream." (1989 NASA Authorization Hearings Before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 8831; AP, Mar 22/88; W Times Mar 23/88; LA Times Mar 23/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Hiroyuki Osawa, President of the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), recently signed an agreement to allow NASA to directly receive data from Japan's Earth Resources Satellite (ERS1). The0*agreement would allow NASA to have access to realtime data from Japan's ERS1 synthetic aperture radar and optical sensor. NASA would receive the data at a ground station at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Data from the ground station would be provided to NASDA. Japan's ERS1 was scheduled to be launched by NASDA on the H1 launch vehicle in early 1992. (NASA Release 8812)
This date marked 5 years since the Pioneer 10 spacecraft had left the solar system on its trajectory toward interstellar space. Pioneer 10the most distant humanmade object in existencewas now 4,175,500,000 miles from the Sun, almost 450*times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Radio signals, moving at the speed of light, took 12 hours and 26 minutes to travel from Earth to spacecraft and back, the longest time of any radio communication in history. The spacecraft, launched in 1972, continued to operate extremely well as it collected and transmitted data back to Earth. Its primary mission, originally scheduled for 21 months, was to assess the feasibility of passage through the Asteroid Belt and provide the first closeup examination of Jupiter and its moons. Pioneer 10 accomplished all of its original goals by December 1973. At that point, the mission was indefinitely extended. Scientists reprogrammed the probe to explore the Sun's atmosphere and to look for a tenth planet and gravity waves in the far outer solar system and beyond. Recent improvements in the NASA ground stations were expected to allow communications with Pioneer 10 to continue until the range approached six billion miles, more than twice the prelaunch estimates. Project Manager Richard O. Fimmel expected that NASA would be able to track Pioneer 10 until the power source limited communications, which was expected to occur toward the end of the Both Pioneer 10 and its sister spacecraft, Pioneer 11, carried an easily interpreted graphic message in the event that they encountered any intelligent life forms on their journey. Scientists believed Pioneer 10 and 11 would travel among the stars virtually forever because the vacuum of interstellar space is so empty that the risk of any type of collision would be negligible. (ARC Release
The NASA Administrator appointed Ivan Bekey to be Special Assistant for System Engineering and Planning Integration, Office of Exploration. Bekey would be responsible for overall systems engineering for Office of Exploration studies and formulation of top level architecture. In the previous year, he served as Director of Program Planning for the Office of Policy and Planning. For the preceding six years, he was the Director of Advanced Programs, Office of Space Flight. He was also NASA coordinator for the National Commission on Space. Bekey joined NASA in 1978. (NASA Special Announcement on 066088)
President Ronald Reagan signed a report to Congress creating a joint Department of Defense (DoD) and NASA program for the development of the Advanced Launch System (ALS). The ALS was intended to provide a launch system that would meet longterm national launch needs; would be flexible, robust, reliable, and responsive; and would drastically cut costs in all elements of the space launch system. The management plan created a joint program office headed by an Air Force program manager and a NASA deputy program manager. DoD would manage the systems engineering and integration, vehicle, logistics, and payload module. NASA would manage liquid engine systems and focused technology efforts. DoD would accept full funding responsibility for the program, with any unique civil requirements not addressed by the ALS baseline being funded by NASA. (NASA Release 885)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinners had been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of Space Science. From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment as Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88138)
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
President Ronald Reagan christened the planned international Space Station "Freedom," to symbolize the values shared by the U.S. and its allies. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the name "Freedom" was recommended by NASA officials and representatives of Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency, project participants. (WH Release, Jul 18/88; UPI, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced his resignation, effective April 8. Dr. Fletcher had served as NASA Administrator for a total of nine years, from April 1971 to May 1977, and again since May 1986, following the Challenger accident. Dr. Fletcher, who reluctantly agreed to return to the Agency at the request of President Ronald Reagan, supervised the adoption of a new management system that put greater emphasis on quality control and safety for the Shuttle program. During his second term, Dr. Fletcher had oversight of the redesign of the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters and successfully lobbied Congress for continuation of the Space Station program. In his resignation announcement, Dr. Fletcher said he now felt that he could "safely place the leadership of NASA in another's hands." NASA Deputy Administrator Dale Myers served as Acting Administrator until a successor was named by President George Bush. (NASA Release 8936, Mar 21/89; AP, Mar 21/89; UPI, Mar 21/89; NY Times, Mar 22/89; WSJ, Mar 22/89; USA Today, Mar 22/89; B Sun, Mar 22/89; LA Times, Mar 22/89)
Space Shuttle astronaut David S. Griggs was killed while off duty when a single engine propeller plane he was flying crashed near a private airstrip in Arkansas. Griggs had been performing aerobatic maneuvers in a vintage ST6 training plane when the craft struck the ground, killing the astronaut instantly. Griggs was a mission specialist aboard an April 1985 flight of the Space Shuttle Discovery and had been designated pilot for Discovery mission STS33 in November. (AP, Jun 18/89; W Post, Jun 18/89; UPI, Jun 19/89; NY Times, Jun 19/89; P Inq, Jun 19/89)
Six toplevel NASA managers announced their resignations in order to avoid new conflictofinterest restrictions on contract related work by former Federal employees. The new restrictions, effective May 16, 1989, would bar officials who have worked on procurement from assuming any private sector jobs involving the contracts for two years. Some of the resigning managers cited the0*failure of Congress to pass a pay raise for senior executive service (SES) personnel as a reason for leaving. The six NASA officials who announced their resignations were Noel Hinners, Associate Deputy Administrator; James Odom, Director of the Space Station program; Jon McBride, an astronaut and chief of congressional relations; John Thomas, head of solid rocket booster redesign at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC); Bill Sneed, MSFC policy chief; and James Downey, irector of MSFC's payload project office. (NASA Releases 8960, 8961, 8962, Apr 24/89; AP, Apr 24/89; UPI, Apr 24/89; WSJ, Apr 25/89; W Post, Apr 25/89; W Times, Apr 25/89)
President George Bush announced the selection of Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, a former astronaut and head of the Space Shuttle program, to succeed Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator. The White House also announced that J.R. Thompson, Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, would be appointed NASA Deputy Administrator. Truly, a veteran of two Shuttle flights, was named to head the Shuttle program by Administrator Fletcher following the 1986 Challenger0*accident. Truly was credited with helping to restore safety and reliability to Shuttlerelated activities. (FBISSov89070, Apr 13/89; AP, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 12/89; NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89; WSJ, Apr 13/89; USA Today, Apr 13/89; W Times, Apr
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Thomas J. Lee as Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, effective immediately. Lee0*succeeded James R. Thompson Jr., selected by President George Bush to be NASA Deputy Administrator. (NASA Release 89108, Jul 6/89)
Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin Jr., and Michael Collins participated in the first of several planned ceremonies at NASA facilities commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted lunar landing on July 20, 1969. Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins gathered at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, with a crowd of 6,000 NASA employees and their families to commemorate the launching of their Saturn V rocket from KSC on July 16, 1969. The ceremony included a playback of the final three minutes of the Apollo 11 countdown and statements by the former astronauts. Following the ceremony, the astronauts rode in a 20mile motorcade to Cocoa Beach, where they `"attended a luncheon in their honor. (UPI, Jul 16/89; USA Today, Jul (#17/89; B Sun, Jul 17/89)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher named Dr. Robert Rosen as Acting Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST), effective April 2. Rosen had served as Deputy Associate Administrator, OAST, since March 1986. (NASA Release 8941, Mar 30/89)
Dale D. Myers, the acting NASA Administrator, announced his plans to resign effective May 13. Myers had served as the NASA Deputy Administrator from October 6, 1986, when he was recruited to return to NASA by President Ronald Reagan. During his tenure, Myers was instrumental in guiding NASA through the period of recovery following the Challenger accident of January 28, 1986. (NASA Release 8949, Apr 13/89)
Three Soviet cosmonauts who had been occupying the Mir Space Station returned to Earth aboard a Soyuz TM7 capsule. The three cosmonauts landed safely in Soviet Central Asia near the city of Dzheskazgan. The departure of the Mir crew marked the first time that the station has been left untended since crew rotations began in February 1987. Soviet space program officials announced that two new experiment modules would be attached to the station in anticipation of the arrival in August of the next crew. (FBISSov89080, Apr 27/89; UPI, Apr 27/89; P Inq, Apr 28/89; B Sun, Apr
The Soviet Union announced that it would suspend occupation of the Mir Space Station for at least three months following the return to Earth of its current crew in late April. The reason given by the Soviets for the abandonment of the station, which had been continuously occupied since February 1987, was a delay in the manufacture of additional pressurized modules to be attached to the facility. Western experts were interpreting the temporary shutdown of the station as a possible costcutting measure and another setback to the Soviet space program following the loss of its twin Mars probes during the last several months. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine was also reporting that degradation of the station's solar power arrays was causing an electrical shortage. (NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89, 15/89; LA Times, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 14/89; W Times, Apr 14/89; P Inq, Apr 19/89)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and the Ambassador of Japan to the United States H.E. Nobuo Matsunaga signed a Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the government of Japan on cooperation in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the Space Station Freedom. The agreement was signed at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. Under the agreement, Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM) to the Freedom program. The JEM, to be permanently attached to the Space Station base, would consist of a pressurized laboratory module, at least two experiment0*logistics modules, and an exposed facility. (NASA Release 8932, Mar 14/89)
Acting NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Samuel W. Keller as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, the thirdranking position in the Agency. Keller had been Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications since December 1977. (NASA Release 8975, May 16/89; LA Times, May 17/89)
Acting NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of former Space Shuttle astronaut William B. Lenoir as Associate Administrator for Space Station. Lenoir replaced James B. Odom, who was retiring. Truly also announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs as Director, Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 8877, May 18/89; UPI, May 18/89; AP, May 19/89; NY Times, May 19/89; W Post, May 19/89; WSJ, May 19/89; LA Times, May 19/89; W Times, May 23/89)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that a NASA T38 jet trainer aircraft being flown by a Space Shuttle astronaut had experienced a near collision with a Pan American World Airways widebody jet about 30 miles West of Washington, DC. The pilots of the Airbus A310 jetliner reported the two planes had come within 500 feet of each other while on perpendicular flight paths. The T38 was flown by Navy Captain David M. Walker, Commander of the recently completed Space Shuttle mission STS28. The near collision occurred when Walker's aircraft strayed below its assigned flight elevation. (AP, May 17/89; UPI, May 17/89; NY Times, May 17/89; W Post, May 17/89; B Sun, May 17/89)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Dale L. Compton to be Director of the NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, effective December 20. Compton, who succeeded William F. Ballhaus, had been Acting Director since Ballhaus resigned on July 15. (NASA Release 89182, Dec 11/89)
Space Shuttle mission specialist Colonel Richard M. Mullane announced his retirement from NASA, effective July 1, 1990. He flew two Shuttle flights in 1984 and 1988 and was scheduled to fly aboard the Atlantis later in February. (NASA Release 9028)
The White House began looking at other ideas for astronaut expeditions to the Moon and Mars besides those presented by NASA. The unprecedented move stemmed from NASA's cost and time estimate, $400 billion over 30 years for the project. A panel representing 54 aerospace companies had met in the previous week, and the National Research Council planned to review its own efforts to seek innovative ideas later in the week. NASA joined the search for sources of outside ideas as well. Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Director for Aeronautics, called the move "highly appropriate" and added, "A lot of our ideas are good, but we certainly haven't covered the waterfront." NY Times, Jan 15/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
The Federal Aviation Administration signed a memoranda of understanding with NASA to jointly research problems in aviation. Areas to be investigated were environmental compatibility, human factors, severe weather, integration of cockpit and air traffic operations, airworthiness, and noise. (NASA Release 90131)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope for the first time had observed a faint object, a quasar billions of light years from Earth. Officials hoped that study of the image, known to astronomers as UM675, would give clues as to the chemicals present soon after the universe was born. (W Times, Nov 5/90)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
would have to return to the hanger for repairs. NASA officials were not sure when the craft would be launched but announced that only eight of the nine planned flights for the year would be flown. (NY Times, June 7/90; W Times, Jun 8/90)
NASA released a call for proposals to lease a commercially developed and owned space module, the Commercial Middeck Augmentation Module, which would ride in the payload bay of the Space Shuttle and add about 50 lockers to the orbiter's capacity. The need for greater capacity resulted from NASA's Commercial Development of Space Program, which was designed to enlarge research opportunities for private use by conducting experiments in materials processing, protein crystal growth, `"biotechnology, and fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 9046; Sp News, Mar 1218/90) During March: A NASA study released to the Senate disclosed that designs for the planned Space Station Freedom needed significant changes that would drive up the initial cost. The study found an elaborate program of preventative maintenance that would require about 2,200 hours each year for space walks by astronauts and0*begin before the station was even completed. Possible solutions included use of advanced robots for maintenance, newly designed spacesuits to ease space walks, and a redesign of Space Station parts that would make them easier to repair. (NY Times, Mar 19/90; Mar 20/90; Mar 28/90; Mar 29/90)
The Langley Research Center in Virginia selected Mason and Hanger Services, Inc. for negotiation of a 5year, $97.9 million contract to support all aspects of supply, transportation and equipment management; general and specialized administrative services; different aspects of the security program; and support of the scientific and technical information program. The Television Development Division of NASA Headquarters awarded the Imaging Systems Laboratory of Florida Atlantic University a one to fiveyear contract with a potential value of $3 million for research and development in advanced video systems for space and terrestrial applications. (NASA Release C90cc; 90131A) ' 0*
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Ross as Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. John W. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held several managerial positions in the private sector. Lawerence Ross, who joined NASA in 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as Deputy Director of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has been given several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970. After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near San Francisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director of LeRc. Townsend began government service in 1947 and held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 9049; 9050; 9051; 9055)
Shuttle program director Robert Crippen said that a Space Shuttle rescue of the errant satellite sent up earlier this month by Martin Marietta appeared possible. He could not say whether the Intelsat communications satellite would be lifted into a higher orbit or if the Shuttle would bring it back to Earth, but noted that either approach would require about one year for planning. (W Post, March 24/90)
NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly announced the establishment of a Space Commerce Steering Group, composed of NASA officials, that would provide an overview of commercial space technology applications. The goal of the Group was to provide coordination of potential commercial capabilities; NASA's Office of Commercial Programs would remain the primary action agent. Truly maintained that NASA "must ensure that [its] technology is transferred to the private sector. The taxpayer's investment in NASA is an investment in the international competitiveness of U.S. industry." (NASA Release 90112)
The Senate, in a rush to agree on the 1991 spending plan, compromised on a $1.9 billion allocation for NASA's Space Station. Said Senator Barbara Mikulski, "The space program has been increased by 13 percent so it's not as if we gouged them." W Post, Oct 17/90; AvWk, Oct 22/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the completion of the merger of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and the Office of Exploration; the two offices were merged into the Office of Aeronautics, Exploration, and Technology. Arnold D. Aldrich was named to head the new NASA office, which was intended to combine the analysis of exploration mission alternatives with innovative technologies, two closely related efforts that Truly felt should proceed under a strong central management. Truly also announced the establishment of the Office of Legislative Affairs, effective March 18, 1990. Headed by Martin P. Kress, this NASA office would be responsible for legislative matters and the coordination of budgetary and policy matters with Congress. (NASA Release 9032; 9033) During February: Daniel Brandenstein, NASA's chief astronaut, returned from a tour of Soviet space facilities and said the original untended Russian shuttle, maiden voyage in 1988, would never fly again. He also reported that the Soviets planned to launch a second untended space shuttle in 1991 and automatically dock it with Mir. The station's crew planned to run some tests. Again untended, it would undock and reenter the atmosphere. (UPI, Feb 21/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly told a panel created by President George Bush that the Agency was facing serious problems, but not what most people believed them to be. The two obstacles standing in front of the Agency, he said, were "Governmentwide practices" that encumbered connections between programs and resources and the public's misunderstanding of the proposed Space Station Freedom. The Space Station's design flaws, he added, were either solved or close to a solution, "yet public understanding is to the contrary." In a related matter, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA planned to spend $1.9 billion over the next five years on its seven centers of excellence in the area of highperformance computing. The Centers would focus on training college and graduatelevel students, thereby educating the next generation of scientists in the field. Truly, who spoke at a conference on supercomputing in September noted, "NASA needs highperformance computing. Some of our missions depend on it." (W Post, Sep 14/90; Fed CoWk, Sep 10/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
After five delays because of the Shuttle Commander's' 0*head cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather, Atlantis (STS36) lifted off under dark skies from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to deliver a 37,300pound classified military satellite into orbit. The postponements tacked on an additional $2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Truly reiterated NASA's policy that meeting launch schedules was secondary to safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its $500 million military payload the following day at an orbit inclined 62 degrees north of the equator, allowing it to fly over every major populated and industrialized center in the Soviet Union. An even higher inclination orbit would have been preferred. A polar orbit was considered ideal for a recon naissance satellite, but the Shuttle base at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, from where such an orbit could have been safely achieved, was not operational; the weight of the larger satellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle. Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California on March 4. No problems were reported during the brief 41/2 day mission, the Space Shuttle's 34th mission and the 6th mission dedicated solely to the military.W Post, Mar 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 5/90; Feb 28/90; NY Times, March 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; P Inq, Mar 5/90))
The press reported hearings of the Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation at which NASA Administrator Richard Truly defended NASA against charges by the General Accounting Office (GAO) that it understated the cost of the planned Space Station and its operations through 2027 by at least $34 billion. Truly questioned GAO figures and stated it was time to begin building the station rather than submit it to further study or audit. (W Post, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; WSJ, May 2/91; B Sun, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91; Plain Dealer, May 5/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the creation of a new Systems Analysis and Concepts Office at NASA Headquarters, in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. James D. Bain, who served as executive secretary of that committee, was appointed Director of the new office. (NASA Release 91-74; SP News, May 20-26/91)
The media reported engineers were studying a possible problem connected with a $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) to be launched by Shuttle Atlantis. The problem involved the motor that deployed a boom carrying a six-foot-wide antenna. The main TDRS antennas are folded for launch, but once the satellite is in orbit, the antenna booms rotate outward and the antennas open up like umbrellas. On June 24, NASA manager of the project Nicholas Chrissotimos, stated that the problem was resolved. (UPI, Jun 21/91; AP, Jun 22/91; C Trin, Jun 25/91)
NASA's Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Experiments Program Manager Dean Olmstead expressed NASA's pleasure that the U.S. Army had joined NASA to conduct various ACTS experiments. ACTS forms the center of NASA's satellite communications research and development efforts. (PR Newswire, Aug 20/91)
A space journal reported that Vice President Dan Quayle had asked David Thompson, former NASA engineer and current chairman, president, and chief executive officer of Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, to take the post of NASA Deputy Administrator. Thompson was considering the matter. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91)
An article in Florida Today referred to former NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's proposal that some 100 top Shuttle program managers around the country be moved to Kennedy Space Center under a consolidation plan NASA was considering. The recommendations were to be discussed at a December 9-10 meeting with NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (Fla Today, Nov 15/91)
The General Accounting Office (GAO) report on NASA indicated it needed to improve contract oversight to reduce cost overruns and schedule delays. According to the GAO, one in every three NASA contracts experienced cost overruns and two in five experienced delays. The conclusion was based on audits at Marshall, Kennedy, Goddard, and Johnson field centers based on a statistical sample of 317 active or administratively closed-out contracts between 1984 and 1989. (Htsavl Tms, Dec 23/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
The report of the committee appointed by the Bush Administration, headed by Norman R. Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, produced favorable comments from industry, according to the New York Times. Industrialists believe that the report showed greater realism about the space program, with its emphasis on unmanned flights and request for larger funding for NASA. In contrast to this complimentary review, Alcestis Oberg in Space News maintained that the Augustine panel's recommendations were irrelevant and a new agency was needed to pursue moon and Mars initiatives. (NY Times, Feb 7/91; SP News, Feb 4-10/91)
NASA announced that the Italian Space Agency (ASI) would design and develop two Mini Pressurized Logistics Modules for Space Station Freedom under a memorandum of understanding signed with NASA in Washington. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly signed on behalf of NASA and Luciano Guerriero, President of ASI, signed on its behalf. The two agencies also agreed to work toward expanding their relationship, including the provision of a Mini Laboratory. (NASA Release 91-200)
Pamela Clark, a former NASA employee who teaches chemistry, wrote an article criticizing the lack of support from upper management of the space program. She urged Congress to adequately finance a civilian space program that would recognize America's position of world leadership. (H Chron, Mar 19/91)
Representative Lamar Smith, Republican, Texas, wrote NASA Administrator Richard Truly expressing concern that NASA's Comet rocket program may keep new firms from entering the commercial space industry. Truly's office was preparing a reply. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
NASA announced that astronaut Mary L. Cleave would become Deputy Project Manager for Sea Viewing Wide Field Sensors at the NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Her work would involve supervising a joint NASA and commercial project to learn about the biological mass in the ocean by studying the chlorophyll content to determine how much plankton is produced. (NASA Release 91-68; H Chron, May 3/91)
NASA announced that a 15-member delegation of Soviet space officials, headed by Oleg N. Shishkin, Minister of General Machine Building, would be visiting NASA headquarters and space centers July 9-16. (NASA Release 91-105)
Parade Magazine contained a feature article on Barbara Morgan, who following the death of Christa McAuliffe in the Challenger disaster, was her designated successor as NASA's teacher in space. NASA Administrator Richard Truly was quoted as saying that after NASA's annual review of the subject, it was determined that it was not yet appropriate to send another teacher on the Shuttle although it was only a matter of time. Morgan stated she recognized the risks of space flight but was nevertheless eager to go ahead with a flight mission. (Parade, Jul 14/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
NASA announced that Pennsylvania State University's Center for Cell Research, State College, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had begun a new space program to enable U.S. industry to enhance the purification and processing of cells, subcellular particles, proteins, growth factors, and other biological products. (NASA Release 91-172)
The House of Representatives rejected President Bush's proposed budget, allowing only a 4.2 percent increase in the space program to keep pace with inflation, instead of the recommended 12 percent increase. (UPI, Apr 18/91; B Sun, Apr 18/91)
NASA officials George Rodney, the agency's top safety official, and Robert Crippen, head of the Shuttle program, said a special investigating team would spend the summer reviewing the way NASA approved Shuttle components for flight. (W Post, May 31/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement following action by the House of Representatives to continue the development of Space Station Freedom. Truly commended the bipartisan vote in the House, expressed his confidence that Freedom would win support in the Senate, and expressed his commitment to shape the final NASA FY 1992 budget in a way that balanced the various research and project areas. (NASA Release 91-88)
The media reported that President Bush had informed two senators, Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, both on the Senate space subcommittee, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly that he would actively campaign to reverse the congressional panel's decision to scuttle the Space Station. (AP, May 23/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91)
The Soviet Union used the name of Yuri Gagarin, the first human in space 30 years ago, to boost its emerging commercial space program. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at an opening ceremony in Moscow said Soviet space science and technology were open to international cooperation and called for joint space research with the United States, European countries, China, India, Japan, and others. (AP, Apr 11/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that based on a recent policy review, NASA's Space Flight Participant Program would be kept in abeyance until 1992. NASA previously had indicated that when the program resumed, first priority would be given to a teacher in space in fulfillment of space education plans. (NASA Release 91-50; UPI, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 6/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the ceremony that would take place on April 25 on the occasion of the rolling out of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour. The ceremony was scheduled for Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, where the orbiter was assembled by Rockwell International Corporation's Space System Division. Truly praised the efforts of all those in NASA and industry who had cooperated on the program. Part of the ceremony would involve the presentation to NASA by Robert Duce, Dean of the University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography, of Endeavour's first "payload," a sternpost remnant recovered from the orbiter's namesake, the first ship commanded by British explorer Captain James Cook in 1768-71. During the ceremony Truly announced the creation of the NASA Endeavour Teacher Fellowship Program  with the gifts donated to NASA by the public for the replacement orbiter. The program would award scholarships to American undergraduates studying to be teachers. (NASA Release 91-62; UPI, Apr 24/91; NASA Release 91-64)
The Washington Times carried an article on Baikonur, the rocket workers' town in the Soviet Union founded by the military in the same year as the Cosmodrome, 1955. No permanent residents were registered in Baikonur, known as Leninsk, but the city had 100,000 inhabitants crammed into a 4.5 square mile area. Tables of Soviet "space firsts" and "space endurance records" were included. Another article in the same issue described Soviet efforts to sell or rent space gear, including parts of the orbiting Mir Space Station, to ease the financial situation of the space program.
The NASA Advisory Council of 25 leaders in industry, government, and academia sent a letter to Vice President Dan Quayle commending NASA Administrator Truly's quick action in implementing the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program. (NASA Release N91-10)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of 26 Space Grant State Consortia as a result of Phase II competition. Recipients receive four-year, $150,000-per-year grants to initiate new programs. States receiving such grants were Alaska, Delaware, District of Columbia, Indiana, Kansas, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oregon, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin. Twelve states with limited aerospace activity would receive similar grants to enhance aerospace research and infrastructure. They were Arkansas, Connecticut, Idaho, Louisiana, Maine, Montana, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, South Carolina, and West Virginia. Both grants require partial matching nonfederal funds and would be used in part to sponsor fellowship programs for undergraduate and graduate students. (NASA Release 91-19)
NASA officials announced that its X-29 experimental aircraft flew five times on January 25, setting a new record for daily flights from the Ames-Dryden test center. The second of two X-29s built by NASA, it was conducting high angle of attack test studies and military utility in a joint project with the Air Force. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 14/91)
In response to the House-Senate Conference report on the FY 1992 budget, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA was very grateful for the funding for Space Station Freedom. However, it was disappointed that the total NASA appropriation did not keep up with inflation. (NASA Release 91-158)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced two key appointments: Arnold D. Aldrich to be Associate Administrator for the new Office of Space Systems Development and Richard H. Petersen to become Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 91-161; AP, Oct 3/91; Daily Press, Oct 4/91; W Post, Oct 10/91)
A Business Week article on attempts to make the commercial space-launch business profitable, quoted NASA Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson Jr. He stressed the need for "real, nongovernmental customers" in order to make the program a success. The article summarized the work of various commercial firms and mentioned a number of instances of unsuccessful rocket launches. (Bus Wk, Aug 12/91)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the appointment of J. Stuart Fordyce as Deputy Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. He had served as Director of Aerospace Technology at Lewis since 1984. (NASA Release 91-65)
AP reported that astronaut John Blaha, commander of the Atlantis mission, said he used the post-flight news conference to express his views on the space program and the importance of the Space Station, after reading criticism of the latter. (AP, Aug 21/91)
Concurrently, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Michael D. Griffin for the new position of Associate Administrator for Exploration. (NASA Release 91-139; SP News, Aug 26-Sep 8/91)
The media reported the concern of Soviet cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station that the station and the space program in general might be sold because of Russia's economic plight. The role of the new Soviet republics with regard to space was also undetermined. Subsequently, Yuri Semyonov, general designer of the Energia team that managed Mir, said according to Tass, that the Space Station would remain the property of his collective. (NY Times, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 7/91; P Inq, Sep 8/91; B Sun, Sep 8/91; AP, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91)
Florida Today reported that Forrest McCartney, who had headed Kennedy Space Center since 1986 would be retiring in about a year. Subsequently, the media reported that McCartney had been asked to step aside early by top NASA managers. (Fla Today, Oct 23/91; UPI, Oct 25/91; AP, Oct 26/91; W Times, Oct 27/91; O Sen Star, Oct 30/91)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
Magellan project manager Tony Spear at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the spacecraft had completed its objective for the primary phase of the Venus mission more than one month before the end of the first 243-day mapping cycle. Magellan mapped 70 percent of the planet by April 3, and would have mapped 84 percent by May 15. The mission was to be extended to allow Magellan to map the remaining 14 percent, including the south pole. Toward the latter part of its mission it will also acquire gravity data. Magellan's findings, as described in Science magazine, indicated Venus was volcanic and geologically active. (NASA Release 91-49; AP, Apr 4/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; AP, Apr 5/91; NASA Release 91-53)
James T. Rose, Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, announced his plan to leave NASA. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that John G. Mannix would take his place. (NASA Release 91-179)
AP reported, as quoted in the Washington Times, that the Soviet cosmonauts were waiting to return home, puzzled by home conditions. Their return was postponed after the republic of Kazakhstan claimed ownership of the territory on which they were supposed to land. Furthermore, the Soviet space program was experiencing financial and administrative difficulties. (AP, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Robert L. Crippen as the new Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, effective January 1, 1992. Crippen is to replace Forrest S. McCartney. (NASA Release 91-180; AP, Oct 31/91; UPI, Oct 31/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with senior NASA officials in Washington to discuss Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson's interim viewpoints on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices. Thompson's final recommendations and a proposed implementation plan were to follow in early November. (NASA Release 91-169)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced, following a senior management meeting, that NASA would conduct a thorough review of the recent discovery that a fuel sensor removed from Space Shuttle Columbia last fall was cracked. However, Truly indicated that the sensor problem on Columbia had been corrected and the Shuttle was now tentatively scheduled for launch on June 1. (NASA Release 91-79; AP, May 25/91; UPI, May 25/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the planned creation of the Office of Management Systems and Facilities. Benita A. Cooper was to be the Associate Administrator for this office which was to enhance total quality management. (NASA Release 91-160)
Dr. Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, announced that the Space Studies Board has long opposed justifying Space Station Freedom solely on scientific merit. However, the Board recognizes, and NASA concurs, that "there are national considerations for building a Space Station other than scientific research." Congress and NASA decided to build the Station in an evolutionary way so that ultimately it would meet the principal scientific research requirements intended. The Station represents a significant part of the long-term goals for the civil space program set by the President. NASA was confident that this was the time to proceed. (NASA Editors' Note N91-17)
A Soyuz rocket blasted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the Mir Space Station carrying an Austrian electronic engineer and the first cosmonaut from the Republic of Kazakhstan, where Baikonur is located. The joint Soviet-Austrian mission was part of a Soviet effort to help pay for the space program with joint international flights. Tass reported the rocket docked with Mir on October 4. On October 10, two Soviet cosmonauts and the first Austrian in space returned to Earth, according to Tass. (AP, Oct 2/91; UPI, Oct 2/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; AP, Oct 4/91; AP, Oct 10/91)
NASA's scaled-back design for Space Station Freedom was to be considered at a National Space Council meeting at the White House. The National Space Council members include members of the Cabinet, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, the White House Chief of Staff, the presidential science adviser, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (W Post, Mar 18/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly and Secretary of Energy James D. Watkins signed an interagency agreement on cooperation in areas relating to space isotope power. The agreement updated an earlier 1965 pact and delineated authorities of NASA and DOE on research, technology development, design, production, delivery, spacecraft integration, and launch support for radioisotope power systems. (NASA Release 91-119)
Encore Computer Corporation filed an agency protest of a $191 million award by NASA Johnson Space Center to IBM Corporation for a mainframe requirements contract. NASA officials were to meet with Encore representatives over the disagreement, which involved pricing information submitted. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 10/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, the Soviet space program was facing a difficult future. The main elements of the Soviet space program were concentrated in three republics: Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. Rockets were built primarily in Ukraine, control centers and instrument manufacturing plants were mainly in Russia, and the principal launch facility, the Baikonur Cosmodrome, was in Kazakhstan. Marcia S. Smith, the Soviet space expert on the staff of the Congressional Research Service, said those three republics agreed in early October they could operate by themselves. However, the economic situation became worse, causing increasing criticism. Nevertheless, communications satellites were essential to produce foreign investments and maintain a link with the outside world. Space research had technological spinoffs in areas such as computers, transportation, communications, and propulsion. Therefore, U.S. experts did not believe the former Soviet states would allow the space program to die. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
The Washington Post discussed the success of NASA engineers in fixing the computer software "bug" that caused spacecraft Magellan, after its arrival at Venus, to lose contact with Earth. Magellan mission director James Scott of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California confirmed that the problem was solved and possible similar flaws in other space programs were being eliminated. (W Post, Aug 18/91)
The media covered the unveiling of the Shuttle Endeavour at some length, including its new features outlined by NASA Administrator Richard Truly: "The latest avionics navigation equipment, the finest mechanical systems, a new drag chute, and equipment for longer duration flights." Endeavour has more fuel cells, which generate electricity, allowing it to stay in orbit as long as 28 days. (P Inq, Apr 26/91; W Times, Apr 26/91; NY Times, Apr 26/91; W Post, Apr 26/91; USA Today, Apr 26/91; WSJ, Apr 26/91; B Sun, Apr 26/91; Daily News, Apr 26/91; H Chron, Apr 26/91; AP, Apr 26/91; UPI, Apr 26/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter from Norman R. Augustine, former chairman of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, assessing NASA's efforts over the preceding nine months to implement the committee's recommendations. The letter recognized that NASA took "many significant actions" but "much is yet to be accomplished." (NASA Editors' Note N91-60; UPI, Sep 16/91)
NASA announced crew assignments for the International Microgravity flight, scheduled for February 1992 and the Spacelab D-2 mission, the second German Spacelab flight, scheduled for February 1993. Lt. Col. David C. Hilmers was to be mission specialist on the microgravity flight and Lt. Col. Jerry L. Ross was to serve as Payload Commander on the spacelab flight. (NASA Release 91-57)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly held a press conference during his visit to Marshall Space Flight Center for its Honors Day. Truly commended the work on Space Station design performed at Marshall and defended the Hubble Space Telescope, a Marshall-managed project. Fred Wojtalik, manager of Marshall's Hubble Space Telescope, was given NASA's Distinguished Service Medal. (Htsvl Tms, Mar 29/91)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of H. Lee Beach Jr. as Deputy Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-198)
NASA administrator Richard H. Truly announced additional actions to implement the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. Truly briefed the National Space Council on January 11 on the status of NASA's review. NASA decided as follows: Space science would remain NASA's priority and NASA would implement the existing strategic plan, as recommended by the advisory committee. In response to the committee's recommendation, NASA planned to form a special task force with the Department of Defense to assess over the next two months development of an evolutionary heavy-lift launch vehicle. Space Station Freedom restructuring activities, centering on life sciences on microgravity research and applications, conducted in concert with international partners, would be extended to incorporate the committee's recommendations. NASA would move with the Office of Personnel Management to structure a personnel management system that recognizes NASA's special needs to attract and retain top-flight scientists, engineers, and other specialists.
NASA announced it was seeking applications from new astronaut candidates with a cut-off date of July 1, 1991. The next class of candidates was scheduled for July 1992. Two types of positions were available: mission specialist for those with significant scientific backgrounds and pilot for those with extensive piloting experience in jet aircraft. (NASA Release 91-67; H Chron, May 3/91)
NASA also announced that President George Bush would join NASA Administrator Richard Truly in a back-to-school special program for elementary students on NASA Select Television. (NASA Release 91-146)
James C. Fletcher, who twice served as NASA Administrator (April 1971 - May 1977, May 1986 - April 1989), died of cancer. (AP, Dec 23/91; W Post, Dec 24/91; NY Times, Dec 24/91; W Times, Dec 24/91)
According to AP, the Hubble Space Telescope presents astrophysicists with a mystery: the existence of hydrogen clouds in space that should have dissipated billions of years ago. According to Ed Weiler, NASA's space telescope program manager, this was Hubble's most significant finding to date. (AP, Oct 23/91)
AP reported that The Save Our Wetlands environmental group had filed suit against NASA to stop the testing of an advanced solid fuel rocket motor for Space Shuttles on the Mississippi Gulf Coast. The group also asked that the Environmental Protection Agency make NASA comply with clean air and water laws. NASA officials maintained that NASA received the needed state and federal permits to test the boosters. (AP, May 29/91)
James R. Thompson, NASA Deputy Administrator, was quoted as praising NASA's preeminence in space and aeronautics technology but admitting its recent difficulties. In view of these, Thompson indicated he thought NASA should slow its push for the Space Station and instead adapt the Space Shuttle to fly longer missions to demonstrate why a Space Station would be valuable.  (Birmingham News, Aug 29/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA would ask Congress to increase its budget by 13 percent in the next fiscal year, emphasizing projects with short-term ecological benefits and helping schools and teachers to encourage students with an aptitude for mathematics and science. Truly added that manned space flights would be downgraded in importance compared with unmanned programs and pure scientific research, particularly research that would benefit the life sciences and development of a new rocket engine. (SF Chron, Jan 25/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced a nationwide search for a senior official to direct NASA's activities to send people to the Moon and to explore Mars. This announcement represented an implementation of a recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program to create a new Office of Exploration under an Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 91-24)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced plans to create a new Office of Space Flight Development. This would allow the existing Office of Space Flight to concentrate on the safety and efficiency of space flight. (NASA Release 91-148)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
According to the press, two members of the House subcommittee that oversees NASA spending, Chairman Bob Traxler, Democrat of Michigan, and ranking minority member Bill Green, Republican of New York, asked NASA Administrator Richard Truly why NASA did not buy a Mir Space Station or other technology from the Soviet Union. NASA replied that the U.S. aerospace industry would not like it. (AP, Oct 25/91; B Sun, Oct 26/91; LA Times, Oct 27/91)
The speech of Lennard A. Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, at a September 19 meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, was published in Washington Technology. Fisk first dealt with the causes and effects of negative publicity about NASA and went on to defend NASA's accomplishments and the rationale for NASA's existence as being an absolute rather than a relative one, which made developing a consensus harder. He concluded that "The adventure of space is a vital part of our society. The space program needs to be perceived as the best this country has to offer." (Washington Technology, Oct 10/91)
Time published an interview with NASA Administrator Richard Truly in which various questions were asked about the Space Station. Truly justified proposed expenditures by stressing the payoff in such areas as environmental control, life-support research, power generation, and health care technologies as well as the discoveries themselves. He also stated that Mission to Planet Earth was poorly understood but promised "unbelievable benefits." (Time, Jul 1/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly gave an interview to Space News about NASA's role in promoting space education and the agency's future plans. One of the difficulties is attracting greater numbers of women and minorities. He discussed NASA's plan to establish a new office of human resources and the need for more people schooled in Earth sciences.  In an editorial in the same issue, the publication commended NASA for its attention to education in high-technology fields and efforts to recruit women and minorities. It also pointed out the number of laid off workers in the aerospace industry as a result of the sharp downturn in the defense industry as potential employees in the space field. (Space News, Feb 4-10/91)
An editorial deplored efforts of the Virginia congressional delegation to block NASA's possible closing of its Reston, Virginia, office. The editorial stated that to cut space program costs, which suffer from a bloated management structure, streamlining must occur and the Reston office was a good place to begin. (Space News, Jan 7-20/91)
NASA held a news briefing designed to show that Space Station Freedom was back on track. NASA Administrator Richard Truly indicated that the final design of the station would be streamlined in weight and electrical power and would rely on robots for repairs. (USA Today, Dec 6/91; W Post, Dec 6/91; W Times, Dec 6/91; AP, Dec 6/91)
NASA's next Shuttle mission is to be that of Atlantis, scheduled for launch in July to release a giant Tracking and Data Relay Satellite intended to link Shuttles and other low-orbiting spacecraft with the ground. Conrad Nagel, the NASA manager responsible for the launch preparation, raised the possibility that Atlantis might be launched earlier than July 25. (Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 15/91)
NASA officials reported that a quality inspector had discovered a cracked hinge in a fuel line door of Shuttle Discovery. The effect of the finding on Discovery's tentative launch date of March 9 was unknown. (UPI, Feb 19/91; AP, Feb 19/91; B Sun, Feb 20/91; W Post, Feb 20/91; NY Times, Feb 20/91; WSJ, Feb 20/91; USA Today, Feb 20/91; W Times, Feb 20/91; UPI, Feb 20/91)
NASA announced that the Aviation Safety Reporting System ASRS), which it manages for the Federal Aviation Administration, had prevented many air accidents and saved lives over the past 15 years. ASRS also identified safety issues for the aviation community and released research papers on aviation safety. FAA and NASA celebrated the 15-year anniversary of the program. (NASA Release 91-112; Inside DOT, Jul 25/91)
According to the Cleveland Plain Dealer, the Ohio EPA ordered an investigation and cleanup of contamination at NASA's Lewis Research Center. NASA officials stated voluntary cleanup efforts were underway and Peter W. McCallum, NASA's chief of environmental safety said most of the sites had been cleaned up or soon would be; he was confident no contamination was leaving NASA's property. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Jul 3/91)
An editorial commended NASA for considering a plan to decrease the risk of space experiments by using a larger number of small satellites, with smaller numbers of instruments. This would increase flexibility in the space program, making it more efficient and possibly cheaper. (SF Chron, Aug 16/91)
NASA Project Scientist Steve Saunders stated that Magellan scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were studying the surface features on Venus caused by wind. Soviet landers and the US Pioneer probes measured wind speeds near Venus at two to four miles per hour, or about the speed needed to move sand grains. The Magellan images indicated wind streaks. Project Manager Tony Spear said that a new strategy to protect Magellan from the heat of direct sunlight has successfully cooled the spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-63)
The media reported on Administration efforts to have the elimination of funding for the Space Station reversed in the House of Representatives. In this connection, the New York Times carried a major editorial urging that the Space Station not be funded. In response to that editorial, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter of support for the Space Station from Thomas Stafford, Chairman of the Synthesis Group, to Representative George Brown, Chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. (USA Today, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; NASA Release N91-42; WSJ, Jun 6/91; CSM, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
An internal memorandum signed by four NASA officials as well as interviews with staff at the Reston, Virginia, facility indicated a strong opinion that moving the headquarters now would disrupt development of the $30 billion Space Station. At a recent meeting three-quarters of NASA staff were said to oppose a move. Despite this fact, NASA Assistant Administrator William B. Lenoir was said to have decided to recommend moving the headquarters. (H Chron, Apr 13/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
Business, county, and NASA officials met in Reston, Virginia, to announce a new hotline for anyone who wanted to keep the NASA Space Station Program in Reston. The Coalition for Space Station Continuity set up the hotline, following reports that the Texas Congressional delegation urged that NASA move to Houston. (McLean/Great Falls Connection, Apr 18/91)
An editorial in Florida Today referred to NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's comment about NASA giving serious consideration to consolidating Shuttle operations at Kennedy Space Center. He estimated this would cut Shuttle costs 25 percent. Such a move would also result in consolidating Shuttle management, as recommended in the Advisory Committee report. (Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
The Cleveland Plain Dealer reported that NASA's Lewis Research Center on December 13 refused to sign cleanup orders for nine sites within the Brook Park complex that were contaminated with hazardous materials. NASA officials indicated they wished to continue talks with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and that signing the orders would mean waiving their right to appeal. Moreover, they complained the agreement did not limit the sum the Ohio EPA could charge for overseeing the cleanup. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Dec 14/91)
A space publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard Truly would forgo attendance at the 1991 Paris Air Show in order to remain in Washington to keep close watch on the congressional fight to keep the Space Station appropriation in the budget. In an editorial in the same journal, it was stated that maintaining the Space Station "at the cost of nearly everything else NASA does would be a major mistake." Subsequently, an editorial in the San Jose Mercury News expressed similar concern that NASA's other important programs would be sacrificed for the sake of the Space Station. (SP News, Jun 10-16/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 11/91)
A space publication printed an adapted version of Senator Dale Bumpers' (Democrat from Arkansas) speech when he introduced legislation in July to cut funding on the NASA Space Station drastically. He favored solving U.S. problems on the ground, not in space. The same issue carried remarks of Senator Jim Sasser (Democrat from Tennessee) that the Space Station was something the United States could not afford. Furthermore, the magazine carried an interview with Jim Beggs, chairman of Spacehab Inc. and former NASA administrator, concerning his organization's relationship to NASA. (SP News, Sep 9-15/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
Ceremonies connected with NASA Administrator Richard Truly's presentation to Rockwell International Space Systems Division, Palmdale, of the 1990 George M. Low Trophy to a contractor for outstanding achievement in quality and productivity improvement were featured at some length. About half the Palmdale work force were scheduled to be laid off after Endeavour's completion; the remaining 450 workers beginning in July would modernize the Shuttle Columbia. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 5/91)
Washington Technology carried two articles on NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS). The first discussed the possibility of the EOS instrument payload being divided among three launch vehicles while still maintaining its "simultaneity." The second quoted NASA officials Lennard Fisk and Shelby Tilford as addressing the EOS Engineering Review Panel in La Jolla, California. They said NASA had devised a restructured plan to remove several of the EOS satellite sensors and replace them with "ballast" of thousands of pounds of lead to maintain payload balance. (Washington Technology, Aug 8/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly presented the Minority Contractor of the Year Award to Consolidated Industries, Inc., of Huntsville, Alabama, and the Minority Subcontractor of the Year Award to Network Solutions, Inc., of Herndon, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-157)
The New York Times reported that Soviet space officials told the White House that the Soviet civilian space program might collapse unless it made large sales to the West. Soviet economic problems were the major cause as well as parliamentary attacks on the space program as wasteful. (NY Times, Sep 3/91; UPI, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 4/91; Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Assistant Administrator for the Office of Procurement. The highest ranking woman career executive in Air Force contracting, she served previously as Principal Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff for Contracting, Headquarters Air Force Systems Command, Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-94)
NASA's Earth Observing System faced possible funding cuts as a result of questioning by Representative Ralph Hall, chairman of the House Space Subcommittee, and his colleagues. Concerns exist also within NASA regarding program costs. Tension reportedly existed between NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, over the amount of the data system to be centered at Goddard as opposed to other NASA sites. Some congressional members questioned NASA's accountability and deplored rivalry between NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly briefed members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on the President's 1992 budget request of $15.7 billion for NASA, a 13.6 percent increase from the 1991 budget. Programs emphasized were the New Launch System to be developed with the Department of Defense; LIFESAT, a reusable biosatellite; Mission to Planet Earth, which shows commitment to the ecology; and a 17 percent increase for NASA's educational activities. (NASA Release 91-21)
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology approved a $14.27 billion space program for the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly 6 percent over 1991 but $488 million less than President Bush had requested. Included was $1.9 billion for the Space Station with $128.9 million to be added when the National Academy of Sciences comments on NASA's plans to reduce the size of the station. The committee specified that NASA spend $25 million of the Space Station money on developing a return emergency vehicle for Space Station astronauts. It also called for spending $30 million to develop advanced propulsion systems, including the first new Shuttle engine in more than 20 years. Closer scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union and continuation of the Landsat earth-monitoring program were also specified. (AP, Apr 24/91)
A trade publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly had asked Vice President Dan Quayle to signal strong support to Congress for the X-30 National Aerospace Plane (NASP) program. NASA feared a major cut in funding of the NASP would significantly delay the program. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
NASA managers were described as divided over whether Discovery could be safely launched on March 9 or needed to be taken off the launch pad and repaired. (UPI, Feb 27/91)
In a letter to the editor, Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, and John N. Bahcall, Professor of Natural Science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, declared that "There is strong national support for both a vigorous manned space program and a strong science program." Believing that both were essential, they pointed out that to maintain its space leadership position, the United States must continue such programs as the Advanced X-Ray Astrophysical Facility, missions to a comet and to Saturn, and the Earth Observing System. (W Post, Jun 27/91)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly spoke on the opening day of the Space Exploration '91 convention in Houston, sponsored by the NASA Alumni League. He said that recent successes by unmanned missions were paving the way for future space initiatives. He also stressed the need for belt tightening over the next several years. (H Post, Oct 30/91; H Chron, Oct 30/91)
The media reported that the National Space Council decided that the new Landsat satellite to study environmental changes on earth and military movements, Landsat VII, would be funded by NASA and the Defense Department. Landsat VII was to resemble Landsat VI, which was scheduled for launch in late 1992. NASA Administrator Richard Truly testified at a congressional hearing on the subject November 26. (WSJ, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; W Times, Nov 27/91)
The wire services reported that NASA managers reaffirmed their previous decision to resume routine Florida Shuttle landings. This occurred prior to the start of a two-day review to clear Atlantis for blastoff around July 23. (UPI, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 12/91)
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Ray J. Arnold as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs. He replaced Lawrence F. Herbolsheimer, who became Deputy Assistant Administrator for Policy and Interagency Coordination. (NASA Release 91-39)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released an internal agency report on roles and responsibilities of NASA centers and Headquarters offices, prepared by former Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson. Thompson focused on three thrusts: building on NASA field organizations as Centers of Excellence in specific areas of science, technology, and development; a reminder to "stick to basics" in engineering disciplines, and program management and realignments of certain NASA Headquarters office responsibilities to achieve more efficient program execution. (NASA Release 91-190; AP, Nov 15/91)
NASA announced that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel would present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly on March 22. (NASA editors' note N91-19)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
NASA announced a number of contract arrangements. A contract extension was awarded to Vitro Corporation of Silver Spring, Maryland, to continue safety and support services at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. NASA further selected Nichols Research Corporation, Huntsville, Alabama, and BDM International, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to compete for a support contract for the Earth Observing System Program Office in Washington. In addition, NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, contracted with Johnson Controls, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida to provide maintenance and operational services at Johnson. (NASA Releases C91-dd, C91ee, C91ff)
According to Reuters, as reported by the Orlando Sentinel Star, Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency, said at a news conference at the Paris Air Show that plans to launch a European Space Shuttle were proceeding despite cost overruns and technical problems. (O Sen Star, Jun 19/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was scheduled to teach ninth grade geometry students at George Washington Junior High School, Alexandria, Virginia, on February 22. Selected as an "All-Star" engineer by the National Engineers Week 1991 committee, Truly was to share his engineering and aerospace knowledge with students. Astronauts Mary Cleave and Bonnie Dunbar were among the more than 10,000 engineers participating in the teaching program. (NASA Release N91-13)
The media quoted Aviation Week and Space Journal magazine as saying that a $70 million cost overrun had doubled the price of two NASA spacecraft being developed to study the interaction between the Earth and the sun. The craft were being built for use in the 17-nation International Solar Terrestrial Physics Program. NASA officials reportedly confirmed the cost increases. (AP, Nov 10/91; W Times, Nov 11/91; Fla Today, Nov 11/91; B Sun, Nov 11/91)
NASA announced the resignation for personal reasons of Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson Jr., an internationally recognized propulsion expert, who served more than 25 years in NASA. (NASA Release 91-149; AP, Sep 17/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; Decatur Daily, Sep 18/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 18/91; Birmingham News, Sep 18/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Sep 19/91; AvWk, Sep 23/91)
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
In a commentary on the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, released in December 1990, Alston Chase pointed out that the report stressed that among NASA's major problems were that it "has grown too large and is trying to accomplish very complex tasks in which there is little margin for error." As an example of NASA's growth, the report cited that Viking involved some 13,000 people, whereas Apollo involved 180,000. (W Times, Jan 8/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a message to all NASA staff on the fifth anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. He cited the important lessons learned, the stress on flight safety, and the successful Shuttle missions since that time. (NASA Release N91-8)
UPI reported that NASA managers reviewed plans to resume routine Shuttle landings at the Kennedy Space Center. The unpredictability of Florida's coastal weather was at issue but it was felt that improvements NASA made in the Shuttle fleet were such that routine landings could now occur. (UPI, Jun 19/91)
A Christian Science Monitor editorial commended NASA's work with regard to the Magellan spacecraft's survey of the surface of Venus. However, the editorial deplored the indecision and delays in the U.S. space program resulting from Congressional ambivalence and stressed the need for the administration to achieve a sustainable program. (CSM, Jun 6/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of General Spence M. Armstrong, USAF (Retired) for the newly established position of Associate Administrator for Human Resources and Education. (NASA Release 91-138)
A policy paper by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington think tank, said defense and national security should be top priority for the US space program. Exploration of the moon and Mars should occur as a result of "market incentives" or interest of research organizations. Environmental research should be the province of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or the Department of Energy. If NASA's functions could be performed by other agencies, it should be closed. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA officials told UPI that a 1993 Shuttle flight would end with a fully automatic, hands-off landing to test untried systems that might be needed if pilots were not up to the task after a long-duration mission (UPI, Nov 19/91)
NASA announced that in conjunction with the Federal Aviation Administration it would sponsor an international government/industry workshop on aircraft icing. The workshop is to be held at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, which has the Lewis Icing Research Tunnel, the world's largest refrigerated icing tunnel. (NASA Note to Editors N91-75)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement between the United States and Canada to participate in a five-year RADARSAT Earth-observation satellite mission. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was one of the United States signers. RADARSAT was scheduled for launch in June 1994 using an expendable launch vehicle provided by NASA. RADARSAT would collect valuable economic and scientific data on ice and ocean surveillance and natural resource management, including surveillance of natural disasters. (NASA Release 91-34)
According to the press, Senate budget leaders expressed concern over NASA's ability to launch the GOES-NEXT weather satellite in time to meet weather monitoring needs. They urged that the National Weather Service buy a $100 million backup satellite, possibly obtaining one from Japan. NASA Administrator Richard Truly said NASA accepted responsibility for the delays and cost overruns in the construction of the new satellites. (W Post, Jul 11/91; NY Times, Jul 11/91; C Trin, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91)
Nationally syndicated economics columnist Warren Brookes questioned the administration's efforts to rescue NASA's Space Station and the new space program represented by the National Aerospace Plane. Brookes stated that possibly national security concerns justified both these programs but their economic justification was dubious. (W Times, May 29/91)
The media reported that 14 major scientific organizations were joining forces to warn of the "excessive cost" of the planned $30 million Space Station that would "threaten the vitality" of essential scientific research programs and imperil U.S. leadership in world technology. The organizations urged a "balanced" space program but did not call for the Space Station to be killed. (LA Times, Jul 9/91; P Inq, Jul 10/91; W Post, Jul 10/91; NY Times, Jul 10/91; Science, Jul 19/91)
Soviet space program experts announced that the 40-ton Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 would break up and fall to earth in February. Tass, the official Soviet press agency, implied Soviet officials had lost control of the station when it said the authorities would issue a "timely warning" to all countries on whose territory station "parts are likely to fall." Salyut 7 was launched in 1982 and last inhabited in 1986, holding up to six astronauts. The Soviet Union had planned to send a rescue mission with the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran but the Shuttle was delayed. (NY Times, Jan 1/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Paul H. Holloway as Director of the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. (NASA Release 91-171)
Vice President Dan Quayle, speaking as chairman of the National Space Council, said the U.S. would not buy or build more Space Shuttle orbiters. It is to continue to use the four existing orbiters into the next century but planned to develop a new family of rockets to replace the current fleet of unmanned vehicles. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said he helped devise the policy's wording and was "totally in support" of it.(P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; B Sun, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; USA Today, Jul 25/91; WSJ, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; Washington Technology, Jul 25/91; Htsvl Tms, Jul 26/91; Peninsula Times Tribune, Jul 30/91 quoting San Diego Tribune; B Sun, Jul 31/91)
A feature article dealt with NASA's management overhaul, which it described as nearly complete and based on recommendations of Congress, the Augustine panel, and the most recent report of former Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson. (W Post, Nov 25/91)
Former NASA Administrator Richard Truly said that he would assume a new job as director of the Georgia Tech Research Institute, a branch of the Georgia Institute of Technology. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of procurement reforms to make NASA the model of excellence for the Federal Government. Goldin said reforms in NASA's procurement process were necessary because 90 percent of the agency's budget is spent through contracts. Major changes in procurement will include the award of new contracts to companies that have demonstrated accountability by delivering quality systems that meet cost, schedule, and technical requirements. (NASA Release 92-123)
A Russian-French crew docked with the Space Station Mir during the first of several joint missions intended to strengthen both countries' space programs. While aboard Mir, the crew was scheduled to conduct several experiments, including one into the chemistry of urine and saliva in weightlessness. They also would test vibrations and pressure on the human body. (AP, Jul 29/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
NASA administrator Daniel Goldin announced in a number of recent speeches the first major reforms resulting from the internal review of NASA programs he had ordered. The Earth Observing System would be streamlined again, and incentives to Space Station Freedom contractors might be pooled to assure that they worked as a team. The reforms were designed to make U.S. civil space programs better, faster, and cheaper. Money saved would be applied to new missions using small spacecraft. (AvWk, Sept 28/92; Science, Oct 2/92)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA officials had scheduled an unprecedented spacewalk by three Shuttle astronauts to rescue a satellite. The agency decided to undertake the third and final three-man rescue attempt upon the request of Shuttle Endeavour's commander. (WSJ, May 13/92; USA Today, May 13/92; W Post, May 13/92; W Times, May 13/92; NY Times, May 13/92; LA Times, May 13/92; P Inq, May 13/92; AP, May 13/92; UPI, May 13/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin endorsed the creation of a Space Agency Forum to coordinate activities among the leades of the world's space agencies to prevent duplication and overlap. (NASA Release 92-143)
A new 5,000-mile-wide radio telescope designed to probe the edge of the universe was near completion in the United States, according to Peter Napier, project manager for the Very Long Baseline Array project. The federally funded project, actually a series of 10 dish-shaped antennas, was expected to begin high-resolution imaging work by December. (W Times, Sept 20/92)
NASA announced that Laurie A. Broedling had been appointed as Associate Administrator for Continuous Improvement. She would report directly to the Administrator and serve as NASA's primary facilitator of Total Quality Management. "This appointment is an important step in bringing a world-class TQM program to NASA," Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-72)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
NASA officials scheduled the next Shuttle launch for July 31, three weeks after the Shuttle Columbia returned from its record-breaking two-week mission. Atlantis' seven-day flight was slated to troll an Italian satellite on a 12-mile-long tether and to launch Eureca, a European satellite, on a one-year mission. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 26/92; W Times, Jul 27/92; NY Times, Jul 28/92)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
In the summer 1992 issue of Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Richard H. Kohrs, director of Space Station Freedom in NASA's Office of Space Development, discussed the advantages and challenge of constructing Space Station Freedom. Aside from the international cooperation required to build and operate it, Kohrs gave three primary functions that the Space Station would perform in the U.S. civil space program: 1) it would enable humans to learn to live and work productively in space; 2) it would serve as an advanced research facility; and 3) it would provide experience and knowledge of building, operating, and maintaining large systems in space. The Space Station was also expected to be a vital component of the total U.S. civil space program, augmenting the planetary exploration program, astronomical research, life-sciences program, aeronautics research, and transportation program. (Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Summer 1992)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
NASA managers said last week that they would refashion the way the space agency conducts its programs, drawing on the results of internal NASA studies now under way and the advice of outside groups. The proposed reforms would serve as a test of whether Administrator Daniel Goldin's vision of faster and cheaper space projects could work in practice. (NASA Release 92-154; Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
In an official statement, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly welcomed the nomination of Daniel S. Goldin to be next NASA Administrator. "I am pleased to learn that President Bush nominated Daniel S. Goldin as the next Administrator of NASA....I wish him every success as he comes to this elite organization," said Truly. (NASA Note 92-20)
NASA started the first flight test in Denver of a laser-based sensor to provide airline pilots with advance warning of "microbursts" that can harbor potentially dangerous windshears. The Federal Aviation Administration has mandated that airlines must select and install an approved microburst detection system on their aircraft by the end of 1995. (NASA Release 92-108)
NASA managers set January 13 as the launch date for the first Shuttle mission of 1993. Designated STS-54, the flight was to have two primary objectives--deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-F) and astronomical observations of invisible x-ray sources within the Milky Way Galaxy with the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer. The crew was to be comprised of John Casper, commander, Don McMonagle, pilot, and three mission specialists, Mario Runco, Greg Harbaugh, and Susan Helms. (NASA Release N92-110; C Trib, Dec 23/92; AP, Dec 22/92; UPI, Dec 22/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
The National Association of Small Disadvantaged Business presented NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin with its Meritorious Award. It was the second time Goldin had received the award. (NASA Release 92-162)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced new minority contract goals and the formation of a NASA Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee. He also announced that the Minority Contractor of the Year was Jackson & Tull, Chartered Engineers, of Seabrook, Maryland; B & W Services, Inc., Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 92-158)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in San Francisco, California, NASA Administrator Samuel S. Goldin said that NASA should decide within five years whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005. A decision in the matter should be made by 1997, Goldin said, although in any event, the space agency would continue to fly the Shuttles until at least 2005. Shuttle costs would have to come down in the meantime, however, even as safety improvements continued. (Space News, Dec 7-13/92)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Charles J. Pellerin, Jr., to the position of Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Quality. Pellerin was also to serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator for long-range planning. (NASA Release 92-59)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, speaking at the University of Hartford, Connecticut, said spending on space exploration was an investment in the future, but that the nation's space agency must get more for its money than it had in the past. NASA research has economic benefits for the nation, providing jobs and developing technologies with commercial applications, but just as important is the agency's role in supporting exploration that increases knowledge of the universe and provides hope for a better future, Goldin added. (Hartford Courant, Nov 18/92)
President Bush kicked-off International Space Year (ISY), a year-long worldwide celebration of space cooperation and discovery. During the year, 29 space agencies and ministries from around the world, 10 international organizations, and the United Nations planned to celebrate the spirit of discovery and work together to promote a new era of global cooperation and to increase knowledge of planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-13)
It was reported that on March 17, 1992, that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel will present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly at NASA headquarters, Washington, D.C. The panel reviews, evaluates, and advises the NASA Administrator on present and future NASA programs and activities. Priority is given to programs that involve the safety of manned flight. (NASA Note 92-21)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the expansion of the National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program to include all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The Space Grant Program offers states the opportunity to receive grants to further projects in aeronautics, space, and related fields. (NASA Release 92-112)
NASA chief Daniel S. Goldin promised a bolder, "new" NASA that would control costs on its scientific missions in space and support the research and development efforts of domestic aircraft makers. Goldin's promise came at a NASA town meeting at California State University, Dominguez Hills campus, where several hundred people showed up for an opportunity to question Goldin about overpriced components, underfunded programs, and a lack of direction in the nation's space program. It was the fourth town meeting Goldin had hosted around the country since taking over as NASA's chief administrator in April. (LA Times, Dec 9/92)
In a speech to the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers in Los Angeles, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA was committed to building a culturally diverse workforce as it pursued the exploration of space. (NASA Release 92-170)
NASA headquarters announced that Space Shuttle Columbia would be launched on a 13-day mission on June 25, 1992. Mission STS-50, planned to be the longest flight to date in the Shuttle program, will carry the United States Microgravity Laboratory-1 payload into orbit. A Spacelab long module was to serve as an in-orbit laboratory for seven crewmembers and 31 experiments devoted to materials science, fluid physics, combustion science, and biotechnology. (NASA STS-50 Launch Advisory)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jeremiah W. Pearson, III, announced that Thomas Utsman, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight, will become the Program Director for the Space Shuttle. He will direct long-range Shuttle planning, Space Shuttle continuous improvement activities and overseeing efforts to reduce Shuttle operations costs while maintaining safety. (NASA Release 92-83)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and National Space Council Executive Secretary Brian Dailey left with an interagency delegation to visit the European Space Operations Center in Germany. The delegation planned to proceed on to Moscow to gain a first-hand understanding of Russia's space program. (NASA Release 92-106)
NASA announced that a Board of Investigation had been formed to assess the problem of the fouled tether that prevented the successful release of the Tethered Satellite System during Shuttle Atlantis' just-completed flight. NASA officials said that any decision about reflight of the $380 million tether system would depend in part on a quick determination of what went wrong and how much it would cost to solve the problem. NASA set an August 28 deadline for the board to report its findings. (NASA Release 92-129; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92, Aug 17/92)
NASA managers decided to replace all three main engines aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour because of problems with powerful oxygen pumps that came to light after an engine test firing. Rocket engineers initially believed that Endeavour had sailed through its flight readiness firing in good condition, with no signs of any major problems in the ship's propulsion system. But detailed analysis of data from the 22-second test indicated the liquid oxygen high pressure turbopump bolted to main engine No. 2 had experienced high vibration levels during engine operation, apparently because of abnormal bearing wear. NASA decided to replace all three of the engines to minimize the impact on the Shuttle's launch processing. (UPI, Apr 8/92; AP, Apr 8/92)
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)
A new bearingless rotor system developed by McDonnell Douglas Helicopter Company, Mesa, Arizona, which promised to be a significant advance in helicopter technology, was tested by NASA. The tests, conducted in Ames' Research Center wind tunnel, evaluated the rotor concept and gathered data to help develop computer programs needed to design a new generation of bearingless rotors. The new system, which eliminates hinges and bearings that usually connect the blades to the rotor shaft, is the key to the innovative system. The blades have advanced airfoils and are made of high strength composites. The technology was expected to have many benefits, including easier maintenance and lower fuel use. "The new rotor system would allow for faster, more agile, more cost effective and safer helicopters," said Steve Jacklin, Project Manager for the wind tunnel test at the Ames Research Center. (NASA Release 92-27)
Deidre Lee was appointed deputy assistant administrator for procurement at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 92-146; Space News, Sept 21-27/92)
U.S. Rep. Louis Stokes, who criticized NASA hiring policies as racially discriminatory during Congressional debate in July, said that he was encouraged by recent steps toward diversification discussed by the space agency at a gathering of top NASA officials at a mostly black elementary school in Cleveland. The gathering included a visit by black astronaut Charles Bolden. (The Plain Dealer, Oct 22/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Bill Livingstone as Special Assistant to the Administrator for Communications. (NASA Release 92-71)
The Association of Space Explorers 8th Planetary Congress opened at Georgetown University in Washington, D. C. It was attended by the largest group of astronauts and cosmonauts ever assembled, with over 100 international space flyers, representing 19 nations, in attendance. The congress opened with remarks by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and was concerned mainly with discussions about an international mission to Mars. Goldin also mentioned the practical applications of NASA's technology innovations since the 1960s. He identified CAT scans, laser surgery, and intensive care units as having had their genesis in the space program. "New products, new industries, and new jobs come through NASA research," Goldin said. (NASA Note to Editors: N92-75; W Times, Aug 31/92)
NASA officials said that the Galileo spacecraft and its atmospheric probe had passed the half-way mark on their voyage to Jupiter. The first full test results on November 20 and December 2 since launch three years ago showed that the probe's systems were in good working order. Galileo was scheduled to arrive at Jupiter in early December 1995. A major milestone in space communications was achieved recently when NASA scientists successfully transmitted laser signals to Galileo at a distance of 1.3 million miles. (NASA Releases 92-224 and 92-225; AP, Dec 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Dr. Charles Pellerin as Associate Deputy Administrator for Strategic Planning, John R. Dailey as Associate Deputy Administrator, and Ralph C. Thomas as Assistant Administrator for Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. The appointments continued management changes Goldin had instituted in recent months. (NASA Release 92-194; Space News, Nov 9-15)
NASA officials said that the last scheduled U.S. shuttle flght this year, a military mission by Discovery, probably would be delayed because of a faulty component in the orbital maneuvering system. A December 2 launch date was subsequently planned. (AP, Oct 15/92; NY Times, Oct 16/92; W Times, Oct 16/92; AP, Nov 2/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri Koptev, the Director General of the Russian Space Agency, ratified the first contract between NASA and a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The contract was for the study of applications of Russian space technology to the Space Station Freedom program. The contract was for an initial period of one year with a value of $1 million. (NASA Release 92-91)
India launched a research satellite into orbit using local technology in what officials called an important milestone in the country's ambitious space program. The 750-foot rocket blasted off from an island off the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. Nine minutes into the flight, the $7 million rocket propelled a research satellite into orbit 280 miles above earth. The flight was pronounced a total success. (W Times, May 21/92)
In remarks before the National Space Club, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the United States needs a laboratory in space so scientists can learn how to protect the health of humans living and working for long periods in space and improve the quality of life on Earth. "We can light up the sky with the inspirational work of Space Station Freedom, or we can stand by and watch the greatest technological bonfire of the century if it's canceled. We need Space Station Freedom and we need it now," said Goldin. (NASA Release 92-92)
The Senate, defying veto threats by the White House, adopted an $6.3 billion savings package that demanded deep cuts in President Bush's military and space priorities, including the Strategic Defense Initiative. Approved 61-38, the measure would take $1.3 billion from prior appropriations for SDI and $1 billion from production funds for the B-2 bomber. The cuts from the space program, though much smaller, dealt a further blow to exploration of Mars, and they would kill an on-going project to design a high-speed aircraft capable of orbiting into space after launch from a conventional runway. (WSJ, May 7/92)
Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, predicted a "Perils of Pauline" battle in Congress over the survival of Space Station Freedom, saying the outpost was an investment in the future that should not be squandered for short-term gains. Despite the high costs and frequent redesigns, Goldin said the station was vital to the future of America's space program. Although he refused to predict the outcome of congressional debate, he expressed guarded optimism that Freedom would survive the latest challenge. (UPI, Apr 29/92)
On their first full day in space, two crew members of the Space Shuttle Endeavour conducted experiments involving motion sickness. Understanding motion sickness has high priority among space agencies around the world. It strikes most astronauts during their first few days in space, and it affects flight planning, such as space walks, which are never scheduled early in a mission. (W Post, Sept 14/92; NY Times, Sept 14/92; W Times, Sept 14/92; AP, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
At a meeting with NASA employees at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA chief administrator, Dan Goldin, emphasized the need for increased attention to aeronautics research in the face of competition from Europe and Japan. Goldin also said that NASA would have to do things "better, faster, cheaper"--the message Congress had just sent the agency by not increasing its $14 billion budget. Goldin also urged senior managment to place more minorities in its ranks and indicated that agency personnel would be reshuffled in the future. (Daily News, Sept 4/92; Antelope Valley Press, Sept 4/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of key personnel in the Office of Public Affairs and the Office of Equal Opportunity Programs. Bill Livingstone was appointed Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Sue Mathis Richard was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Lewin S. Warren was appointed Acting Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs; and Oceola S. Hall was designated Acting Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs. (NASA Release 92-94)
J.P. Mitchell, Pratt and Whitney's Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME) Alternate Turbopump Development project manager, reported that a pair of Pratt and Whitney designed high-pressure turbopumps had been successfully tested at 100 percent rated power on a SSME at NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. (PR Newswire, Jan 23/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable in Washington, D. C,, that the U.S. government should spin off more new technology to help boost the economy. He also said that the space business sector must move beyond its attempts to sell goods and services to the government to become a real commercial industry. Goldin said NASA's newly created Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology would be given broad authority to pursue innovative ideas, seek out new technologies, and accelerate transfer of the agency's own breakthroughs to industry. (Space News, Nov 16-22/92; AvWk, Nov 16/92)
The National Research Council said NASA should increase its budget for civil airliner and air traffic control research, even if it means a cutback in NASA's military and space programs. The council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, said the United States status as the world leader in aircraft manufacturing would continue to erode if NASA did not enter into a major cooperative program with industry, universities, and other government agencies to develop a new generation of airliners. (W Post, Oct 1/92)
NASA officials added an extra day to the environmental mission of the Space Shuttle Atlantis so its seven-member crew could conduct more research on the atmosphere. (P Inq, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92)
After hearing complaints from employees across the nation, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin unexpectedly announced he was changing the agency's logo. Goldin killed the despised "worm," which displayed "NASA" in high-tech red lettering, and restored the insignia affectionately known as the "meatball." The meatball, which served the agency from 1959 to 1975, consists of the agency's name surrounding a starry blue background, a red wing shape and the flight path of a spaceship. It was worn by astronauts on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions. (W Post, May 26/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin issued a call to restore America's leadership in aeronautics that is threatened by failure to invest adequately in research facilities and advanced technology. Goldin told the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics meeting in Arlington, Virginia, that additional spending had to be directed to high speed research, advanced subsonic and systems integration, critical research facilities, and hypersonic research. Top priority needed to be given to developing a hypersonic commercial plane that could carry 300 passengers at least 6,000 miles nonstop at two-and-one-half times the speed of sound by the year 2005. NASA's budget provided for $1.1 billion for aeronautics, or 7.9 percent, Goldin said, a funding level that had to increase. (NASA Release 92-219; The Sun, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 10/92; H Post, Dec 10/92; AvWk, Dec 14-21/92)
Scientists from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said they planned to seek answers to such problems as the development of frog eggs in weightlessness and control of space motion sickness on the next Shuttle flight scheduled for mid-September. Space Shuttle Endeavour was slated to carry a crew of seven, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J, a science laboratory containing 43 experiments, 34 of them provided by Japan, on a six-day mission. (NASA Releases 92-130 and 92-128)
In an effort to inspire students to study mathematics, science and technology, almost 1,000 engineers from NASA planned to visit schools nationwide during the week of February 16-22. NASA's "teachers for a day" will be participating in the National Engineers Week's Discover "E" Program, the largest student outreach effort sponsored by the engineering profession. NASA engineers were to participate in career day activities, teach students, conduct science competitions, participate in teacher workshops, and judge science fairs. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said, "Space exploration and its monumental engineering feats are vital to America's future competitiveness, will strengthen domestic economy, provide jobs for Americans and inspire students to study mathematics and science." (NASA Release 92-24)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Samuel W. Keller as Associate Administrator for Russian Programs. The new position was established to provide focus for the many programs involving NASA and the former Soviet Union. (NASA Release 92-103)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
Astronomers resumed the search for evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) today with simultaneous commands to computers and radio telescopes at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and in the Mojave Desert of California. Although there have been previous limited projects, NASA officials, who are financing and directing the new project, said the planned 10-year, $100 million search would be the most comprehensive and ambitious one ever undertaken to search for signals of life beyond Earth's galaxy. Later, more radio telescopes around the world were to join the search, which NASA has renamed the High Resolution Microwave Survey. The latest SETI project was timed to begin on the 500th anniversary of Columbus' discovery of land in the Americas. (NY Times, Oct 6/92, Oct 13/92; W Post, Oct 5/92; LA Times, Oct 7/92; The Sun, Oct 8/92; Newsweek, Oct 12/92; AP, Oct 10/92, Oct 12/92; UPI, Oct 13/92; C Trib, Oct 10/92; P Inq, Oct 10/92; 13/92; NASA Release 92-160)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that his agency had started an intense examination of itself and its programs aimed at setting goals for the nation's civilian space program and controlling costs in the future. Goldin said he had named two teams to undertake an agency-wide analysis of what NASA should be doing and what it could do within the constraints of a limited budget. The self-analysis was organized, Goldin said, after he examined the NASA budgets for the coming years and realized that the agency was committed to programs that could not be funded in an era of tight federal spending. (AP, May 26/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed an agreement with International Technology Underwriters (INTEC) to explore ways that the insurance industry can assist in financing human and robotic satellite rescue and repair missions. INTEC would also look at options for providing incentives in the construction of commercial satellites to make them easier to rescue and repair if problems develop. "We need to consider new approaches to salvaging satellites that will encourage the further commercialization of space, such as robotic rescues in high and lower orbits," Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-99)
Defense contractor Teledyne, Inc., announced that it would pay $17.5 million in fines to settle federal criminal charges alleging that the company systematically falsified reliability tests of electromagnetic relays. The relays are used in virtually all U. S. weapons systems and space programs, including the Patriot missile and the Space Shuttle. It wasn't known if any systems failures had been caused by the relays, which function as electronic switches. (AP Oct 3/92)
During the Soviet period, Ukrainian scientists and industry were an integral part of the Soviet space program, which employed over 250,000 people. When the breakup of the Soviet Union fragmented its space program, Ukraine gained one of the world's most advanced aerospace industries, capable of producing everything from rockets to satellites. However, without the Soviet Union to pour money into space exploration, Ukraine was looking for new ways to keep its aerospace industry working. (LA Times, Apr 24/92)
NASA officials said that tomatoes grown by students and teachers from seeds that had been in space for nearly six years show little or no difference from the fruit of seed that never left the Earth. The tomatoes from a batch of 12.5 million space-borne seed were as healthy as their earthly counterparts, though "findings suggest that the space-exposed seeds germinated slightly faster" and "seedlings had a faster initial growth rate," the officials said. (W Times, Apr 19/92; W Post, Apr 20/92; NASA Release 92-49)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
The House of Representatives approved a $47.3 billion space program for the next three years after voting to limit spending on development of an advanced solid-fuel rocket motor motor. The bill reauthorizing NASA for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 was passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate. The House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned Space Station, nearly $8 billion for other space science applications, and $12.5 billion for the space shuttle program. Before approving the bill, the House agreed to cut in half, to $260 million, the 1993 budget for the next generation solid-fuel rocket, designed to enable the Space Shuttle to carry heavier payloads, including key components of the Space Station. (AP, May 5/92)
NASA headquarters reported that eight finalists had been chosen for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy--NASA's Quality and Excellence Award. The finalists were: Cray Research Inc., Honeywell Inc., IBM Federal Sector Division, McDonnell Douglas Space Systems, Paramax Systems Corp., Rocket Research Co., Stanford Telecommunications Inc., and Technical Analysis Inc. (NASA Release 92-57)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin charged a new team of agency officials with finding a cheaper way to build Space Station Freedom, even if that meant assembling much of it without the Space Shuttle. The team, comprised mainly of officials within NASA but outside the Station program, was asked to redesign the Station so that it can be completed on time despite congressionally imposed spending limits. Goldin's directive came in the wake of reduced Space Station funding in both the House of Representative and the Senate. Findings were due to Goldin by November. (Space News, Aug 17/92; AvWk, Aug 24/92)
The fifth meeting of the Space Agency Forum on the International Space Year (SAFISY) opened in Washington, D. C. The forum is composed of 29 members (national and multi-national space agencies), including NASA, and 10 affiliate members (international, space-related organizations). The meeting was called to review progress of the various SAFISY-sponsored international space year projects and to discuss options for post-1992 cooperation. (NASA Note to Editors N92-76)
The NASA announced that both tape recorders aboard the $617 million Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were malfunctioning, and engineers directed the craft to not use the machines. Compton, a joint project of NASA and the European Space Agency, was built by the space and technology group of TRW under the direction of Daniel Goldin, the man selected by President Bush to become the new NASA administrator. (W Post, Mar 24/92)
In a broad-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he expected to deal with declining agency budgets by prioritizing and focusing NASA projects. He estimated that a substantial cut had been made in the agency's costs during a review of the last few months--perhaps one-third to one-half of a needed $17 billion in savings--and that new programs would not be multi-billion-dollar projects but would cost in the range of tens to hundreds of millions of dollars. (Aerospace America, Nov 92)
Space Center Houston opened on this date. The $70 million non-profit center, which expected to lure two million visitors a year, is designed to bring the "wonder days" of the early space program to a generation of children that has known only the Space Shuttle. The center, on the periphery of NASA's space campus, supplants the former visitor facility inside the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.  (USA Today, Oct 14/92; H Chron, Oct 14/92, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92; Newsweek, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the fate of the Russian space program is in doubt. Although most of the republics that make up the successor to the Soviet Union, the Commonwealth of Independent States, had signed an agreement pledging to continue the space program and to honor all the Soviet Union's international agreements on space projects, many experts questioned the impoverished nascent union's ability to follow through. "There is a high level of uncertainty," said James Head, a planetary scientist at Brown University. "The commonwealth will absolutely not be able to maintain a space program at the same level of activity," declared Roald Sagdeev, former director of the Soviet institute that ran all scientific research programs in space. (C Trib, Jan 29/92; Boston Globe, Jan 30/92)
The countdown began for the Space Shuttle Atlantis on a mission to test an Italian satellite linked to the Shuttle by 12 miles of electricity-generating cord. NASA officials said there was a 90 percent chance of acceptable launching conditions on July 31. (NY Times, Jul 29/92, Jul 31/92; CSM, Jul 29/92; UPI, Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; AP Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; The Sun, Jul 31/92; W Post, Jul 31/92; LA Times, Jul 31/92; P Inq, Jul 31/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Paul F. Holloway, in addition to his responsibilities as Director of Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, would be assigned temporarily to NASA headquarters as a special assistant to the administrator. Goldin also announced the departure of Don G. Bush, assistant administrator for procurement, effective January 11, 1993. (NASA Release 92-292)
A study conducted for the Federal Aviation Administration by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments concluded that the Washington area could support flights of "tiltrotor" aircraft to New York and Boston. Tiltrotors would be competitive with commercial aircraft within a range of about 350 nautical miles from Washington. To date, tiltrotor aircraft had been developed and flown by the military, which hoped to use the craft for transporting troops. (W Post, Jul 16/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with representatives from seven Historical Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), the latest recipients of NASA's Research Center grants. The awards were the latest approach to meeting some of NASA's present and future research and workforce needs and in tapping into scientific resources found among under-represented minority students and faculty at qualifying universities. (NASA Release 92-11)
NASA announced that Rockwell International Corporation's Space Systems Division had received NASA's first-ever award for World Class Performance in recognition of its exemplary work in building the new Space Shuttle orbiter Endeavour. The award is given when the NASA administrator determines that an organization has performed world-class work of significant benefit to the agency and U.S. taxpayers. (PR Newswire, Jul 14/92)
In an interview with Final Frontier magazine, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin gave his views about NASA and its contribution to American society. "I took this job because I believe NASA is critical to America's future. NASA provides hope, opportunity, and inspiration to the American public. It does this through its primary mission: to reach for the stars, in the broadest sense, of course. . . . For the last 30 years it has been demonstrated over and over again that the space program helps take America's value-added industry right to the cutting edge and provides jobs and opportunity." (Final Frontier, Sept/92)
Veteran NASA astronauts Richard O. Covey and Kenneth        Bowersox and ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier were named to the crew for STS-61, the Hubble Space Shuttle Telescope servicing mission scheduled for late 1993. Covey was appointed the mission commander, and Bowersox was to be the pilot. Nicollier was named to be a mission specialist. Three other crew members previously named to the STS-61 mission were payload commander Story Musgrave, and mission specialists Tom Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Kathryn D. Thornton. (NASA Release 92-218)
Jim Scott, Magellan project manager at the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, expressed regret at NASA's decision to cut short the spacecraft's mission. Since its launching from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on May 4, 1989, the spacecraft had mapped 97 percent of Venus' surface, using radar to peer through the planet's thick clouds and take pictures of the rugged, volcanic landscape. Scientists hoped to continue mapping in more detail during an "extended mission" ending in 1995, but NASA officials decided to avoid adding $80 million to the cost by ending the mission on September 30, 1993. The budget decision meant that engineers would not be able to move Magellan from its elliptical orbit and into a lower circular orbit starting in May 1993. That would have allowed Magellan to remap Venus with three to 10 times more detail than the pcitures it already had taken. (NASA Release, 92-14; W Times, Jan 29/92)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
Solar scientists were puzzled by an unexpected "gamma ray afterglow" discovered on the sun by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. The glow, a strong emanation of high-energy gamma rays, persisted for more than five hours after a solar flare explosion on June 11, 1991. A similar phenomenon occurred four days later. The scientists also announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had taken the first image of the sun in neutrons, the first picture of any celestial object ever made with neutrons, that is, matter, rather than light. Another scientist reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had found evidence of powerful beams of downward-streaming protons at the onset of a stellar flare while looking at a red dwarf star more than 30 light-years away. Solar flares can produce magnetic storms on Earth that interfere with electrical power and radio transmissions. (NASA Releases 92-112 and 92-113; NY Times, Jul 16/92; USA Today, Jul 16/92; The Sun, Jul 16/92; P Inq, Jul 16/92; UPI, Jul 15/92, Jul 17/92; W Post, Jul 20/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
Thomas O. Paine, 70 who was deputy administrator and administrator of NASA from 1968 to 1970, died of cancer May 4 at his home in Los Angeles.In 1985, President Reagan named him chairman of the National Commission on Space to set goals for future space exploration. He also was a member of Vice President Quayle's Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. After leaving NASA, he returned to GE where he became a vice president and power generation group manager. In 1982 he retired from the Northrop Corporation as its president. (W Post, May 8/92; NY Times, May 7/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Chief of Staff. The Chief of Staff facilitates communications between the Administrator's office and senior staff members, as well as with private sector executives and international visitors. In addition, the Chief of Staff focuses on internal NASA Headquarters management and operations, aiming to increase the efficiency of the organization. (NASA Release 92-58)
During Space Shuttle Columbia's upcoming mission, scientists planned to test a theory which may have applications ranging from hurricane dynamics to superconductivity . The Lambda-Point Experiment was to study the strange behavior of helium at its critical temperature of 2.177 degrees above absolute zero. Other experiments were to study the effects of gravity on metals and semiconductors as they solidify on Earth and in orbit and vibrations in the Shuttle as the vibrations affect the other two experiments. The Shuttle crew was also scheduled to deploy the Laser Geodynamics Satellite, an Italian satellite to study the movements of the Earth's crust and other phenomena. (NASA Releases 92-175 and 92-176; LA Times, Oct 2/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
In the last of a week-long series of talks in California at California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA, its partners, and its contractors, were suffering from a bureaucratic "sickness" and political infighting that had sapped the U. S. civilian space program's will to take risks or to admit mistakes. "We need a complete resurgence of our space program to be bold, to take risks, and accept failure," Goldin said during a lively, two-hour discussion and debate with Carl Sagan, astronomer and founding president of the Planetary Society, based in Pasadena. Sagan agreed that NASA had lost its "sense of direction" and said that the key questions facing NASA were what would be its role in the post-Cold War era and what could it accomplish that was in the national interest in a time of pressing economic problems. (Space News, Dec 14-20/92)
It was reported that the Bush Administration's commitment to keeping Russia's nuclear scientists employed by offering financial assistance and technical cooperation was running into obstacles as U.S. officials held up some deals and sent conflicting signals about others. Among the projects awaiting approval were requests by federal agencies to acquire Russian-made plutonium, buy a Russian-made reactor for the U.S. space program, and join an international consortium with Russia and others to explore use of fusion energy.  (W Post, Mar 25/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin agreed to seek increased funding for NASA's life sciences program destined for the Space Station Freedom, calling current funding levels "disgraceful" and clearly in need of increased funding. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
Outgoing NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced his support for using space to enhance education and his recommendation to administrator-nominee Daniel S. Golding that NASA fly Barbara Morgan, who was a backup to Christa McAuliffe. (NASA Release 92-40)
NASA selected 28 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The proposals were submitted by 65 small, high technology firms located in 16 states. Total value of the 28 awards was $14 million. SBIR objectives are to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally funded research innovations. The SBIR program is managed by NASA's Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., and all individual SBIR projects are managed by nine NASA field centers. (NASA Release 92-27)
In a speech to the National Space Club, outgoing NASA chief Richard Truly, who resurrected the Shuttle Space program after the 1986 tragedy, said that the country's space program is in jeopardy and that "the cheap shots" coming from the National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, "must end" if the White House and Congress want to maintain U.S. leadership in space. (USA Today, Feb 27/92; W Times, Feb 27/92; W Post, Feb 26/92; Fla Today, Feb 15/92; O Sen, Feb 14, 1992; Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 18/92; Defense News, Feb 17/92; B Sun, Feb 19/92; Space News, Feb 17/92; AP, Feb 19/92; NY Times, Feb 20/92)
Space Shuttle Endeavour touched down on Rogers Dry Lake, California, ending a historic, nine-day maiden voyage. The public's response to Endeavour's mission, which featured an unprecedented three-astronaut capture of a stranded communications satellite, was the most enthusiastic since the Shuttle program resumed in 1988, NASA officials said. A crowd of an estimated 125,000 turned out in the desert to watch the landing. (LA Times, May 17/92; P Inq, May 17/92; AP, May 16/92; W Times, May 17/92; B Sun, May 16/92; W Post, May 17/92)
The U. S. National Research Council urged NASA to expand study of advanced subsonic aircraft in order to keep U. S. aerospace companies competitive in the face of growing advances made by foreign industry. A council report said NASA should focus on improving aircraft performance and operating efficiency and coordinate the work with industry and academia. (AvWk, Oct 12/92; National Research Council News Report, Fall Report)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his first hiring decisions, naming four men to senior management posts at NASA headquarters. The new appointments--Maj. Gen. Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Bryan D. O'Connor, Charles F. Bolden and Frederick D. Gregory--included three present or former astronauts and a Marine general who led forces during Operation Desert Storm. (W Post, Apr 29/92; NASA Release 92-54)
A House panel raised legal questions about the National Space Council's handling of a proposal to restructure space program management. Representative Howard Wolpe of Michigan, chairman of the House Science subcommittee on investigations and oversight, charged in a letter to president Bush that the council's official circulation of the proposal was in conflict with the 1958 Space Act. The proposal, prepared by the Livermore Laboratory's Lowell Wood, also violated the council's charter not to interfere with line management responsibility in NASA. (AvWk, March 9/92)
The Associated Press reported that two ex-Soviet cosmonauts circling the Earth went on television to reassure the public that they were safe and working hard, despite the many difficulties caused by the turmoil back home. The demise of the Soviet government and independence of the former republics had thrown the space program into disarray, delaying the cosmonaut's return for months. (AP, Feb 15/92)
The United States and France recently announced plans to increase civil space program cooperation. The two countries said they were also prepared to invite Russia to join with them in new cooperative endeavors. The focus of this new cooperation was the monitoring of the global environment and bringing France and Russia in with the United States as major partners on the Mission to Planet Earth program. The August 10 launch of the U. S./French Topex-Poseidon ocean survey satellite laid the foundation for the U.S/French initiative. (AvWk, Aug 17/92)
Yuri P. Semenov, general director of NPO Energia, the Russians' civilian manned space program, invited U.S. officials to lease room aboard the Mir Space Station, orbiting 240 miles above Earth, to conduct experiments. In addition, Semenov also proposed selling Russians' most powerful rocket, the Energia, which exceeds the lifting capacity of any U.S. launch vehicle. (W Post, Feb 23/92; NY Times, Feb 23/92)
The commander of the Space Shuttle Endeavour, Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein of the Navy, said that the problems and needs of America's cities were no reason to divert money from the space agency's annual budget of $14 billion. If anything, Capitain Brqndemstein said a strong space program was needed to nspire yopung to high achievement and hopes for the future. He said that voyages of exploration were a vital social investment, todayand centuries ago. "America is a country based on boldness and looking into the future, not looking out the back of the bus," said Captain Brandenstein. (NY Times, May 18/92)
A high-powered panel of space experts appointed by U.S. Vice-President Dan Quayle was scheduled to begin deliberations on October 1 that were intended to lay the groundwork for a revamped U.S. space program. The 11-person panel was to advise on ways to change the space effort in light of the Cold War's end, tight budgets, and rapid technological advancements. (Space News, Sept 28-Oct 4/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he would act promptly to implement the recommendations of a Management Review Team for enhanced security at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The team considered Ames high risk for hostile intelligence operations. (NASA Release 92-207; UPI, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 19/92; USA Today, Nov 19/92; W Times, Nov 19/92; P Inq, Nov 19/92; AP, Nov 18/92, 19/92, and 20/92; W. Post, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 22/92; Space News, Nov 23-29/92)
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft was seriously contaminated with metal filings, paint chips, and other trash and could not be launched until it had been cleaned. The contamination may have been introduced when technicians tried to protect the spacecraft from possible damage from Hurricane Andrew. Originally scheduled for launch on September 16, NASA officials estimated a postponement of at least 10 days or possibly two weeks in the launch date. (NY Times, Aug 28/92; AP, Aug 28/92; W Post, Aug 29/92; The Sun, Aug 29/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
Shuttle managers said budget-cutting goals recently mandated by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin could mean the loss of as many as 800 jobs on top of the 300 to 400 being phased out during the new fiscal year at the Kennedy Space Center. The cuts were part of Goldin's pledge to run a leaner, more efficient space agency. (O Sen Star, Sept 30/92)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration began evaluating new technology that could substantially improve the efficiency of the nation's air traffic system, including improved on-time arrivals, increased fuel efficiency, and a decreased work load for air traffic controllers, according to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center. (Commercial Aviation News, Sept 22/92)
A panel of experts recommended that the Air Force assume sole responsibility for developing a new all-purpose national launch system called the "Spacelifter" by the end of the decade. NASA's fleet of Shuttles would be phased out at the earliest opportunity, having become too costly and fragile a system to dominate the space program much longer. The report did not call for a large, heavy-lift vehicle but focused instead on development of lower-cost, medium-size rockets that could satisfy virtually all known payload needs and be tailored to carry cargo or people. (W Post, Nov 19/92 and Nov 21/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92 and Nov 22/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92)
After triumphing in a bruising congressional battle in 1991 and securing a $2.25 billion berth in the Administration's 1993 budget, NASA officials and Space Station Freedom contractors said they were on target toward a scheduled launch of the first Space Station components in November 1995. The station, to be lofted piece by piece aboard the Space Shuttle, was to be partially operational by 1997, and permanently manned by a four-astronaut crew by 2000. (LA Times, Feb 24/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin appeared ready to abandon the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane program with its goal of constructing and flying a single-stage-to-orbit air-breathing vehicle in favor of a hypersonic research effort. The latter, the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility effort, centers on a manned, Mach 10-class reusable test aircraft launched from the back of a NASA/Lockheed SR-71A, and on an unmanned platform launched atop a rocket to explore physical phenomena at speeds approaching Mach 25. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
Facing a tight budget, National Aerospace Plane officials proposed extra steps to slow the program aimed at building two runway-to-orbit research planes. The program's goal was to make the first flight of an x-30 aerospace plane by late 1999. The revised program director Robert Barthelemy presented the revised schedule to top Air Force and NASA officials in a quarterly technical review at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. Congress approved $250 million for the program for the 1992 year after slashing nearly $100 million from the Bush adminstration's $303.8 million request. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
Washington Technology reported that at a May 11 appearance before the annual meeting of the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences (NCMS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin emphasized his commitment to NASA's technology-transfer outreach to industry. At the meeting, Goldin announced a memorandum of understanding that allowed NASA and the NCMS to propose joint research projects. (Washington Technology, May 20, 1993)
Jack Gibbons, President Bill Clinton's science advisor, said that the Clinton administration was debating various options for space policy management. Central was the question of whether to centralize control of the space program in a single White House office or spread out military, individual, and commercial space policy among several high-level councils. The role of science and technology in the Clinton administration was scheduled to be discussed during a January 30-31 meeting in Maryland. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
Space News praised President Bill Clinton's space plan as a "rational, sound approach that will keep the station alive, head NASA in the right direction, and keep NASA Administrator Dan Goldin around."(Space News, Feb 22-28/93)
NASA officials said that its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had yielded three major breakthroughs, two of which would enable scientists to unmask hidden supernovae buried deep in the center of the Milky Way.  The third discovery pinpoints a source of the mysterious cosmic rays in this galaxy that have puzzled researchers since the rays first were detected more than 80 years ago. (NASA Release 93-182)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the agency had exceeded its 1992 goal of awarding 6.7 percent of the total value of the agency's prime and subcontracts to small disadvantaged businesses. Over $865 million was awarded to minority organizations; this figure represented 7.2 of the total $12 billion awarded during the last fiscal year. (National Black Review, Feb 5/93)
Representatives from NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and industry described how they had worked together to take windshear advance-warning devices from the drawing board to the commercial aviation marketplace in just five years.  The windshear reports, part of a NASA/FAA conference in Hampton, Virginia, detailed development of microwave radar, laser radar, and infrared sensors that provide up to 40 seconds warning of windshear. Now NASA and the FAA were considering whether pilots should have formal training to interact with these new instruments. (NASA Release 93-270 and 93-171; AvWk, Oct. 18/93)
President Clinton named David R. Hinson, an aerospace executive and former Navy fighter pilot, to head the Federal Aviation Administration. Mr. Hinson was founder of Midway Airlines. In his new job, Hinson would oversee the safety of the aviation industry and be responsible for initiating and enforcing safety regulations and operating the air traffic control system. (NY Times, May 14/93; USA Today, May 14/93)
The Washington Post reported the White House was seeking to quell expectation about U.S. and Russian cooperation on Space Station Freedom. In an April 13 letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, White House science advisor John H. Gibbons stated that the "White House has made no policy decision to focus our Space Station redesign effort around present or future Russian capabilities."  He went on to say that "NASA should not limit its redesign options to those compatible with the orbit of the Russian Mir Space Station." (W Post, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
According to the Wall Street Journal, five aerospace companies were proposing to revive planning for a advanced new rocket to carry satellites and other commercial payloads into space. The companies had asked NASA to join in planning and researching the project; they anticipated that it would help the U.S. gain a greater share of the commercial launch business now dominated by Arianspace, a European joint venture. (WSJ, May 6/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the establishment of a study team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to explore possibilities for a return mission to Mars to recover some of the scientific objectives of the Mars Observer mission, if communications with that spacecraft could not be reestablished. (NASA Release 93-157; UPI, Sep 1/93; AP, Sep 1/93)
In a speech delivered April 2 at the annual conference in Washington of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, outlined what NASA was doing to emphasize cultural diversity within the organization.
Congress held an oversight hearing March 2, in which members of Congress attempted to determine what had led to a potential $1 billion overrun in the Space Station program. Space Station managers testified on how the overruns had developed and how they planned to fix them. At the hearing, NASA officials said they had offset all but about $500 million of the potential cost overruns for the next three year; they had done so largely by cutting management jobs and replacing consultants with government employees. (W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93; Space News, Mar 8-14/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93; H Post, Mar 3/93)
NASA reported that it had lost all contact with Shuttle Columbia for 80 minutes on May 4 because of an erroneous computer command sent to the Shuttle. The blackout led to the loss of some science data but did not cause any major problems; NASA officials, however, reviewed procedures for creating and sending commands to the Shuttle antenna.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and a team based at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which manages most planetary flights, have examined a variety of options for a new mission to Mars to achieve the scientific goals of the lost Mars Observer at less cost.  The flight would be launched no earlier than 1996. (W Post, Nov 13/93)
A NASA in-house study reported that the agency's technology transfer reputation had been overblown. According to the assessment,"Technology transfer processes are non-integrated, undocumented, and too slow." The report was requested last May by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. (Washington Technology, Jan 14/93)
NASA announced that it had postponed the Space Station Freedom Utilization Conference, planned for June 21-24 in San Francisco, California. NASA managers decided to postpone the conference because of recent instructions to redesign the Space Station. (NASA Media Advisory)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts was scheduled to blast off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission during which the team would carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments. This was the fourth joint Russian-French space mission since 1982. The mission had been largely overshadowed by the space program's serious financial problems caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union. (RTw, June 6/30)
NASA officials said that the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to be functioning well, but that they would not know until February whether or not the Hubble's vision problems had been corrected. (W Times, Dec 16/93; Fla Today, Dec 14/93, Dec 16/93; RTw, Dec 15/93; UPn, Dec 15/93)
NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)
NASA officials said that the Mars Observer mission could be a total loss if ground controllers failed to re-establish contact with the probe in time for the scheduled start of the orbit on August 24. Engineers suspected that a faulty flight clock aboard the craft might have caused communications to cease. New computer commands were sent telling Mars Observer to switch to a backup clock.  However the commands failed to restore contact with the spacecraft, suggesting that the clock theory was wrong. If contact could not be restarted, controllers would have no way of receiving scientific data or even confirming if the Mars Observer probe had made it into orbit. The Mars Observer project was the first U.S. Mission to Mars in 17 years; it was designed to pave the way for a new generation of international planetary exploration centered on Mars.
NASA announced that it had awarded contracts to three U.S. aerospace companies to develop materials and materials fabrication technology for a future U.S. high-speed civil transport. Contracts went to Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, Seattle, Washington; Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Co, Marietta, Georgia; and McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, Long Beach, California.  (NASA Release 93-124)
A White House panel recently called for the American space program to cut back its program significantly. The panel's report, issued on December 17, said that duplication among agencies had to be eliminated and cold-war secrecy reduced. The panel added that the United States should seek to make international cooperation an essential component of its space exploration strategy. (NY Times, Jan 26/93)
NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center Director Robert Crippen and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles had signed an agreement that would transfer benefits derived from the U.S. space program to the private sector and industries in Florida.  The two parties agreed to set aside $1 million each for the next two years to implement projects under this agreement. (NASA Release 93-155)
Sotheby's auction house announced that it had agreed to sell more than 200 items from the Soviet space program, including the first moon rock fragments ever to go up for sale.  The items were being sold by family members of the top participants as well as the state factories that produced the space suits and capsules being offered for sale. The Russian government  was not involved in the sale.  ((Rtw, August 9/93; AP, Aug 11/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced that following a White House directive, NASA had begun a redesign of the proposed Space Station to make it simpler, smaller, easier to build, and cheaper to operate. The redesign team planned to present three proposed models to the Clinton Administration by June 1. Goldin said that the agency would make maximum use of the $8.5-billion worth of work that had gone into designing and planning the Space Station since the mid-198s. (NY Times, Mar 12/93; W Times, Mar 12/93; LA Times, Mar 12/93; B Sun, Mar 12/93; AP, Mar 11/93, Mar 12/93; WSJ, Mar 12/93; Space News, Mar 15-21; AvWk, Mar 15/93; H Post, Mar 8/93, Mar 12/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeff Lawrence, a senior congressional staff aide with experience in space and aeronautics matters, as the agency's Associate Administrator for Legislative Affairs. (NASA Release 93-70; W Post, Apr 21/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
According to a USA Today/CNN/Gallop Poll, most Americans now feel the nation should cut or eliminate spending for the space program. Marcia Smith of the Congressional Research Service said that people are concerned about where to cut the budget, and NASA is seen as a discretionary program. The poll also revealed that people were losing faith in NASA's performance. (USA Today, Sep 7/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Dr. France Anne Cordova, head of the Astronomy and Astrophysics Department, Pennsylvania State University, was scheduled to assume the responsibilities of NASA Chief Scientist effective mid-October. She was to be on extended detail from the University to NASA. (NASA Release 93-162)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
Three major aerospace companies announced cutbacks yesterday, with Connecticut and Washington State losing most of the jobs. Pratt & Whitney, a jet engine manufacturer whose plants are mainly in Connecticut, said that 6,700 jobs would be eliminated over the next 12 months. The Boeing Company announced that it would cut back production of all models of jet airliners. Such a downsizing could result in as many as 30,000 lost jobs. McDonnell Douglas, which had already announced that 8,700 jobs would soon be eliminated, most of them production jobs in its California factories, said that 1,500 white-collar jobs would disappear from its St. Louis headquarters. (NY Times, Jan 27/93; WSJ, Jan 27/93)
NASA announced the assignment of Dr. John Cox as acting Deputy Director, Program and Operations, Space Station Freedom Program, and Robert Moorehead as Chief engineer for the Office of Space Systems Development (OSSD), NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release 93-136)
Galileo's controllers at the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, continued to work on unfurling the spacecraft's stuck high-gain antenna. If their attempts were unsuccessful, the craft's controllers would use Galileo's low-gain antenna to gather data, including data from a probe that would descend into Jupiter's atmosphere. Use of the back-up system would enable NASA to complete 70 percent of its mission, according to project manager William O'Neill. (CSM, Jan 13/93)
Ellen Ochoa, the first Hispanic woman astronaut, was scheduled to be a mission specialist on the Shuttle Endeavour launch March 23. Her mission raised anticipation in the Hispanic community, and NASA invited several Hispanic educators and activists to be present at the launch. NASA planned to send Ochoa on a tour of several cities later in the year. (El Sol, Feb 4/93, Feb 10/93)
In a speech to the National Space Symposium, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make the space program relevant to all Americans. He said he wanted everything smaller, faster, cheaper, and more varied. And he wanted to take more risks.
Some NASA scientists, following the "faster, better, cheaper" advice of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden, want to send two small space probes to study Pluto, the solar system's last known unexplored planet. The Plato mission could cost $600 million to $1 billion, depending on whether the probes were reached by Russian or U.S. rockets, respectively. By comparison, NASA expected to spend more than $2 billion to launch a spaceship in 1997 to explore Saturn. (AP, Feb 8/93)
NASA awarded the Arlington, Virginia-based Analytic Services Inc. a one-year grant to help study opportunities for cooperation among nations with space programs. (W Times, Mar 9/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93)
Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) recommended eliminating the JPL Edwards Test Facility, staffed by 28 JPL employees and 18 contractors, at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert. If NASA managers accepted the recommendation, the facility could shut down by 1996. (UPI, Feb 8/93; Feb 9/Antelope Valley Press, Feb 9/93)
NASA reported that the agency was working with the nation's large aerospace companies to determine how NASA computer programs could help industry design and produce aircraft more efficiently. The ultimate goal was to integrate all the factors involved in aircraft design and production in order that aeronautical engineers would be able to design aircraft systems simultaneously rather than separately as is done now. (NASA Release 93-90)
NASA negotiated with PRC, Inc. of McLean, Virginia, a sole source contract extension to provide data processing and telecommunications support for NASA headquarters, Washington. (NASA Release C93-o)
In response to questions from reporters, President Clinton said that there might be some changes in the space program but that supporters of NASA should be pleased with his recommendations. He gave no details, but White House officials said the President would call for full funding for the Space Station when he addressed Congress February 17. John H. Gibbons, the President's science advisor, on the other had, said that big science projects would be cut back as the Administration searched for ways to pay for them. (AP, Feb 13/93, Feb 16/93; Space News, Feb 15-21; LA Times, Feb 13/93; USA Today, Feb 17/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Bryan O'Connor, Deputy Director of the Space Station Redesign Team, would take over management of the Space Station effort in order to accommodate a request by the team's leader, Joseph F. Shea, that his workload be reduced. Shea submitted his resignation as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis; he was to serve as Special Advisor to the Administrator and advisor to O'Connor. (NASA Statement on Advisory Committee Meeting)
NASA's newly formed Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee met in Washington to discuss their charter and to begin developing an agenda. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who formed the group, charged them with helping NASA respond to a directive from Congress that required the agency to award 8 percent of the total value of the agency's contracts to economically and socially disadvantaged businesses and minority educational institutions involved in key NASA activities.	Goldin pledged in September that NASA would meet its 8 percent goal. In an attempt to meet his pledge. the agency identified 26 procurements that would be set aside for small disadvantaged businesses (SDBs) and for members of the Small Business Administration's 8(a) program for minority-owned firms.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number  of organizational changes in the agency. He named John R. Dailey to be Acting Deputy Administrator and said that Dr. Joseph Shea, recently named as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis, would have oversight over all Space Station related development activities.
The Washington Post reported that NASA, under White House instructions to cut the budget of Space Station Freedom, was attempting to push the McDonald Douglas Corporation out of the $30 billion Space Station contract. McDonald Douglas was the prime contractor in the project, which had cost overruns of between $300 million and $1 billion. (W Post, Apr 25/93)
NASA announced that the agency was accepting applications for mission specialist and pilot astronaut positions effective immediately. The cut-off date for applications was July 1, 1993.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Office of Space Flight would assume responsibility for management of the Space Station Program.  Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Associate Administrator of Space Flight, was scheduled to lead the integration of these major programs.  (NASA Release  93-1291; AP, Oct 20/93)
NASA officials said that Germany was being charged only $150 million of the $400 million cost of launching a science mission aboard Shuttle Columbia on February 25. Columbia's crew was expected to include two German researchers and a laboratory of German science experiments. The price was agreed upon in 1986 under a pricing policy NASA officials admitted was outdated. (O Sen Star, Feb 4/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)
In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPLA), Pasadena, California, announced the selection of two major aerospace companies as the associate contractors for the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Network Phase B1 study and MESUIR Pathfinder support effort.  The companies were Hughes Aircraft Company; Hughes Spacecraft & Communications , El Segundo, California; and Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division, Downey, California.  (NASA Release C93-r)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA was raising the number of contracts it had with small, disadvantaged and women-owned businesses. According to Goldin, $310 million would be set aside under a Determinations and Findings (D & F) to make sure that NASA awarded 8 percent to such businesses. Eight percent was the figure set by Congress. (LA Watts Times, Jan 7/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA had awarded 8.5 percent of its 1993 fiscal year contracting budget to socially and economically disadvantaged firms, achieving a congressionally mandated goal of 8 percent for FY 1994 a year early. (NASA Release 93-214)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the activities of the Office of Exploration would be absorbed by the Office of Space Science, effective immediately. (NASA Release: 93-54)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the recipients of the Minority Contractor and Subcontractor of the Year Awards in recognition of minority businesses that had made outstanding contributions to NASA. Hernandez Engineering, Inc., Houston, was named as Minority Contractor of the Year. AJT and Associates, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, was named Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 93-177)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden awarded test pilot A. Scott Crossfield the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contributions to aeronautics and aviation during his career of 50 years.
NASA announced that a task force established by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to review plans for the Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission had concluded that "the mission is achievable." The servicing mission was currently scheduled for December 1993. (NASA Release 93-96)
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
Representative George E. Brown Jr, chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, warned the Clinton Administration that ordering a redesign of the Space Station might doom not only the space station but also other international "big science" projects. He also sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin cautioning him against abandoning the current design, which had cost $8 billion so far. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin's shuffling of top Space Station officials had led to internal friction between NASA and officials at the Reston, Virginia, program office for the Space Station. NASA's international partners in the Space Station were also reportedly concerned that they were not fully involved in key decisions involving the Station. (AvWk, Aug 2/93)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) described innovative new aeronautics research programs that would let airports across the nation and around the world handle more planes with fewer delays while maintaining today's high level of safety. (NASA Release 93-172)
The Boeing Company and the four leading European aerospace companies, partners in the Airbus Industrie consortium, reached an agreement to conduct a one-year study of the feasibility of jointly building a superjumbo airliner capable of carrying up to 800 passengers. (NY Times, Jan 28/93)
The Houston Chronicle  announced that NASA, responding to criticism of its cost overruns and the quality of its projects, had announced major reforms in the way it did business. In addition to other changes, procurement reforms would levy greater penalties on contractors that deliver defective products, continually exceed cost estimates, or fall behind schedule. (H Chron, May 10/93; Federal Computer Week, May 24/93)
The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.
A Christian Science Monitor editorial urged the Clinton Administration to rethink its civilian space program, noting that the program had drifted without overall purpose since rivalry with the old Soviet Union had ceased to be a significant factor. The editorial urged the Administration to define what the United States should accomplish in space and outline a realistic program to do it. (CSM, May 18/93)
John Aaron, the project manager of the Space Station, resigned after Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, demanded Aaron's resignation in return for continued funding for the project. Krueger said Aaron must be removed because "precious tax dollars have been mismanaged. There is no question that a new management team must get to work immediately to increase efficiency and productivity." (UPI, Feb 13/93)
Some scientists, led by former CBS News science adviser Richard C. Hoagland, accused NASA of not doing enough to investigate surface features that may be signs of intelligent life. The critics say that computer-enhanced photographs taken by the 1976 Viking Mars mission show objects on the Cydonia Plain that they believe were left by an extraterrestrial civilization.  Mr. Hoagland said a "rogue group in NASA" might have sabotaged the Mars Observer mission to suppress information about the Cydonia Plain structures. NASA officials denied the charge.  (APn, Aug 24/93; LA Times, August 25/93; Weekly World, Sept 14/93)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that he had appointed Margaret G. Finarelli to be Assistant for Strategic Planning.  Prior to her appointment, she served as NASA's Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations. (NASA Release 93-132)
David Lux, project manager for the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane, which crisscrossed the globe on Cold War spy missions, said that the plane had a new job helping NASA generate a database to be used by people who do aircraft design.  He said that Blackbird would soon take to the skies to see if it were possible to eliminate or reduce sonic booms for future high-speed airliners. (UPI, Jul 25/93)
A report released by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA must improve its ability to transfer technology to business. The report included eight recommendations for changing NASA's culture to facilitate technology transfer.
An article in the Christian Science Monitor reported that scarce NASA funding jeopardized the Space Station and manned flights. NASA had asked for a $1 billion increase over fiscal year 1993; however, Representative Ralph Hall, D of Texas, the chairman of the House space subcommittee, told Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, that a billion-dollar increase was not very likely. (CSM, Apr 28/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and astronaut Mae Jemison visited the Challengers Boys and Girls Club in South-Central Los Angeles and announced funding of a science room in the club's new facility. The club runs all-day education, social, and sports programs, six days a week.
NASA announced that Guy Gardner, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight Russian programs, had been put in charge of overseeing two joint missions with the Russian space program.
The Prince William Journal reported that Daniel Goldin, NASA Administrator, had decided that NASA should spend $90 million for the development of the Perseus aircraft, a remote-controlled drone that NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Science Corporation of Manassas to build. The unmanned aircraft would be used for environmental studies of the upper atmosphere. (Prince William Journal, May 5/93; LA Times, May 9/93; UPI, May 14/93)
Joseph R. Cipriano, associate director of the department's Energy Research office, recommended that the department fire the project manager for the $11 billion Super Conducting Super Collider, slash President Clinton's budget request, and "take a year... to fix problems." In a memo, Cipriano noted that morale was very low, confidence in existing management was practically nonexistent, and cost and schedule trends were worsening at an alarming rate.  A nonprofit group of research universities, Universities Research Association, Inc, was under contract to build the instrument. (W Post, Aug 2/93)
The Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce announced that it had awarded NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, U.S. Air Force Lt. General Edward Barry, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) its Kitty Hawk, Sands of Time Award. The chamber annually recognizes individuals and companies in the aerospace industry as a means of promoting the industry. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
The Clinton Administration considered cancelling NASA's $30 billion Space Station and the $8.2 billion Super Collider but decided to keep the programs after encountering intense opposition to their cancellation. Cost overruns on the two programs, however, have damaged their political prospects in the administration and Congress. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93; AP, Feb 6/93, 8/93; UPI, Feb 5/93, Feb 8/93; W Post, Feb 6/93; W Times, Feb 6/93; P Inq, Feb 6/93;B Sun, Feb 6/93; NY Times, Feb 6/93)
NASA announced that Mae C. Jemison, M.D., the first woman of color in space, had resigned to pursue interests in "teaching, mentoring, health care issues, and increasing participation in science and technology of those who have traditionally been left out."  Jemison, who joined the astronaut program in 1987, was a science mission specialist on STS-47, Spacelab-J, in September 1992, a cooperative mission with the Japanese to study life sciences and materials processing. (NASA Release 93-043; P Inq, Mar 7/93; B Sun, Mar 7/93; W Post, Mar 8/93; W Times, Mar 7/93; AP, Mar 6/93; UPI, Mar 6/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; People Magazine, Apr/93)
An improperly etched spring in one of Space Shuttle Endeavour's three oxygen turbopumps could delay next week's planned launch of the Space Shuttle. The inspection stamp was etched in a high-stress area rather than in a spot with minimal stress, NASA officials said. The spring holds the pump bearings in place. If the improperly marked spring broke at liftoff, the affected bearing cage could come loose. (AP, May 25/93)
The House of Representatives passed an amendment to the National Helium Act of 1960. The amendment judged the helium program as a case of government waste and voted to end its monopoly on sales to the space program. The 1996 Act required NASA to buy its helium from the government-run reserve, even though it could be bought for as much as $10 less per 1,000 cubic feet on the open market. The Senate was still considering the amendment.
Three days before the Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to begin orbiting the red planet, NASA engineers lost communications with the $1 billion probe. Radio contact broke off after engineers commanded the spacecraft to prepare for a crucial rocket firing on August 24 that was designed to send the spacecraft in orbit around the planet. Mars Observer was programmed to automatically fire its rockets, but NASA needed to hear from the spacecraft to be certain that had happened. If the commands were not received, the ship could fly past Mars completely. NASA officials expressed grave concern over the problem but said that communications could be restored at any moment. (UPI, Aug 22/93; AP/Aug 23/93; Rtw, Aug 23/93; WSJ, Aug 23/93; P Inq, Aug 23/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; USA Today, Aug 23/93; W Post, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Aug 23/93; C Trib, Aug 23/93; LA Times, Aug 23/93; RT, Aug 23/93)
The Washington Post reported that Maxime Faget, chairman and founder of Space International Inc., had resigned from his position as consultant to the Space Shuttle redesign team. Some NASA employees questioned Faget's objectivity because his company had earlier proposed its own alternative Space Station and design and because the company would likely bid on any new design proposal. Faget's resignation "was determined by both NASA and Space Industries as necessary." (W Post, Mar 24/93)
Daniel S. Golden, NASA administrator, named Dr. Joseph F. Shea, adjunct professor of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and former NASA employee, to be in charge of the redesign of the Space Station. Golden also announced measures to conserve resources and restrict new spending during the redesign transition. (NASA Release 93-038; Space News, Mar 1-7; UPI, Feb 27/93; W Post, Feb 27/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden instructed senior NASA managers to begin a five-month study that would examine whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005 or upgrade the fleet so that shuttles could fly until 2030. The study was being led by Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Systems Development. (Space News, Feb. 8-14/93)
The House of Representatives voted to maintain $2.1 billion in funding for the scaled-down Space Station Freedom by a 220 to 196 vote. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin attributed the growing support to an intense lobbying effort by the White House and congressional supporters. The project's chance of surviving the Senate vote were seen as good. (RTw, June 28/93; UPI, June 28/93; APn, June 29/93; AP, June 29/93; W Post, June 29/93; LA Times, June 29/93; H Post, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93; W Times, June 29/93; NY Times, June 30/93)
In his keynote address at the inaugural University of Southern California Engineering Day, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, emphasized that space exploration involved risks but that they were worth taking. He also said that NASA's specific challenge was to "win back our credibility through performance." ( LA Times, May 21/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, presented Gene Roddenberry, creator of the Star Trek television series, NASA's Distinguished Public Service Medal on January 30. The medal, which was awarded posthumously, was presented to Roddenberry's widow, Majel Barrett Roddenberry. Gene Roddenberry died in October 1991.
The Mars Observer failed to call Earth on August 25, when a five-day timer should have had it send an emergency signal, lessening hopes that the mission could be salvaged. Observer was the latest reminder of the growing problems of the U.S. space program.  The Observer failure added to a string of expensive space failures: the loss earlier in August of a $500-million spy satellite, then of a $67-million weather satellite, and a series of mishaps with NASA's orbiting observatories and other planetary probes.
The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)
In an interview in the Scientist, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the current NASA reorganization would make science more of a priority in NASA and involve the science community in correcting problems at NASA. He stated, "NASA is science and exploration, not infrastructure and bureaucracy." In response to a question about jobs, he noted that NASA was not a jobs program, but rather existed for "inspiration and hope, and a basic understanding of science." He said that he hoped to launch a small discovery satellite every year, while cutting back Space Shuttle flights from 12 or 13 to six a year. (The Scientist, Jan 11/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
NASA's Inspector General told Congress that NASA is plagued with contractors who overcharge, receive bonus payments while running up huge cost overruns and employ workers who frequently sleep on the job. The agency currently has more than 400 criminal fraud investigations under way, the Inspector General told the House Government Operations Committee. (AP, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 6/93, Oct 7/93; LA Times, Oct 7/93)
NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had provided the most detailed look yet at comet Shoemaker-Levy 5, which was hurtling toward a July  1994 collision with the planet Jupiter.  Hubble's high resolution images showed that the approximately 20 objects that make up the comet are much smaller than originally estimated from observations with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 93-188; USA Today, Oct 15/93; S F Chron, Oct 15/93; RTw, Oct 14/93; W Post, Oct 25/93)
NASA officials announced on April 25 that a three-month review of the development of Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been successfully completed. The work package involved work on laboratory and critical subsystems. The Marshall Space Flight Center and its main contractor Boeing Defense & Space Group were responsible for the work, which included many elements considered the core of the Space Station. (UPI, Apr 25/93)
NASA appointed Deidre A. Lee as Acting Associate Administrator for Procurement. She replaced Don G. Bush, who announced his intention to resign in November 1992. Since September 1991, Lee has been serving as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Procurement. Prior to that she was the Executive Officer to NASA's Acting Deputy Administrator. (NASA Release 93-11)
The Houston Post reported that the two committees charged with redesigning Space Station Freedom were behind schedule. The two groups, a technical resign team mainly made up of NASA employees and a team of outside experts, had been faced with much infighting at NASA and a barrage of criticism from Congress and the foreign countries participating in the Space Station project. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin asserted that the work would be finished on time. (H Post, May 4/93; AvWk, May 3/93; H Chronicle, May 6/93)
In a report to Congress, the General Accounting Office (GAO) reported that NASA  had underestimated the cost of its programs by billions of dollars. The report noted that original estimates for 25 of the 29 NASA programs GAO analyzed were too low. GAO found that more than a third cost more than double the early estimates, while only four cost less than those estimates. Most of the programs cost between 50 and 99 percent more than the early projections. One notable exception was Space Shuttle Endeavour; its $1.8 billion cost was $399 million less than the original estimate. NASA officials cited "overoptimism" as a reason why initial estimates were often significantly lower than current estimates. (NY Times, Jan 31/93; AP, Jan 30/93; Space News, Feb 8-14/94)
The Houston Chronicle reported on a new nationwide poll of registered voters conducted by Yankelovitch Partners and sponsored by NASA contractor Rockwell International Corporation. The poll revealed that 70 percent of American voters supported the construction of a permanently staffed Space Station and 63 percent believed that the United States should spend "whatever is necessary" to preserve its lead in space activities. Some of the poll results, however, reflected wide swings of support for the space program. (H Chron, May 25/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, who described himself as "an agent of change" in a late-November interview with Government Executive magazine, has set about instituting the "faster, better, cheaper" goals popularized over the past two years by the National Space Council.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that Space Station Freedom needed to be everything from a scientific laboratory to "an inspiration to children."  Disagreeing with Goldin, Robert L. Park, representing the American Physical Society, argued that the "Space Station is unlikely to make any significant scientific contribution." (AP, Jul 1/93, Jul 2/93)
NASA managers and industry contractors blamed Space Station cost overruns on the rush to redesign the effort in 1990 and 1991. Congress directed NASA in October 1990 to shave $6 billion from the Space Station over five years. NASA settled on a plan in early 1991 to shorten the pressurized modules and reduce the number of solar arrays. The agency also pushed back the date when the crew could occupy the Space Station by two years--to 1999--and reduced the crew size by half. In addition, NASA redid plans for the latticework structure that forms the Space Station's backbone and the Johnson Space Center's major responsibility in the program. According to Jack Boykin, Johnson's acting project director, the plan was too optimistic in its estimates of cost and technical complexity.
NASA unveiled a $300 million radar system that can take color pictures of Earth's damaged environment from a Space Shuttle. According to NASA project scientist Diane Evans, "In many case, radar is the only way scientists can explore unaccessible regions on Earth's surface." The camera was scheduled to fly on the Shuttle three times, in 1994, 1995, and 1996. NASA and the German and Italian space agencies cooperated on the project. NASA paid half the cost. (AP, May 14/93)
In an address to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, said that the redesign effort for Space Station Freedom was making "great progress." (AvWk, May 10/93)
NASA managers and engineers warned that infighting and confusion jeopardized the Space Station effort. Critics said that NASA must strengthen accountability, do away with bureaucratic constraints, and forge a more cohesive team. There was widespread disagreement among Space Station players over whether NASA should make some personnel changes or take a more radical path, for example, invest more authority in the program office in Reston, Virginia, or concentrate effort at a single NASA center. (Space News, Feb 15-21/93)
NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)
A feature in the NY Times about Daniel S. Golden, NASA Administrator, called him a "bold remodeler of a drifting agency." Golden was quoted in the article as saying that he believes "nonlinear thinking" is essential to the rebirth of NASA. (NY Times, Dec 21/93)
NASA officials announced that further testing on the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II (WF/PCII), an instrument scheduled to fly on the Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission in December, might be necessary. Tests had cleared the camera of suspicion that it was flawed, but NASA asked for one last independent review of the data just to make completely sure.  (NASA Release  93-169; W Post, Sep 28/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of two astronauts, William M. Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, to senior management positions at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release June 24/93)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
Federal Computer Week recognized three NASA employees for their work in procurement. Don Lovall, Chief, Technical and Information Systems, Design engineering Directorate at the NASA Kennedy Space Center, was recognized, together with his team, for awarding the Personal Computer Acquisition Contract (PCACP), an innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's First consolidated microcomputer buy. PCAC was unusual because it fostered competition among three chosen vendors throughout its five-year life. Skip Kemere, ADP Procurement Branch Chief, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, was also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in the SEWP BOWL, its first agency wide buying vehicle for high-powered work stations. Darleen A. Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement at NASA, was recognized for her action on the awarding of NASA's Earth Observing System Data and Information System core contract. Instead of accepting low-ball bids from major firms, she sent the bids back to the bidders and asked that they be adjusted--upward--to reflect more realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, attempted to smooth over "strained" relations with top NASA management, upset over a letter that he had written to a House subcommittee investigating space station funding. In part the letter read,"I have been concerned with regard to the validity of the present cost and schedule estimates." NASA officials scheduled to testify before the subcommittee said that Goldin's comments seemed to discredit what they had to say even before they said it. Yesterday, Goldin denied that he distrusted his top managers. (W Post, Mar 5/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that the U.S. space program "is in chaos" because of congressional budget cuts. NASA's five-year budget plan dropped from $106 billion last year to $71 billion. Noting that NASA's budget changed every two or three months, Goldin called on Congress to institute a multiyear budget that would enable the agency to develop a strategic plan. (USA Today, Nov 17/93; W Times, Nov 17; Reuters, Nov 16/93, Nov 17/93; Fla Today, Nov 17/93)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
NASA announced that the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, would lead a multi-year research program effort to develop technology for a future high-speed civil transport. According to Louis Williams, Director of the High-Speed Research Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., "The program is laying a technical foundation for an environmentally compatible, economically practical commercial transport that could contribute up to 140,000 jobs and $200 billion to the national economy in the next century." (NASA Release 93-52; Daily Press, May 24/93)
USA Today reported that scientists on the Space Shuttle Columbia during its fall mission were scheduled to behead five white rats. Space program scientists Frank Sulzman said that killing the rats in orbit would give researchers better information on the effect of weightlessness on the animals. (USA Today, May 12/93)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin volunteered to remain at NASA until the Clinton Administration appointed an replacement. He made the offer in a January 14 letter to the White House. Meanwhile he suspended an agency reorganization that he had just begun following months of review. White House officials have just begun to collect names of potential NASA chiefs and solicit opinions on Goldin's record, according to government officials (W Post, Jan 20/93; Space News, Jan 25-31)
The Washington Post reported that a White House official had indicated that President Clinton intended to retain NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, a Bush appointee. The White House apparently had decided that Goldin was just the type of hard-nosed administrator that NASA needed. (W Post, June 24/93; UPI, June 24/93)
Moscow held its first international aerospace show in Moscow.  As many as 200 foreign aerospace companies and 250 enterprises from all over the former Soviet Union took part in the show, the largest event of its kind ever held in Russia.  Russian military space equipment was on show for the first time. (UPI, Aug 31/93; LA Times, Sept 1/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced agency plans to use its nearly completed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) Yellow Creek facilities in Iuka, Mississippi, for manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. (NASA Release 93-215)
NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory was to receive a scheduled boost to a higher orbit beginning on October 4, to prevent the spacecraft from reentering the Earth's atmosphere. The reboost was necessary to compensate for orbit decay, which is the result of solar activity slowly pushing the satellite toward Earth over a period of time, said NASA officials. (NASA Release 93-179)
NASA announced that it had banned news organizations from covering meetings about the redesign of Space Station Freedom. NASA said the meetings would be closed because they involved mainly NASA employees, not outside advisers. NASA has formal advisory committees, which meet openly in compliance with a 1972 law governing such meetings. (Space News, March 22-28/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin notified employees in a memo distributed the previous week that the scaled-back Space Station would mean the loss of about 1,300 jobs among federal workers alone.  Space Station work involved 2,300 of NASA's 24,000 employees. (AP, Jul 26/93; Sp News, Jul 26-Aug 1/93; B Sun, Jul 27/93)
The Federal Aviation Administration authorized civilian pilots to use a satellite-based navigation system that would enable them to choose direct routes without relying on navigational aids on the ground. The system, the Global Positioning System, uses a network of 24 satellites orbiting 11,000 miles above the Earth. Each satellite sends out a continuous signal that can be computed by receivers to determine an exact position. (NY Times, June 10/93)
NASA officials announced that they planned to eliminate a number of expensive facilities and delay several Space Station assembly missions in their attempt to cut growing cost projections for the program. Senior program officials said that they had reduced $l.08 billion in anticipated cost increases for the Space Station to $678 million. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center released their annual economic impact statement in terms of the effect of the Center on Brevard County. Despite budget cuts, the 1994 impact on the economy was $1.18 billion in comparison to $1.32 billion in 1992; the total workforce (including contractors, civil service, and construction) was 16,500 in 1994 in contrast with 18,700 in 1992. The review of NASA operations should result in more job cuts, which would occur in early 1995. (Fla Today, Nov 24/94)
The crew for the STS-67 mission aboard Columbia for late 1994 was announced. Stephen S. Oswald was to command the Astro-2 astronomy mission to study the far ultraviolet (UV) spectra of faint astronomical objects and polarization of UV light from hot stars and galaxies. USAF Major William G. Gregory was named pilot, Navy Lieutenant Commander Wendy B. Lawrence mission specialist, Ronald A. Parise and Samuel T. Durrance payload specialists, Tamara E. Jernigan Payload Commander, and John M. Grunsfeld mission specialist.
While visiting the University of Tennessee, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA had to share responsibility for the failure of the canceled Commercial Experimental Transporter (Comet) spacecraft program. The University of Tennessee Space Institute (UTSI) managed the project, which involved other universities and private contractors. The goal was to provide a lower cost alternative for ferrying private industrial experiments into orbit. Goldin said UTSI was not to blame for the cost overruns that nearly doubled the project's price; in retrospect, NASA should have been more active and offered help to UTSI. (AP, May 13/94)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) authorized airlines to begin using military satellite signals for navigation. The military's Global Positioning System, consisting of 24 orbiting satellites, according to the airlines would save them millions of dollars by flying more efficient routes. It was unclear what the FAA would do with existing microwave landing systems. (WSJ, Feb 18/94; W Post, Feb 18/94; NY Times, Feb 18/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the University of North Dakota's Center for Aerospace Sciences (CAS). Goldin visited at the invitation of Senator Byron Dorgan, a member of the Commerce Committee, which oversees NASA and its budget. Goldin was impressed with CAS's new technology and the educational services and programs it conducted for children and the public as well as college students. (Grand Forks Herald, Jun 3/94)
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)
NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Systems, Inc., Vienna, Virginia, for a contract to provide information resources and management support services to NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release C94-ll)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston as his first stop on a fall tour of all NASA facilities. In a tough speech to all employees, he said he wanted more innovation and less bureaucracy. He stressed that in a time of tight government budgets, "every single person is going to have to justify their activity--all the time." In emphasizing the need to improve business practices, he cited the NASA worker-to-manager ratio on some projects as 2-to-1, whereas 12-to-1 was the private sector goal. (H Post, Sep 13/94; H Post, Sep 14/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Brian Welch as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-116)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center but declined to endorse Representative Bud Cramer, Democrat, saying it was not appropriate for him to get into partisan politics. Goldin did, however, give Cramer credit for his help in saving the Space Station and he announced that a new generation launch vehicle would be developed at Marshall. (Huntsville News, Oct 28/94)
The National Research Council reported that NASA officials had not yet established a solid working relationship with the Russian Space Agency. The Council found tremendous improvement in NASA management but considered that NASA thus far lacked a strong grip on Russian involvement. Since 1985 the Council, the operating arm of the National Academies of Science and Engineering, had reviewed the Space Station regularly under federal funding. The Space Station Committee, headed by Jack Kerrebrock, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor, also expressed concern that NASA needed to invest more in experiment development and preparatory work on Spacelab, the Shuttle's science laboratory. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; NY Times, Jul 29/94; Phillips Business Information, Jul 29/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that NASA would stop work on the Polar spacecraft and would continue with pre-launch activities on the Wind spacecraft. Work on Polar was to resume only after the Wind spacecraft had operated successfully on-orbit and after a reevaluation of resources needed to complete the program within budgetary limits. (NASA Release 94-75; SP News, May 16-22/94)
NASA announced that the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) was awarding the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon management team the CNES Medal in recognition of their achievements. Seven team members from NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, and the CNES project office received the awards.Launched August 10, 1992, TOPEX/Poseidon continued to study the topography of the oceans. (NASA Release 94-132)
Another article in the same newspaper commended NASA for having learned the secret to getting along with Congress: humility equaled stability. NASA had done its homework prior to submitting its budget request and got almost everything it asked for. The writer gave most of the credit to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin whose mantra of "cheaper, better, faster" had forced NASA staff to wake up to reality. (O Sen Star, Oct 16/94)
Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)
NASA announced that it had released the Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Cassini mission to Saturn, which would be available for public review and comment over a 45-day period. Cassini was a cooperative scientific mission of the U.S. and European space agencies scheduled for launch in October 1997 for a seven-year robotic spacecraft journey to Saturn. (NASA Release 94-174)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Readdy would replace Kenneth D. Cameron as NASA manager of operational activities at Star City, Russia. As Director of Operations, Russia, Readdy would work with Russian trainers, engineers, and flight controllers to support the training of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City, and to enhance continued cooperation between NASA and Russia's Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-115)
Ken Szalai, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, said that construction of the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane (NASP), the X-30, and its first flight scheduled for 2000 were no longer goals. Funding for the plane runs out in 1994, but Szalai said research into supersonic flight would not end. John Bass, deputy program manager for the NASP consortium of government and industry, including five aerospace firms, the Department of Defense and NASA, considered the decision a great loss. The one area remaining a problem was that of propulsion, which engineers could not test because the scramjet engine required to power the X-30 needed an environment where wind speeds reach 25 times the speed of sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May 30/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that members of the NASA Hubble Space Telescope Recovery Team would receive the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association on May 6 for their outstanding work. (NASA Release 94-71; H Post, May 6/94)
Bryan O'Connor, overseer of Shuttle operations at NASA headquarters, said that NASA expected to receive shortly a Russian-built Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly that would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russia's Mir Space Station. A damaged tube delayed delivery of the docking component. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 25/94)
NASA Program Manager for Human Systems Technology in the Office of Aeronautics, Washington, D.C. announced that NASA was designing an electronic chart to make flying safer for aerial firefighters who often fly in potentially dangerous conditions above forest fires. The Electronic Chart Display being developed at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, shows pilots an area's terrain and obstacles on a computer screen. (NASA Release 94-69)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) in its report faulted NASA's effort to fit a program projected in the late 1990s to cost more than $20 billion a year into an annual budget of $14 billion. The CBO said such effort risked delay and failure, and the CBO offered the alternative of grounding the astronauts and ending the Space Shuttle program. Specifically, the report proposed one of the following: ending costly piloted space flight, concentrating instead on robot aircraft and new technology for industry; emphasizing a roboting spacecraft and conducting only four instead of eight Space Shuttle flights a year; concentrating on piloted space flight, building the Space Station and planning for manned missions to the moon and Mars, limiting robot missions to pathfinder projects for the moon-Mars effort. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA would not back away from the Administration's balanced aeronautics and space program. He added that any of the three CBO alternatives would destroy that balance and that NASA could accomplish daring and difficult missions on a tight budget. (NASA Editor's Note N94-27; B Sun, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; P Inq, Mar 25/94; NY Times, Mar 25/94; O Sen Star, Mar 25/94; W Post, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; LA Daily News, Mar 27/94; Federal Computer Week, Mar 28/94; O Sen Star, Mar 31/94)
An article about U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar and their training in Russia stressed their intensive Russian language lessons and their sense of Russia's space program accomplishments in the face of the country's serious economic problems. They believe both countries would benefit from space cooperation: the United States would gain from the experience and data Russia had collected from long stays in space and Russia would profit from U.S. technology and the use of the U.S. Shuttle to ferry large cargos to Mir. (C Trib, Jul 3/94)
In a speech to aerospace executives at the South Bay Association of Chambers of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that "survival of the fittest," the new motto at NASA's contract office, should also be the rule at aerospace companies. He asserted that defense and space companies must follow NASA's lead in streamlining operations and delivering results for the public. (Daily Breeze, Oct 21/94)
NASA announced that it would conduct a joint campaign with Brazilian space agencies to study the Earth's space environment over the magnetic equator from August 15 through October 20, 1994, as part of the International Equatorial Electrojet Year. During the campaign, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, was scheduled to launch 33 rockets from the Centro de Lancamento de Alcantara launch range in the northeastern state of Maranhao, Brazil. (NASA Release 94-126)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, described some of the benefits Americans enjoyed in their daily lives that resulted from space-based research. Among these were insulation techniques used by Meals on Wheels to deliver food to senior citizens, miniaturization and computers, laser technology for use in the information superhighway, and biomedical discoveries. The latter included laser systems used in heart treatment, pacemakers, and body imaging techniques used in breast cancer detection. In addition, the space program created thousands of jobs. Despite the above achievements, Mikulski admitted that NASA in the past had over-promised technology and underestimated cost. NASA needed a clear set of priorities, and space programs must become multinational. (W Post, Jul 20/94)
Wilbur Trafton, NASA's Space Station program director, who was in Houston to attend the Space Exploration 94 conference sponsored by the NASA Alumni League, said several Chinese officials attending a gathering of aerospace professionals in Huntsville, Alabama, asked informally about joining the U.S.-led International Space Station program. They were urged to pursue their goal through diplomatic channels. (H Chron, Oct 27/94; H Post, Oct 27/94; W Times, Oct 27/94)
In an address to business executives, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also spoke of NASA's goal of putting a man on Mars. With the proper technical groundwork and economic and political conditions, Goldin felt 10 years was a reasonable time frame for accomplishing this. The plan was for innovative technology to cut the cost, such as drawing methane from Mars to use as fuel for the return trip, thus cutting the space vehicle's size in half. Another part of NASA's vision was to learn how to work together with other countries in space programs. (Reuters, Feb 15/94)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had an extensive interview with US Black Engineer (USBE) Magazine on his past and current experience, commitment, and achievements in promoting minority advancement in the aerospace field. He detailed how in his long career in rising through the field he had worked for minority progress.
NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Services Inc., Vienna, Virginia, to provide Information Resources Management Support at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release C94-gg; Federal Computer Week, Oct 24/94)
According to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, NASA received 28 outstanding proposals from universities, the aerospace industry, and government laboratories for smaller, less expensive planetary science missions under its new Discovery program. By January 1995 NASA was to select a few to pursue seriously with the expectation that one or two would be developed and launched by the period 1999-2001. NASA set forth specific funding limitations and wanted models of streamlined management of such projects while demanding high quality. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
A Japanese cabinet advisory commission report stated that Japan needed to double its space budget over the next 15 years to initiate planetary expeditions, become a leader in Earth observation, and develop advanced robotics. The new space plan confirmed Japan's existing commitment to international space programs, inclduing the Japanese Experiment Module for NASA's International Space Station. The recommendations came from a long-term planning group within the Space Activities Commission and were to be forwarded to Japan's Finance Ministry at the end of August when the fiscal 1995 budget would be prepared. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement following the defeat of the Senate amendment to end funding for the International Space Station. Goldin praised the Senate's vote of confidence as an indication of a bipartisan coalition of support. He said that the Space Station was a "truly international scientific effort, and a powerful symbol of peaceful cooperation in the post Cold War world." Subsequent to Goldin's statement, various media comments appeared stressing the commitment of "time and political capital" by the President and the Vice President to supporting the Space Station, in addition to Goldin's tireless efforts. (NASA Release 94-127; SP News, Aug 8-14/94; B Sun, Aug 12/94)
Space Shuttle Endeavour, which had been rescheduled to lift off on April 8, was launched April 9 because of bad weather. In its cargo bay was the Space Radar Laboratory, weighing 23,000 pounds and containing $366 million worth of imaging systems. The system was to bounce radar waves off Earth in three frequency bands to produce three-dimensional maps of ocean currents, river valleys, forests and farm lands, the geology of volcanoes, and features under desert sands. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and the German and Italian space agencies developed the equipment. The radar developed a glitch after the first day, but ground control was able to repair it and the results were most successful. (NY Times, Apr 8/94; W Post, Apr 8/94; B Sun, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 8/94; USA Today, Apr 8/94; AP, Apr 8/94; UP, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 9/94; W Post, Apr 10/94; NY Times, Apr 10/94; B Sun, Apr 10/94; P Inq, Apr 10/94; UPI, Apr 10/94; Reuters, Apr 10/94; AP, Apr 11/94)
NASA, together with the U.S. Department of Energy, the U.S. Department of Defense Information Systems Agency, AT&T, and Foxworth & Dinkins, a Washington, D.C.-based marketing firm, sponsored a three-day conference at Clark-Atlanta University November 7-9 that brought representatives of the 117 historically black colleges and universities to explore the opportunities for minority students in science and mathematics. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was one of the conference speakers. (Atlanta Business Chronicle, Nov 11-17/94)
The Earthwinds balloon flew 200 miles in seven hours from Reno, Nevada, over the Sierra Nevada and landed 200 miles north of Los Angeles in its fourth failed attempt since its initial try in February, 1992, to make the first nonstop round-the-world flight. The hourglass-shaped craft about the length of a football field consists of an upper teardrop-shaped, helium-filled bag separated by a three-man crew capsule from its lower round, air-filled anchor balloon. The project, sponsored mainly by hotel magnate Barron Hilton, has cost $7 million to date, with $700,000 for non-reusable balloons and helium for each flight. Project manager Don Engen expected no new flight this season, but project advisor, Apollo XVII commander Gene Cernan, predicted another attempt. (Reuters, Jan 12/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and its affiliated sites--Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island, Virginia, and NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C.--announced the selection of Cortez III Services Corporation of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to provide comprehensive logistics services to these sites. The services included transportation, flight project planning and coordination support, supply management, warehousing, property management and disposal, mail services, forms and records management, and interior design. (NASA Release C94-s)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Robert E. Whitehead as Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Aeronautics at NASA Headquarters. (NASA Release 94-23)
New Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich indicated in an interview that he favored a NASA confined to research and development, with remaining functions contracted out to the private sector as far as possible. His overriding mission for NASA was drastically reducing the cost of getting into space. Gingrich praised NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's efforts to reshape NASA but considered the agency still to be "a people-heavy, obsolescent bureaucracy." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced a report by the General Aviation Task Force of NASA's Aeronautics Advisory Committee. The report of the industry-led task force called on NASA to revitalize its general aviation program, make its wind tunnels, laboratories and simulators more accessible to the general aviation community, and better balance its technology program to meet general aviation needs. The four areas on which the report called on NASA to concentrate were: propulsion, noise, and emissions work; aeronautical systems research; structure and materials development; and aerodynamics research. (NASA Release 94-29; Wichita Eagle, Feb 26/94)
Senator Howell Heflin, Democrat from Alabama, told a space conference at Auburn University that he owed his life to the space program. He referred to angioplasty, a pacemaker, and a steel artery expansion device, all of which were based on space-related research. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and several Auburn graduate astronauts also took part in the program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
John Gibbons, White House science adviser, said that as a result of tight budgets the Government would combine the operations of civilian and military weather satellite systems: two belonging to the Defense Department and two belonging to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The combining should save as much as $300 million by the end of 1999. Under an interagency agreement, the Defense Department was to procure future weather satellites, the Commerce Department's Atmospheric Agency was to operate the system, and NASA was to conduct research on advanced technology to be incorporated into the new spacecraft. The program became a joint Defense Department-NASA project in 1993. NASA was to build and launch a Landsat 7 spacecraft to replace the aging Landsat 4 and 5 spacecraft. NASA also was to design a new generation of spacecraft to compete with foreign satellites that provide similar data. On May 11 John Morgan, Director of the European weather satellite operations (Eumetsat) said he would discuss with nations that participate in European satellite and space programs NOAA's invitation to join the combined weather satellite system. These agencies already cooperate with NOAA on developing a Joint Polar System. (AP, May 10/94; NY Times, May 11/94; W Post, May 11/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 12/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
Volodymyr Gorbulin, head of Ukraine's space agency, appealed to the West for full space research cooperation to save Ukraine's aeronautics industry from collapse. Gorbulin expressed disappointment that NASA officials had refused to discuss joint space construction at talks in Kiev the following week because Ukraine had not yet signed international agreements on proliferation of advanced rocket technology. (Reuters, Mar 15/94)
Drucella Andersen, who served as head of public affairs for aeronautics at NASA, moved to the Federal Aviation Administration as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. (W Post, Aug 19/94)
Commenting on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's urging of space scientists to search for a habitable planet among the stars, science columnist Robert C. Cowen viewed such a quest as feasible in view of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope. He saw the next phase of the search as involving a look for signs of gravitational interaction of a star and planets. (CSM, Jun 22/94)
The group of scientists from Phillips Rocket Laboratory investigating the disappearance of the Mars Observer more than one year ago concluded the probable cause of the accident. Phillips aeronautical engineer and project manager said the likely cause was failure of a small pyro valve that allowed propellants to mix. This in turn could cause the rupture of a tube and result in the Observer tumbling out of control. (Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94)
NASA officials indicated that details of scientific evidence supporting the theory that man-made chlorine was causing the ozone hole above Antarctica would be released on December 19. The evidence was based on three years of data from NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). UARS instruments had found chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in electronics and refrigeration systems in the stratosphere. The stratospheric ozone layer was responsible for protecting people, animals, and plants from too much ultraviolet sunlight. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; NASA Release 94-215; UP, Dec 19/94; Reuters, Dec 19/94; LA Times, Dec 20/94; NY Times, Dec 20/94; W Post, Dec 20/94; W Times, Dec 20/94; USA Today, Dec 20/94; WSJ, Dec 20/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94; H Chron, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 20/94; C Trib, Dec 20/94; AP, Dec 20/94)
At Russia's request, the Federal Aviation Administration was about to launch a sweeping inspection of Russia's airlines and air safety controls. The review resulted from three serious air crashes in Russia during the year and dire warnings of the dangers of Russian air travel. (W Post, Aug 27/94)
NASA Kennedy Space Center spokesman Bruce Buckingham said that that NASA had worked out a plan that would allow NASA employees to have the Labor Day weekend off and still would permit the launching of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (Fla Today, Aug 15/94)
NASA named John C. Lynn to head the new office of Chief Information Officer within the Office of the Administrator at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-199)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said he would personally discuss the Space Station program with 220 members of Congress before the House of Representatives votes on the Station in the summer. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94; AvWk, Apr 11/94)
In a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, chairman John Dingell, Democrat from Michigan, pressed NASA officials to explain why they had selected Boeing as prime contractor for the Space Station in late 1993 in spite of the firm's having failed NASA's own cost-control reviews. NASA officials admitted they did not know that Boeing was under 21 federal criminal investigations and was forced to pay the government $161 million in settlements. Testifying for NASA were Deirdre A. Lee, Associate Administrator for Procurements, and Deputy Administrator John R. Daily. In addition to the problems with Boeing, Michael Thibault, Assistant Director of the Defense Contract Audit Agency, said that an audit of charges by IBM, a subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas, one of the earlier Space Station contractors, found that about 20 percent of IBM's $490 million charges were not allowable under its contract. (LA Times, Jul 28/94; SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
NASA's attempts to streamline its management of space programs and cut costs were highlighted with details of personnel cuts and commendation of the efforts of Jeremiah Pearson who had served as associate administrator for space flight. An example of Shuttle and Space Station mergers was the Johnson Space Center's new $250 million Mission Control Center. The Center could handle Shuttle missions, activities aboard the Mir, and the new International Space Station simultaneously. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
A feature article on NASA stated that cooperation with the Russians in space was an important foreign policy initiative of the Clinton Administration. In this connection, NASA was working hard at merging many of its programs with those of Russia, as NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin indicated in a recent interview. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
Bowman Cutter, deputy assistant to the President for economic policy, took a lead in developing a space policy for the administration, according to a statement he made on May 26. As a first step, he convened a meeting May 13 at the White House with a diverse and bipartisan group of industry representatives, NASA managers, military officers, and academicians to discuss the space program's future. Although there was some talk about the Space Station, the major emphasis was on longer-term policy. Rather than new programs, White House officials said the focus was to be on streamlining NASA's bureaucracy, focusing research and development to help private industry, and pushing small missions to demonstrate advanced technologies. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
The flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour was aborted 1.9 seconds before liftoff as a result of automatic engine shutdown caused by an overheated fuel pump. In consequence NASA officials stated that they were moving the launch of Endeavour to the first week of October because of the time it would take to refurbish the craft. (UP, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94; NY Times, Aug 19/94; W Post, Aug 19/94; W Times, Aug 19/94; USA Today, Aug 19/94; AP, Aug 19/94; Fla Today, Aug 19/94; O Sen Star, Aug 19/94; NY Times, Aug 21/94; AvWk, Aug 22/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and astronaut James D. Halsell gave a talk at California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA). Both men stressed the importance of education and discussed NASA's forthcoming projects. The talk ended with congratulations to CSLA electrical engineering professor Helen Boussalis, who won a $3.8 million grant for her project to design and build a model space segmented telescope. (University Times, Oct 27/94)
New Mexico's senators, Democrat Jeff Bingaman and Republican Pete Domenici, sent a letter urging NASA to keep two data facilities at the White Sands Space Network Complex northeast of Las Cruces. A $5 million building planned for NASA data operations remained empty in Las Cruces because NASA had decided to shift activities to West Virginia, according to NASA officials. However, NASA's inspector general said NASA could save $39 million through fiscal year 2000 and nearly $97 million thereafter if data operations connected with the Earth Observing System remained at White Sands instead of being moved to Fairmont, West Virginia. According to a September 5 syndicated column by Jack Anderson, Senator Robert Byrd engineered the change in location. (Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 9/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 10/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 12/94; Times-West Virginian, Sep 15/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
The $20 million docking ring, known as the Androgynous Peripheral Docking System, which would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995, arrived from Russia after it had been tested in Russia, in California, and in orbit. NASA managers expressed confidence in the ring although they could not read the Russian plaque on it. (O Sen Star, Dec 7/94; Fla Today, Dec 7/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named Jay F. Honeycutt as Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center upon the departure of Robert L. Crippen on January 21, 1995. (NASA Release 94-214; AP, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 16/94; O Sen Star, Dec 16/94; H Chron, Dec 16/94; H Post, Dec 16/94; AP, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Brigadier General Elmer T. Brooks, USAF (Retired), as Deputy Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Communications (OSC) at NASA Headquarters. Charles Force, Associate Administrator for Space Communications, commented on the problems facing NASA's use of telecommunications technologies with reduced funding. OSC was responsible for planning, development, and operation of NASA's worldwide communications, telemetry, and data acquisition activities. (NASA Release 94-9)
In a telephone interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, who was formerly general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group in Redondo Beach, California, answered questions about NASA and his efforts to revive the agency. Among other topics, he discussed the International Space Station, the difficulties of working in space, and the problems of budget cuts that NASA faced. (Orange County Register, Apr 8/94)
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)
At a conference at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., officials of NASA and of Spacehab Inc., the Arlington, Virginia, company that built and leased the laboratories that fly in the Space Shuttle, described progress made in the more than 80 missions that had included research payloads. Other private and university researchers were encouraged to join in such projects. (UP, Sep 28/94)
Engineers William Weist and Ray McLaughlin, with three other scientists and pilots of AlliedSignal, Inc., have since October 1991 been flying a converted 1952 Convair with powerful, updated turboprops at 300 feet in Florida testing a new system to detect low-level wind shear. In summer, bursts of concentrated cold air descend to the ground and violently spread out horizontally in all directions, causing unpredictable changes in wind direction at low altitude. Identified only two decades ago, wind shear has since 1964 caused at least 26 aircraft accidents in the U.S., killing more than 500 people. Although airports are installing radar, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that air-traffic controllers might need two minutes to warn pilots, who might have only ten seconds to react. In contrast, this system can warn in 50 seconds, despite analyzing four million pieces of information per second and filtering out ground clutter such as traffic. (WSJ, Jan 13/94)
Spence Armstrong, NASA Associate Administrator for Human Resources, stated that in order to cut more than 1,000 jobs as Congress ordered, NASA needed to offer buyouts to staff. To restructure the Space Station Freedom project, NASA had to cut 1,300 positions, but employees were not leaving in normal attrition numbers--an attrition of only 600 to 700 persons was predicted for fiscal 1994, without buyouts. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said further cuts would endanger NASA's entire mission. The vice president's "reinventing government" group said NASA needed to accelerate its job cuts but stick with attrition and buyouts rather than reductions in force. The group offered no specifics as to positions NASA should cut. (Federal Times, Feb 24/94)
Mars Pathfinder, the first of NASA's Discovery missions, was beginning construction in preparation for launch in two years' time. Anthony J. Spear, project manager for the Mars Pathfinder project at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said fabrication of the cruise portion's structure had begun; final assembly of the spacecraft was to begin in June 1995. Testing of various kinds would follow with the spacecraft being shipped to Cape Canaveral for launch by early September 1996. The primary goal was an engineering demonstration of a low-cost Martian landing system. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
As part of NASA's High-Speed Research Program, NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC) was using its National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex to study and curb the noise from the takeoff exhaust or "plume" of turbulent air in the wake of future supersonic jetliners without affecting takeoff performance. Project Manager Paul Soderman, an aeronautical and acoustical engineer, said that such future aircraft would have to comply with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. An exhaust nozzle of an "ejector suppressor" type was being studied by laser and infrared video. (NASA Release, Jan 31/94)
Officials at NASA, Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said mission designers were being discouraged from including Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) in future satellites. RTGs were plutonium-powered and were used most frequently on spacecraft traveling beyond Earth's orbit because solar panels became increasingly less efficient the farther they were from the sun. Scientists and engineers planning NASA's proposed Pluto Fast Flyby mission wanted to use an RTG, but thus far approval had been refused. The scientists were concerned that NASA was becoming anti-nuclear, but NASA officials and the White House denied there was a policy decision to end the use of RTGs. In late June, a Technology Challenge team headed by Dwight Duston, director of science and technology for the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, "unanimously recommended the use of an RTG without reservation" for the Pluto Fast Flyby. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94)
NASA announced that aerospace industry engineers were finding NASA's Remote Access Wind Tunnel (RAWT) at the Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, was saving them time and money in testing a model of a next-generation supersonic transport. The RAWT was equipped with a computer and video camera that allowed them to send real-time test data to engineers at aerospace companies nationwide. (NASA Release 94-186)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was the scheduled keynote speaker for an October 27-28 conference at Auburn University on the past, present, and future of the U.S. space program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 17/94)
Although the November 8 elections gave control of Congress to the Republicans, major changes in funding for the space program were not expected. This was the case despite the fact that Newt Gingrich, Republican from Georgia, who was expected to be the next Speaker of the House of Representatives, was an outspoken space advocate as was Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania and ranking Republican on the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee. NASA was already making plans to sell the Space Station program to the 11 freshman Senators and approximately 85 new House members who were to take office in January. (SP News, Nov 14-20/94)
In a wide-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin reviewed his tenure to date and focused on prospects for civil space flight. Goldin proposed that while private industry would use the low orbiting costs offered by a new single-stage-to-orbit vehicle to profit from commercial space applications, governments would cooperate on building a space infrastructure to support robotic and human exploration. He believed that countries could cooperate in space infrastructure while maintaining competition in space ventures such as the development of a launch vehicle. (AvWk, Sep 5/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House of Representatives Science Committee, told the seven-member Space Shuttle crew that repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in September 1973, that their successful mission would help restore support for the space program. (Reuters, Mar 8/94; B Sun, Mar 9/94)
The deed to NASA's Computer Complex in Slidell, Louisiana was transferred to the city of Slidell at a ceremony attended by NASA Acting Deputy Administrator General John R. Dafley among others. For more than 30 years, the Slidell complex had provided support for the Space Shuttle external tank program as well as other Office of Space Flight administrative and program activities. However, these functions recently were moved to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Various plans were underway for ways in which the Slidell facilities could be used. (Sentry News, Dec 15/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number of management appointments and organization structural changes at NASA Headquarters and various field centers. The changes will affect NASA science, technology, research facilities and major programs, as well as the agency's Advisory Committee structure.
Jean-Marc Artaud, program director for the Ariane-5 rocket for the French National Space Agency (CNES) in Guiana, discussed the launch that took place of a solid propellant booster that was part of the new generation rocket. The rocket was launched from a European Space Agency (ESA) center in the jungle of French Guiana on the northeast coast of South America in a test aimed at keeping the ESA in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the next century. (Reuters, Sep 30/94)
On the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the first moonlanding mission, the Italian newspaper La Repubblica published an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. In it he complimented Italy for its good space knowhow, saying Italians were magicians in the area of space communication. He also mentioned ways in which Italy was cooperating with NASA such as the Italian astronaut who was to help complete the testing of the tethered satellite system and the Italian Space Agency's work with NASA on the Cassini Space Mission. He pointed out that above all NASA counted on Italy for the construction of logistic pressurization modules and that this construction would give Italian firms a technological capacity that would have an impact on all Italian industries. (La Repubblica, Oct 11/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the National Space Society's conference and challenged the space community to define the U.S. role in space. He expressed frustration at repeated congressional efforts to kill the planned International Space Station. (Fla Today, Mar 11/94)
After a closed door session of the House Space Committee, Chairman George Brown, Democrat from California, said he would support the Space Station. The growing support for the Space Station also was reflected in public opinion polls. However, James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican from Wisconsin and senior Republican on the Committee, was angry at the response to his concern about Russian participation in the space program from White House science adviser John H. Gibbons. (H Chron, Jun 16/94; H Post, Jun 16/94; Fla Today, Jun 16/94; H Chron, Jun 17/94)
In a speech to the Huntsville-Madison County Chamber of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the Marshall Space Flight Center's top priority was safe Space Shuttle propulsion. The second priority was the Center's share in the Space Station program and the third priority was the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, and X-ray telescope scheduled to be launched in the late 1990s. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
NASA in a cooperative agreement notice called on third parties to develop public-use applications of its remote sensing databases in order to make use of the reams of Earth and space science data collected to date. Paul Hunter, Program Manager for NASA's Information Infrastructure Technology Applications program, said NASA planned to grant about eight to 10 large awards of $500,000 to $1.5 million per year, and eight to 20 smaller awards of about $100,000 to $300,000. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 11/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Appropriations Subcommittee meeting to consider NASA's budget, that NASA needed $2.1 billion for the International Space Station and could not build the station for less. (AP, May 17/94)
Free-lance journalist Alcestis Oberg maintained that following the November elections NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin planned to cut jobs at Johnson Space Center drastically. According to the article, Goldin hoped to reduce the Space Shuttle operations work force by 50 percent in five years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of 30 percent in 1995. (H Post, Oct 20/94)
Former CBS news anchor Walter Cronkite was quoted as saying that in view of the lack of a guarantee that money saved from the space program would be used for urgent needs such as health, housing, education, and crime, the United States could not afford not to continue going into outer space. (LA Times, Jun 21/94)
Carl Pilchner, who works on advanced planning issues in NASA's Office of Space Science, told the agency's Space Science Advisory Committee that top NASA managers were drafting a 12-20 page strategic plan giving highest budget priority to the Mission to Planet Earth (MTPE). The MTPE was due to the insistence of Vice President Gore, reflecting messages NASA Administrator Goldin was receiving from the White House in response to his submitted proposals. (Def Daily, Jan 21/94)
The Mars Observer spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. NASA officials reported the probable cause of communication loss as a rupture in the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine--MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have put the craft in a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. Goldin asked Dr. Wes Huntress, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Science, to conduct a thorough review of the findings and recommendations and to report back in the near future on corrective actions to be taken by NASA. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
At a press briefing at the Kennedy Space Center, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Jeremiah Pearson said NASA was currently undertaking a review to gauge the Shuttle program's health after budget cutbacks and to identify possible additional savings. The review was scheduled to be completed in early January. Bryan O'Connor, Shuttle program director at NASA Headquarters, said 13 teams at NASA field centers across the country were examining jobs, procedures, and requirements to improve efficiency. However, he indicated that much of 1994's $141 million cut in the Shuttle program's operating budget could be made up with expected reimbursements and reassignment of funds. For example, Congress had suggested that the program use a $22 million reimbursement from Japan for Shuttle flights to that end. (Fla Today, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94; AvWk, Oct 17/94; AP, Oct 24/94)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
The 25th anniversary of the first moonwalk was the occasion of several articles looking back at the excitement of that event and developments since as well as an assessment of the current status of the space program. Noting that one-third of the U.S. population was not alive in 1969, the articles especially remarked upon lack of enthusiasm about space, together with expressing concern about earthly matters. Neil Armstrong's role in the moon landing and the fact that he never became a public hero also was touched upon. (W Post, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; WSJ, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; H Post, Jul 22/94; P Inq, Jul 22/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave the commencement address at Tullahoma to 22 University of Tennessee Space Institute graduates. He said Congress had been supportive but the nation needed to decide where it was going. America used to have a vision and be willing to take risks, but it had lost confidence in itself and was willing to settle for mediocrity. He pointed out that the cost of the entire space program "was only a quarter of a percent of the gross national product" so canceling one program would not solve the nation's problems. (Htsvl Tms, May 13/94; Independent, May 14/94)
A 20-month long Justice Department sting operation centered on NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston resulted in criminal fraud and bribery charges against nine men and one contractor. Two other contractors, General Electric Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, which had employed two of those charged, agreed to pay the government $1 million to cover cost of the undercover operation, code named Operation Lightning Strike. The two firms cooperated with the probe and might continue to do business with the government. Among the charged were Astro International Corporation of League City, Texas, and two NASA employees. The sting, conducted by the FBI, NASA's Office of Inspector General, and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, particularly targeted NASA's Space and Life Sciences Division in Houston. In October 1993 NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin told Congress that NASA had some 400 criminal fraud investigations underway. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; W Post, Feb 23/94; W Times, Feb 23/94; USA Today, Feb 23/94; NY Times, Feb 23/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94; WSJ, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 23/94; C Trib, Feb 23/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced receipt of a report investigating the loss of the Mars Observer mission.
In a written statement, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said the Department of Energy had told his office that NASA was "involved in the sponsorship or co-sponsorship of some human experiments to determine the effects of radiation" during the 1960s and 1970s. Goldin did not say what experiments had taken place. He promised a full public accounting. "There is no place in this agency for human medical experimentation conducted in secrecy or without full respect for human dignity of each and every participant," the statement said.
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) was making components and expected to integrate the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) by early June 1995. NEAR was the second mission approved in NASA's Discovery program but would be the first to be launched. To make a scheduled January 1999 encounter with 433 Eros--a silicate rock asteroid--NEAR would need to be launched within a two-week period beginning February 17, 1996. It would be launched on a Delta 2 and would swing by Earth in 1998 so that its plane could be changed to match that of Eros. The spacecraft would carry four instruments: a visible imager, an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a near infrared spectrograph, and a magnetometer. In entrusting to APL its first planetary science mission to be developed outside the agency, NASA turned to a laboratory experienced in rapid, inexpensive space programs. APL was responsible for three other proposals that NASA was considering under the Discovery program. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
A study by Loren Thompson, Deputy Director of Georgetown University's National Security Studies Program, was one of several major sources examining the U.S. space industry's growing challenge from competition and domination by foreign governments' expanding space programs and their successes with smaller but cheaper launch vehicles.
NASA announced the appointment of Earle K. Huckins III as Cassini Program Director in the Office of Space Science. An international program, Cassini was designed to explore the planet Saturn, its rings and moons, and the surrounding environment. Scheduled for launch on a Titan IV Centaur in October 1997, the Cassini spacecraft was to swing by Venus, the Earth, and Jupiter before being inserted into orbit around Saturn in June 2004. Cassini was projected to orbit Saturn for four years. (NASA Media Advisory Aug 11/94)
William Baragar, Boeing Company's corporate director of congressional affairs, said that Boeing planned to help NASA develop a High Speed Arm Transport (HSAT) that could cut flying time from Los Angeles to Tokyo from 12 hours to four. Baragar said NASA had asked Congress for $220 million for research on the plane, which could fly at about 2.4 times the speed of sound or slightly faster than the Concorde and carry about 300 people. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also discussed the project with a British newspaper. (Antelope Valley Press, May 17/94; Financial Times of London, May 30/94; LA Times, Jun 1/94)
NASA was pressuring the European Space Agency (ESA) to allow U.S. personnel greater access to European industry, laboratories, and reviews in order to provide additional assurance that the U.S./European Cassini mission to Saturn would succeed. The mission was of great importance to NASA and it felt that ESA's contribution to Cassini was not being coordinated fully with NASA. The pressure was creating sharp controversy among Europeans who did not want such extensive U.S. access although NASA proposals included greater European access to U.S. facilities. NASA managers raised the issue with their European counterparts behind the scenes at the International Astronautical Federation conference taking place in Jerusalem. NASA pressure resulted from NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's instruction to NASA Cassini managers that they must assume responsibility for quality control not just for the orbiter but the whole mission, including the Martin Marietta Titan-4 booster and the ESA probe. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
Flight tests of new terminal automation software confirmed that airline traffic could be routed to arrive at a gate within 20 seconds or less of a scheduled time, while enabling fuel-efficient descents initiated at pilots' discretion. According to NASA researchers, when deployed at hub airports, the complete Center-Tracon Automation System (CTAS) would optimize the flow of aircraft and improve air traffic control productivity significantly. Recent evaluations dealt with the Descent Advisor portion of CTAS but other parts of CTAS provided air traffic controllers with the data they needed to ensure efficient and safe operations. The recent flight tests were performed under a joint research and development effort involving the Federal Aviation Administration, NASA's Ames and Langley Research Centers, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, several contractors, and United Airlines. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin released a statement in response to the markup of NASA's budget by the House Appropriations Subcomittee on VA-HUD-Independent Agencies. He said that "Given the enormous challenge that Chairman Stokes and the members of his committee had in adequately addressing the many needs of the agencies covered in this budget, NASA is pleased with today's markup." He added that NASA was pleased to comply with the further challenge Stokes presented in the markup. (NASA Release, Jun 9/94; AP, Jun 9/94; W Times, Jun 10/94; O Sen Star, Jun 10/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 10/94; H Post, Jun 10/94; Fla Today, Jun 10/94; AP, Jun 10/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for September 1994, would include two firsts: atmospheric research using a laser, the Lidar In-Space Technology Experiment (LITE), and robotic processing of semiconductor materials. The mission would also feature the deployment and retrieval of a free-flying astronomical observer and the first untethered spacewalk by astronauts in more than 10 years. On August 31, NASA officials indicated there might be a delay in the contemplated September 9 launch because of problems with the craft's propulsion system. (NASA Release 94-135; AP, Aug 31/94; Reuters, Aug 31/94)
The publication of former astronaut Jim Lovell's new book, Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13, led to an article recounting the Apollo 13 flight 24 years previously. He stated his belief that NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin should do more to use NASA's past successes to show how NASA had progressed since. (W Times, Oct 21/94)
Groups of citizen lobbyists, particularly from Florida, Texas, and Ohio, came to Washington to lobby Congress on the importance of the Space Station to the continuation of a manned space program. (Fla Today, Jun 15/94; O Sen Star, Jun 15/94)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced their joint sponsorship of a general aviation design competition for students at U.S. aeronautical and engineering universities. Teams of graduate and undergraduate students, working with faculty advisers, were to develop a multidisciplinary design for a general aviation aircraft. (NASA Release 94-102)
In a speech to the American Geophysical Union, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin challenged scientists to establish an ambitious new goal for space science that would unite competing research disciplines and resurrect public excitement. As a possible goal, Goldin suggested that NASA commit itself to finding habitable planets outside the solar system. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
The seven astronauts who repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in December 1993 were designated recipients of the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award. In their names $250,000 was to be donated to a scholarship fund for dependents of NASA employees. The award ceremony occurred on March 28. (AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Mar 28/94; UP, Mar 28/94; USA Today, Mar 29/94)
Flight tests of the X-31 at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base were featured. Dryden director Kenneth J. Szalai noted that the X-31 had completed more flights than any other experimental aircraft, demonstrating methods of enhancing fighter maneuverability. Gary Trippensee was NASA project manager and director of the International Test Organization that included the Department of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Navy, Air Force, Rockwell Aerospace, the German government, and Deutsche Aerospace. The program focused on technology transfer--industrial use of data gathered during government research projects. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/94; Bakersfield Californian, Apr 21/94)
NASA was scheduled to open a new facility, the Global Hydrology and Climate Center, in Cummings Research Park West in Huntsville, Alabama, October 27. The focus of the Center's $15 million annual program was to study Earth's water cycle and the ways in which it affected climate. Research would involve collection and analysis of rainfall, lightning, and temperature data on a global scale, according to Center director Ron Greenwood. The Center was to house 42 scientists from Marshall Space Flight Center, 59 from the Universities Space Research Association, and 46 faculty, staff, and students from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin was present to open the Center, which was to operate in cooperation with the other institutions mentioned and to concentrate on studying water vapor. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 25/94; Htsvl Tms, Oct 27/94)
NASA announced the creation of the Office of Space Access and Technology at NASA Headquarters in Washington and the selection of John E. Mansfield as the new NASA Associate Administrator for the office. The merger of two previous offices: the Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology and the Office of Space Systems Development gave greater focus to the development of advanced space technologies and future space launch systems. The changes were to take effect September 6. (NASA Release 94-137; Defense Daily, Aug 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin presented Congressman Louis Stokes with the National Association of Small Disadvantaged Businesses Meritorious Award "for his outstanding contributions in the performance of contracts at the NASA Lewis Research Center and turning NASA Lewis Research Center around." (Call and Post, Oct 20/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
NASA announced the creation of an Office of Policy and Plans at NASA headquarters, with Alan Ladwig as Associate Administrator. Previously, Ladwig had been a senior space policy analyst in private industry. (NASA Release 94-181)
A NASA delegation led by Mike O'Brien from NASA's External Affairs Division in Washington was in Moscow to present to Russian officials the draft of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) concerning the International Space Station. The MOU detailed services to be provided by Station partners and the percentage of Station resources--power, water, storage space--each would receive. Bill Shepherd, deputy program manager for NASA's Station program, was optimistic about Russian response to the MOU and also optimistic about NASA's purchase of the 20-ton FGB navigation and propulsion tug (the first Station component to be sent up) from Lockheed-Khrunichev. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 19/94)
NASA announced that in cooperation with the Civil Air Patrol and the Federal Aviation Administration it was hosting a national conference for educators on "Aviation and Space Education: America's Leading Edge" in Norfolk, Virginia, April 6-9. (NASA Release 94-46)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)
Lockheed Corporation in Calabasas, California, and Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park division of Rockwell International, teamed up to compete with other aerospace companies for $167 million in grants from NASA over the next five years to explore the feasibility of a "single-stage-to-orbit" (SSTO) rocket. It was uncertain whether the White House and the Pentagon favored such a plan, which NASA considered a cost-saving alternative to updating current rockets. (LA Times, Apr 12/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a committee to develop a plan to identify and catalogue, to the extent practicable within 10 years, all comets and asteroids that might threaten the Earth. Eugene Shoemaker, an astronomer with the Lowell Observatory, was appointed chairman of the eight-member Near-Earth Object Search Committee. The committee was formed in response to congressional direction to NASA to develop a plan in coordination with the Department of Defense and the space agencies of other countries. Gregory Benford, professor of physics at the University of California, Irvine, commented on the congressional charge by saying that publicizing such tracking would be an opportunity for NASA for "smart public relations and smart science." (NASA Release 94-128; LA Times, Aug 21/94; B Sun, Aug 24/94)
An article discussed finding other planetary systems as an inspiring new challenge for astronomy and pointed out NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's proposal that NASA's core mission might be the search for a habitable planet. Mention was made of Proxima Centauri, the nearest neighbor of a bigger, hotter, brighter star: the sun, which made it an easy star around which to look for planets. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope was used to study Proxima Centauri and recently the Hubble discovered discs in the Orion nebula, which might produce planetary systems. Although the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) was eliminated by Congress, SETI continued with private money and became Project Phoenix, scheduled to be connected with the Parkes radio telescope in Australia in early 1995 and to listen for faint radio signals from hundreds of stars. (Economist, Jul 16/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the University of Arizona's Open Sciences Forum at which professors presented overviews of their space-related work. He assured the faculty and students that NASA would continue to fund University of Arizona research projects such as the $3.6 billion Cassini Saturn probe. He urged scientists to simplify the way in which they discuss their experiments so that lay people would understand them and thus increase scientific awareness. Stressing the concept that "small is better," he mentioned the development of robots that may one day extract fuel from the moon or Mars, thus reducing the amount of propellant that would need to be stored on moon- or Mars-bound spacecraft. (Tucson Citizen, Apr 9/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California, chairman of the House Science Committee, sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin asking that NASA develop cost estimates for upgrading the infrastructure surrounding Russia's Baikonur Cosmodrome. He also requested that NASA explore options for establishing direct relations with Kazakhstan in the areas of science and technology. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
After three years of testing by NASA's Langley, Virginia research center, the airline industry, industry suppliers, and the Federal Aviation Administration, a new device was approved to alert pilots of wind shear danger. Called the Bendix RDR-4B, it was made by Allied Signal Inc. in Morristown, New Jersey and was being installed by various commercial airlines. The device complements ground-based wind-shear detection systems, known as Terminal Doppler Weather Radars, being installed at 47 major U.S. airports. (W Times, Dec 6/94)
Richard DalBello, assistant director for space programs in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that NASA's competion for a reusable rocket to replace the Space Shuttle was on hold while White House budget officials mulled over the technical, financial, and political prospects for the program. The White House Office of Management and Budget must sign off on the NASA plan before NASA officials invited the U.S. aerospace industry to submit competing designs for the rocket. Most U.S. aerospace firms already had competing blueprints for a reusable rocket. (SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave an impassioned defense of NASA to a group of aerospace executives attending an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference in suburban Washington. He described the budget fight as part of Congress's continuing effort to turn the space program into a "debating society" and said it was time for the talk to stop. He deplored the fact that NASA was not given enough money to create a space program that American youth could dream about. Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, who sat next to Goldin, in contrast spoke of "a fatally flawed space station program" on which space dollars should not be risked. (O Sen Star, May 5/94; Space News, May 9/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin paid a 90-minute visit to Rocketdyne's main factory in Canoga Park. He said the company had made some progress in correcting quality control problems that caused two shuttle launches to be aborted seconds before liftoff and two other scheduled flights to be postponed. (LA Times, Apr 1/94)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes in the Office of Space Flight (OSF) at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. These included the appointment of Bryan O'Connor, currently OSF Deputy Associate Administrator, to assume the post of Space Shuttle Program Director. O'Connor's position was to be assumed by Richard Wisniewski, who retired from NASA in 1990 after 35 years of government service. (NASA Release 94-66; WP, May 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Space Subcommittee the Space Station program was proceeding but cost and schedule savings were decreasing. NASA earlier estimated Russian participation would save two years and $2 billion. After the Systems Design Review, it appeared time would be speeded by 15 months and savings probably would be $1.5 billion. Also, Russia now wanted $650 million instead of $400 million for lease of the functional cargo block vehicle. Furthermore, agreement needed to be reached with Russia on the cost of a major component required to provide navigation and reboost capability for the Station. NASA assured the Committee that the agency would never cede control of the Station to Russian ground commanders. Goldin also said it was essential for NASA to have stable funding. (Reuters, Apr 13/94; Defense Daily, Apr 14/94; O Sen Star, Apr 14/94; H Post, Apr 14/94)
A joint statement was issued following a meeting of the heads of space agencies involved in the International Space Station: the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the European Space Agency (ESA), the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), the Russian Space Agency (RSA), and NASA. This was the first group meeting since Russia accepted the collective invitation to join the International Space Station partnership in December 1993. The heads of agencies discussed the outcome of the recently completed Space Station System Design Review. CSA, ESA, and NASDA noted the remarkable progress made to accommodate Russia as a new partner and to satisfy the interests of all the partners in the new program structure, and they commended NASA for its efforts to improve program efficiency and to clarify the potential for additional partner contributions.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced contract awards for two new "Smallsat" satellites to observe the Earth with unprecedented sensor technology. The awards went to two teams led by CTA of Rockville, Maryland, and TRW, Inc., of Redondo Beach, California. The teams were to build, launch, and operate the satellites--each no bigger than a console television set--for less than $60 million each. The satellites were to be developed, launched, and delivered on orbit in 24 months or less on a Pegasus launch vehicle. (NASA Release 94-94; AP, Jun 8/94; Reuters, Jun 8/94; NY Times, Jun 9/94; W Post, Jun 9/94; USA Today, Jun 9/94; WSJ, Jun 9/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; H Post, Jun 9/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94; W Post, Jun 14/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced agency plans to proceed with the use of the nearly completed facilities at Yellow Creek in Iuka, Mississippi, originally designed for use with the proposed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), for use with the manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. NASA and the Thiokol Corporation worked out plan implementation, which was scheduled to take approximately two and a half years. Thiokol plans to move all of its nozzle operations to the Yellow Creek facility. In view of the federal government's investment of taxpayer money in the construction of the Yellow Creek facility, NASA was committed to obtaining maximum return while seeking to mitigate the economic impact on the region resulting from the ASRM termination. (NASA Release 94-68)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
An audit report by NASA's inspector general, which was still in draft, noted that NASA could have saved almost $6 million in business travel costs in 1993 by flying available commercial flights instead of using NASA aircraft. As a result, NASA planned to rewrite rules for the use of its planes, according to Laurie Boeder, associate NASA administrator for public affairs. Jack Anderson's column contained a critical account of NASA travel concentrating on NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's use of NASA aircraft in the six-month period from October 1, 1992 through March 31, 1993, which reportedly cost taxpayers $514,000 more than if he had flown a commercial airline. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; W Post, Dec 19/94)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin spoke to workers at Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems in eastern New Orleans, praising the company's new contract with NASA to make lightweight Space Shuttle external fuel tanks, calling the tanks an essential part of the Space Station. (Times-Picayune, Apr 26/94)
The pressure on California's space firms to adapt to a new mission, survival, in view of congressional budgetcutting and constant funding problems was highlighted. The role of commercial firms in the space industry as opposed to NASA was raised as was the fact that the space program no longer revolved around competition with the Soviet Union. (LA Times, Jul 6/94)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) was pushing ahead with certification of predictive wind shear systems. Robert Passman, FAA associate program manager for airborne wind shear research, said he believed airborne predictive systems worked, based on observing one on a NASA aircraft in Orlando, Florida, in 1993. He noted that the alarms from such a system correlated well with ground-based Terminal Doppler Weather Radar detection of microbursts. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
A biography of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin based on an interview with him, said that Goldin put in 15-hour days; originally, he did this seven days a week but now he did it five and a half days a week. In returning to NASA from TRW, he determined to battle the bureaucracy and did so. He expressed concern about America having become a nation of consumption, interested mainly in entertainment and recreation. His major present concern was keeping the Space Station on track. (News Register, Jul 17/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement hailing the vote in the House of Representatives that defeated an amendment to end the Space Station program. In his statement, he expressed appreciation for the leadership of the President, the efforts of the Vice President, and the hard work of Chairman Brown and Representative Walker. He also praised the collaboration of NASA with international partners, which strengthened the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 94-106)
Space News reported on the financial and other difficulties confronting the Russian space program. Few of the staff of the Russian Space Agency (RSA) were receiving pay checks; many space workers were on unpaid leave and other scientists and engineers had left RSA; unlike NASA, RSA had oversight responsibility but did not manage space projects, leading to power struggles with companies engaged in space work and with the military with whom RSA must negotiate such matters as rental fees for using military facilities for launches. (SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, and ranking member of the House Space Subcommittee, wrote NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin requesting information about U.S. dependence on Russia, payments to the Russian government, cost constraints on the Space Station in view of NASA's tight budget, and financial agreements with Station international partners. He expressed reservations over the decision to move the Station to a higher orbital inclination at the Russian request and expressed the fear that the agreement with Russia was negotiated from a position of U.S. vulnerability because of budgetary limits. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
NASA announced that 100 girls, ages nine to 15, were to join the NASA Headquarters workforce on April 28. (NASA Release 94-60; AP, Apr 20/94)
NASA officials said that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) had not been home to any secret radiation tests on humans, and no workers were unknowingly exposed to any harmful materials. "We do not do anything like that here," KSC spokeswoman Lisa Malone said. Life science research underway at the space center mostly involves growing plants and food in an environmentally controlled chamber at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station as well as some muscle fatigue research in long-term bedrest studies to simulate weightlessness. The Johnson Space Center in Houston and the Ames Research Center near San Francisco are the facilities where most medical research on humans is conducted.
NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)
Donna Shirley, director of NASA's newly formed Office of Mars Exploration at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasenda, California, discussed NASA's plans to send up to 28 orbiters, landers, and rovers to Mars within the next decade. Glenn Cunningham, program manager for NASA's Mars Global Surveyer, was quoted in connection with keeping the program within cost limits and the November 1996 scheduled launched of the Mars Global Surveyor aboard a Delta 2 rocket. (Fla Today, Aug 27/94)
Former NASA Space Station Director Richard Kohrs was a member of a team to revamp the Cassini mission for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also contacted him, reportedly asking that he look at the troubled Space Station program. (SP News, Mar 28-Apr 3/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
Preparations for the launch, the launch itself, and experiments conducted aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia received extensive media coverage. Fueling began the morning of March 4 prior to the crew's boarding. The mission commander and the pilot wore newly devised long johns with tubes that plugged into water pumps to keep them cool while awaiting takeoff and during reentry. Most of the major experiments were to be operated from the ground so that the astronauts could concern themselves with medical tests, some mechanical structures, and observation of the 12 rats used in a bone density study. On March 5, one of Columbia's three auxiliary power units registered an unusually high pressure reading, causing concern; the readings returned to normal when the crew switched to other heaters. It developed that the high pressure apparently resulted from an ice buildup in one of the auxiliary power units. Meanwhile, several articles expressed concern that budget cuts endangered the safety of NASA flights, but NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin denied this was true. As the space flight progressed, two crew members at a time took turns in taking four hours off duty in view of the lengthy nature of the mission. (W Post, Mar 4/94; AP, Mar 4/94; UP, Mar 4/94; Reuters, Mar 4/94; W Times, Mar 5/94; NY Times, Mar 5/94; W Post, Mar 5/94; B Sun, Mar 5/94; P Inq, Mar 5/94; W Times, Mar 6/94; W Post, Mar 6/94; P Inq, Mar 6/94; Daily News, Mar 6/94; UP, Mar 6/94; Reuters, Mar 6/94; NY Times, Mar 7/94; AP, Mar 7/94; UP, Mar 7/94; Reuters, Mar 7/94; NY Times, Mar 8/94; CSM, Mar 8/94; W Post, Mar 8/94; C Trib, Mar 8/94; Reuters, Mar 8/94; AP, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94)
A solid-fuel booster for Ariane-5, the new rocket designed to keep Western Europe in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the 21st century, was tested successfully in the jungles of French Guiana, according to Jean-March Artaud, Ariane-5 program director for the CNES French national space agency in Guiana. (Reuters, Dec 16/94)
A biographic account of NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stressed his enthusiasm for sending humans into space combined with a tremendous work ethic. As an administrator at aerospace manufacturer TRW, he developed strong ideas about what was wrong with the space program and how to fix it. Space advisers to President George Bush found NASA unresponsive to change and decided to offer the NASA Administrator's job to Goldin. Among his management tools, Goldin said, was the creative use of chaos. (W Post, Jul 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin made a state-of-the-agency address to all staff members in which he stressed that NASA intended to become less costly and quicker during the next four years, ending with as many as 4,000 fewer workers. Kennedy Space Center Deputy Director Gene Thomas, who answered questions after the televised address, said it would be a year of "significant change." (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
NASA announced the selection by the White House of Charles R. Chappell, Associate Director for Science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to serve a one-year assignment as Deputy Director of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. Chappell was to head NASA's participation in the GLOBE program and was to report directly to the NASA Administrator. Chappell was to be assigned to the White House and together with the GLOBE Director, Thomas Pyke Jr., was to work on the design and implementation of the GLOBE program for the Vice President. (NASA Release 94-92)
Gregory Reck, Acting Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT), said that NASA had tasked an industry team with reviewing the direction of its research and development (R&D) efforts in space communications technologies. The group, which was to be composed of satellite manufacturers such as Hughes and Space Systems/Loral, ground station builders like Harris Corporation, and small aerospace firms like Orbital Sciences Corporation, was to identify future space-based systems, both in low-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, and how they might tie into the National Information Infrastructure. NASA's role in the activity was to be directed by Samuel Venneri, head of spacecraft and remote sensing in OACT. The consensus findings of the team were to be used in relation to NASA fiscal year budgets. According to the NASA officials, the key motivation behind the initiative was to minimize inroads by European and Japanese competitors into the 60 percent market share held by U.S. firms in satellite communications. (Defense Daily, Apr 7/94)
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
Jack Anderson's column indicated that the ties of Isadore Hyde, convicted in 1993 of defrauding the federal government, to Senator Trent Lott, Democrat from Mississippi, were investigated by NASA officials among others. Hyde's company received a contract in 1984 to provide security services at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi, and diverted more than $186,000 for personal use. Former Hyde employees alleged that Hyde used NASA resources to do political favors for Lott and put Lott's mother, who was 71 at the time, on the company's payroll. (W Post, Apr 25/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
The condition of the Russian space program was described in view of Russia's new space cooperation with the United States. Russian policy was to activate the control center for Space Station Mir only when the ground was in contact with Mir. Otherwise the center was closed and personnel returned to their primary employment: moonlighting jobs. The primary Russian contractor on the Space Station, NPO Energia, had made progress toward privatization, but upper management remained committed to the traditional Soviet pattern of secrecy and exclusion of outside supervision. (O Sen Star, Jul 3/94)
In September a conference on space debris was scheduled to be held at Kent University's Unit for Space Sciences in Canterbury, England. Experts from space agencies around the world were to attend the three-day conference. Kent University had become a center of expertise in the study of space debris, having mounted experiments on the subject on several spacecraft. (Times of London, Aug 21/94)
NASA announced that two companies had been recognized as minority contractor and subcontractor of the year for their outstanding contributions to the space program. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named ERC, Inc., Tullahoma, Tennessee, as Minority Contractor of the Year and BST Systems, Inc., Plainfield, Connecticut, as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 94-163)
The Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, Inc. held a legislative conference in Washington, D.C., at which NASA had the largest government career recruiting exhibit of any agency. NASA's Associate Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, Yvonne B. Freeman, said that NASA was now aggressively recruiting future black scientists as early as elementary school and paying for their training. Of the $740 million NASA spent on education each year, $70 million now went to historically black colleges and universities, up from $6 million two years previously. Representative Louis Stokes, Democrat from Ohio, who formerly criticized NASA for doing little to hire blacks or enter into contracts with black companies, said NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had really made a difference in NASA's programs. Stokes's appropriations subcommittee was responsible for NASA funding. (Plain Dealer, Sep 16/94)
At a hearing of the House of Representatives Science Committee, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin testified that NASA had experienced a 30 percent budget cut in the last two years but said he was prepared to oversee a "cleanup" of NASA management. He asked Congress not to ask for any more cost-saving redesigns of the space station. Goldin said the agency was committed to change by functioning more efficiently with less money and by forming more partnerships with business to enhance the transfer of the latest technical information to industry. (UPI, Jan 6/95; Gannet News Service, Jan 6/95; Federal News Service, Jan 6/95; H Chron, Jan 7/95; NY Times, Jan 7/95; W Post, Jan 7/95; APn, Jan 6/95)
Four more missions have been selected for NASAs Discovery program. Formally started in NASAs FY 1994 budget it features small planetary exploration spacecraft with focused science goals that can be built in about 36 months for about $150 million. Lunar Prospector was judged mature enough to proceed, while missions to study the Sun, Venus, and a comet (mission Stardust) were selected for further detailed study. Two missions are already under development in the Discovery program: the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mission(which would orbit the asteroid Eros in 1999(and the Mars Pathfinder, which would land on Mars in 1997. (NASA Releases 95-19, 94, 112 & 209; W Post, Mar 2/95, May 15/95; Fla Today, Nov 5/95; AP, Mar 5/95 & Nov 27/95; AvWk, Mar 6/95 & Dec 11/95; Science, Mar 10/95)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory selected Lockheed Martin Astronautics to develop two small spacecraft that will explore Mars in 1998. They will be half the weight and cost of the 1996 Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Pathfinder. Their low weights of the new orbiter and lander will allow them to be launched on a new launch vehicle called the Med-Lite, which is being developed by McDonnell Douglas. (NASA Releases 95-30 & 196; Space News, Mar 27/95)
NASA tests a new noise reduction jet exhaust nozzle for a high speed civil transport (HSCT). The tests are being conducted at the Ames Research Center. (NASA Releases 95-69; AvWk, May 15/95)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin released a statement regarding the effects of the proposed five-year, $2.7 billion reduction. He essentially stated that the House of Representatives FY96 budget resolution assumes massive cuts in NASAs efforts to study the Earth. It would turn an integrated global program into a series of disconnected and fundamentally less effective measurements. The cuts would cripple the core of the program, the Earth Observing System. The U.S. government-in partnership with scientists, private companies, and other nations must ensure that this cutting-edge research that is the foundation of Mission to Planet Earth is continued. While NASA is committed to prudent and permanent deficit reduction, further cuts to Mission to Planet Earth(and environmental research in general(seriously jeopardize an investment in the future that will return economic and quality of life benefits far in excess of what we spend today. (NASA Releases 95-54 & 99)
Launch of Space Shuttle Discovery (mission STS-70) marked the 100th Human Spaceflight. This event occurred 34 years after Alan Shepards historic 15-minute sub-orbital flight into space. STS-70s primary objective was deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-G. Discovery used a new version of a main engine which took a decade to develop. (NASA Releases 95-32, 59 & 71; NY Times, Jul 14/95; W Post, Jul 14/95; USA Today, Jul 14/95, Jul 17/95; Fla Today, Jul 11/95, Jul 12/95, Jul 16/95 & Jul 17/95; AP, Jul 12/95, Jul 13/95 & Jul 20/95; UPI, Jul 12/95 & Jul 21/95; Reuters, Jul 20/95 & Jul 21/95; AvWk, Jul 17/95)
Galileos tape recorder, which had been balky, is again working. Scientists will avoid using the magnetic tape near either end of the reel to reduce the power needed to operate the recorder. (NASA Releases 95-168, 182, 188 & 193; NY Times, Oct 21/95; W Post, Oct 13/95, Oct 23/95 & Oct 29/95; Fla Today, Nov 5/95; Space News, Oct 16/95, Oct 23/95, Oct 30/95 & Dec 11/95; AvWk, Oct 23/95, & Oct 30/95; Science, Oct 27/95)
A Russian space enthusiast, Sergei Leskov, lamented the declining state of the Russian space program in the January 19 issue of "Izvestia." Production of rockets and other hardware has declined in the last few years, Leskov said, and even the hardware in orbit was on its last legs. The Mir space station, too, had grown old and increasingly gave mission controllers nasty surprises. He noted that during the past five years, funding of the space sector had been cut five-to-ten-fold in certain areas. The contract with the United States for construction of the Alpha space station had been the salvation of the Russian space sector, but only a small range of enterprises were involved in it, and the project did not promote development of new technologies. Without an infusion of more money, Leskov wrote, the Russian space sector could find itself as much a part of history as the Pyramid of Cheops. (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, Jan 23/95).
National Leadership/National Partnership is NASAs theme at the Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) Fly-In Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition July 27-August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin. A featured exhibit identifies unique partnerships formed between government, industry, and academia to revitalize the general aviation industry in areas ranging from modernizing cockpits to reducing aircraft weight and cost. Highlighted are activities of selected companies developing general aviation technology through the NASA Small Business Innovation Research (SBIRP) program. (NASA Releases 95-119, 128, 129 & 174)
Today is the first of three dates that the Earth will be able to view the rings of Saturn on edge in about 15 years. Thirteen of Saturns 18 moons were discovered during past ring crossings. The other two dates in this trio will be August 10, 1995 and February 11, 1996. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory will use these opportunities to fine tune the mission of the Cassini spacecraft to be launched in 1997 for an examination of Saturn beginning in the year 2004. (NASA Releases 95-72 & 118; W Post, May 3/95; C Trib, Apr 28/95; AvWk, Apr 24/95)
Childbirth is expected to be made safer and easier with the space-age forceps being developed by Marshall Space Flight Center with the Collins Clinic in Slidell, Louisiana. Using space program instrumentation technology, fiber optic sensors in the forceps will enable the physician to monitor forces on the infant throughout the delivery. The use of composite materials will help ensure a safer distribution of pressure on the infant. Additionally, the instrumented forceps will allow obstetrical students to learn to use forceps within safe limits before entering practice. (NASA Release 95-153)
Senior NASA managers have recommended that Ames Research Center be placed under the oversight of a private contractor. However, it also recommended that Ames aerospace facilities be transferred to Langley Research Center and that its space station centrifuge be transferred to Johnson Space Center. The Zero Based Review Team also endorsed sweeping changes in the organization of NASAs other research facilities, but it rejected a proposal to have a contractor run the Kennedy Space Center. (SF Exam, Feb 18/95; Science, Apr 21/95)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin applauded Japan's contribution as a partner in the space station program when he spoke to high level science officials in Tokyo. Goldin was on his first trip to Japan as head of NASA. (Phillips Business Information, Jan. 16/95)
Several Senate Democrats proposed a $33 billion package to balance the budget by the year 2002 by cutting defense and space programs. The package included elimination of NASA's space station for a savings of $10 billion over five years. (Fort Worth Star-Telegram, Jan 6/95; H Chron, Jan 6/95, Jan 8/92; Greensboro News & Record, Jan 6/95; News and Record, Jan 6/95)
NASA and Russian space station officials were scheduled to begin a series of technical exchange meetings at the Johnson Space Center intended to give clear direction to joint cooperation in constructing the international space station. Twenty-five teams of Russian technicians and engineers were expected to arrive to discuss a number of issues, including docking procedures, power supply distribution; structural mechanics, depressurization; and place and use of antennae. Crew size was also to be discussed. The meetings were expected to last until February 10. NASA officials hoped to agree on as much common ground as possible so that Russia could be made an official partner in the station project before the year is out. (Phillips Business Information, Jan 19/95)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA intended to cut at least 2,500 civil servants from its payroll before the end of the century, scaling back its work force to levels not seen since the early 1960s. Supervisory positions at NASA headquarters and its field centers were to be targeted as the agency tried to stay in step with Clinton administration plans to shrink the government. (H Chron, Jan 20/95; APn, Jan 20/95; W Times, Jan 24/95; AvWk, Jan 23/95; Fla Today, Jan 22/95)
An internal NASA review team has produced proposals that include sweeping management and organizational changes to cut spending an additional $5 billion by the end of the decade. (NASA Releases 95-65, 73, 123 & 132; NY Times, May 20/95)
NASAs Galileo spacecraft has confirmed it has reached the inside of Jupiters magnetosphere. Direct measurements of the Jupiter system may now begin. Final tuning of the flight path is scheduled for December 2. On December 7, Galileos previously deployed atmospheric probe will plunge into Jupiters cloud tops and descend into the giant planet on a parachute. An hour after the probe mission is completed, Galileo will begin to fire its onboard rocket beginning a two year mission of close-up studies of the planets large moons, Jupiter itself, and the magnetosphere. The spacecraft was launched aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis and an Interim Upper Stage (IUS) on October 18, 1989. (NASA Releases 95-207 & 215; NY Times, Dec 3/95, Dec 7/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec 11/95; W Post, Dec 4/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec 11/95; USA Today, Dec 1/95, Dec 7/95 & Dec 8/95; Fla Today, Dec 7/95; WSJ, Dec 7/95; Time, Dec 11/95; Newsweek, Dec 18/95; AvWk, Nov 27/95, Dec 4/95 & Dec 11/95; Science, Dec 15/95)
El Nio is stronger this year compared to the winter of 1992-93, according to NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The TOPEX/Poseidon ocean observing satellite, launched on August 10, 1992, is part of a joint program of NASA and the French space agency. The satellite uses a radar altimeter to measure sea-surface height with an accuracy of better than 2 inches. Sea-surface elevation is related to the heat in the upper ocean, which is important for long-range weather forecasting. (NASA Releases 95-7, 146 & 159; NY Times, Jan 14/95 & Apr 25/95; W Post, Jan 25/95 & Feb 11/95; AP, Jan 24/95; Reuters, Jan 24/95; Science, Feb 3/95)
An air-safety computer system developed by NASA at its Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, in 1985 had yet to be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration. The Takeoff Performance Monitor was designed to help pilots handle takeoff mishaps more quickly and safely, but airlines, manufacturers, and Federal Aviation Administration officials said the cost and liability burdens outweighed the benefits. Troublesome takeoffs occur less than 1 percent of the time but account for 10 percent of all serious airplane accidents, according to the National Transportation Safety Board. (CSM, Jan 6/95)
NASA requested proposals for two vehicles, X-33 and X-34, to prove the concept of single-stage to orbit. The X-33 would be a technology demonstrator vehicle and the X-34 would be a reusable, or partially-reusable, booster for placing small payloads into a low Earth orbit. Significant cost-sharing by industry was anticipated. (NASA Releases 95-1, 23, 38 & 40)
NASA officials dedicated a new testbed at Edwards Air Force Base in California's Mojave Desert for development of a solar-powered regenerative fuel cell system that they hope will one day provide clean and efficient renewable electric power. The testbed is the heart of Cleveland-based Lewis Research Center's new government and industry multi-use regenerative fuel cell program and mirrors the government's policy of developing technologies that will both foster US competitiveness and, at the same time, support government programs. (NASA Release 95-8)
An early goal of NASAs proposed New Millennium program is to test highly sophisticated space hardware to prove that scientific spacecraft can be built more than 30 percent smaller without sacrificing performance. The first New Millennium spacecraft will explore a comet, an asteroid, or some combination of them. Three deep space missions are to be flown by the year 2000. (NASA Releases 95-100 & 155; Space News, Feb 13/95, Jun 5/95 & Sep 4/95; AvWk, May 15/95 & Sep 25/95)
NASA is developing plans for the Science Institutes which are expected to help streamline the agencys management structure and improve the quality of its scientific research. Two institutes are being defined as pathfinders. One is affiliated with NASA Johnson Space Center that would conduct biomedical research. The other is affiliated with NASA Ames Research Center that would focus on research related to the origins and evolution of life, and planetary biology. (NASA Releases 95-110 & 132; Science, Nov 17/95)
A contract for the design and development of the International Space Station was signed today by NASA and the Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division. This 400-ton Space Station will be a catalyst for global cooperation, bringing together resources from the United States, Russia, Japan, member nations of the European Space Agency, Canada, and Italy. The new contract was for $5.63 billion. Assembly will begin in November 1997 with the launch of the U.S.-purchased Russian FGB space tug a power and propulsion module. It will be followed in December 1997 with Node 1, that would connect laboratory and crew modules and allow the Space Shuttle to dock. (NASA Releases 95-2 & 13; Space News, May 1/95; AvWk, Apr 10/95)
A new generation of air traffic control tools are being field tested at the Denver International Airport. The Center-TRACON Automation System (CTAS) became its primary traffic management tool the day it opened on February 28. CTAS was designed with the involvement of the ultimate users, the controllers and the pilots. It consists of three software systems: the Decent Advisor (DA), an air/ground datalink system, and advanced cockpit automation. The DA has routinely met its goal of reducing arrival time prediction accuracy to under 20 seconds. In addition to reducing traffic controller workload, CTAS will increase aircraft fuel efficiency and reduce delays. The field tests are jointly conducted by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) which contemplate more such fruitful partnerships in the future. (NASA Releases 95-66, 198 & 150; AvWk, Jul 31/95, Aug 21/95 & Oct 30/95)
Saturns possible two new Moons sighted by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) on May 22 are thought instead to be orbiting clumps of icy rubble. Images from the August 10 ring plane crossing presented a new mystery. They seem to show at least three new objects, which are in different orbits than the two May objects. An explanation is that a shattered moonlet would be brighter and more visible, than when all of its mass was compressed into a single solid body. (NASA Releases 95-172; Science, Oct 20/95)
Veteran Space Shuttle astronauts Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr., Richard N. (Dick) Richards and Pierre J. Thuot have left the Astronaut Office. Ken Reightler will join Lockheed Martin, Houston, as the Program Manager for Engineering, Test and Analysis. Dick Richards remains at NASA, moving to the Space Shuttle Program Office to serve as the mission director for the second servicing mission for the Hubble Space Telescope. After three Shuttle flights, Thuot will teach astronautics courses at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 95-104; AvWk, Jul 10/95)
Images from the international Space Radar Laboratory (SRL) may help researchers find previously unknown settlements near the ancient city of Angkor in Cambodia. The radar data was obtained during the October flight of the Space Shuttle Endeavour. SRLs complementary radars, the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (X-SAR), is a joint mission of the United States, German and Italian space agencies. (NASA Release 95-12; Space News, Feb 27/95; Science, Feb 17/95)
Supersonic Laminar Flow Control (SLFC) experiment may apply to High-Speed Civil Transport (HSCT) which could fly twice as fast as todays typical airliner. SLFC is a special structure mounted on the wing of an F-16XL. (NASA Releases 95-124 & 184; Interavia, Jan/95; AvWk, Oct 23/95)
A team of aerospace executives has recommended that NASA modify the Space Shuttle programs management structure. The team was headed by former Johnson Space Center Director Christopher Kraft. The report to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recommends separating developmental activities from flight operations. The Kraft report endorses the themes of reducing the role of civil service employees, increasing contractor accountability, and reducing the number of government-to-contractor interfaces. (NASA Release 95-27; NY Times, May 22/95 & Apr 14/95; W Post, Jun 7/95; Fla Today, Mar 2/95 & Apr 5/95; Reuters, Mar 13/95; AvWk, Mar 6/95, Mar 20/95, Apr 10/95 & Jun 12/95)
NASA invited bids from the nation's aerospace companies to develop two reusable rocket designs under a novel strategy that called for the industry to pay much of the cost. The goal was to enhance the competitive footing of U. S. companies in the lucrative global commercial launch market while lowering the amount spent annually by the federal government on space transportation.
NASAs Office of Space Access and Technology selected 12 research proposals for negotiation. The proposals are for Phase II contracts in NASAs Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Pilot Program. The STTR program is similar to the Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIRP) but varies by requiring small business concerns to conduct cooperative research and development by partnering with a research institution. At least 40 percent of the work must be performed by the small business concern, and at least 30 percent of the work must be performed by the research institute. STTR and SBIRP comprise only some of the many research grants NASA awards each year. (NASA Releases 95-46, 103, 165, 174, 183, 199, 210 & 214)
The United States and Russia began taking practical steps toward merging their manned space programs.  NASA expected to begin shuttle flights to the Mir Space Station as a step in a joint venture to build a space station. The agreement called for seven flights through 1997 in which U. S. space shuttles would dock with Mir and allow the exchange of crews. One shuttle mission in 1995 would supply solar arrays that would combine U.S. advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's expertise in space structures and mechanisms in order to boost Mir's electrical output by six kilowatts. (AvWk, Jan 2/95; San Diego Union-Tribune, Jan 4/95)
The Chicago Fire Department has signed a Space Act agreement to explore ways space technology can be used to enhance emergency services. Candidate activities include: locating firefighters within a 2,400 foot area; monitoring the vibration signature of a burning structure to determine when the firefighters must be evacuated; checking into the feasibility of using liquid oxygen in a new breathing apparatus; identifying the location of an emergency 911 call made from a cellular phone; and warning hearing impaired drivers of an approaching emergency vehicle. (NASA Releases 95-51 & 116; Space News, Apr 24/95; C Trib, Apr 20/95)
NASA commemorated the 10-year anniversary of the Challenger tragedy. In advance of the anniversary, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin reaffirmed NASAs dual commitments to exploring the frontiers of the universe and to maintaining the highest safety standard possible. According to Goldin, the best way to honor the memories of the crew of Challenger, and of all the men and women, who have given their lives to explore the frontiers of air and space, is to continue their bold tradition of exploration and innovation. In the decade following the accident, NASA had instituted multiple safety changes in the Shuttle program, including the nine changes in the programs structure recommended by the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission). By the end of January 1996, NASA had launched 49 Shuttle missions since the Challenger accident and had successfully deployed the HST. Memorial observances at KSC and JSC took place at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger exploded.(NASA, Space Shuttle Program Changes and Accomplishments Since 1986, news release, January 1996; NASA, Administrator Goldin Issues Statement on Challenger Observance, news release 96-2, 16 January 1996.)
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASAs Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as the first day of a new space program in America. Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve very good safety ratings.(Associated Press, NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry, 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact, 30 September 1996; United Press International, NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact, 1 October 1996.)
Peter H. Diamandis, President of Angel Technologies Corporation, an aerospace firm located in St. Louis, Missouri, offered a US$10 million prize to the first private aviators to complete a suborbital flight into space. Diamandis stated that the object of the prize was to motivate private companies to invest in space exploration, someday making spaceflights open to the public. Were looking to spark a constructive competition, Diamandis explained. To claim the prize, the privately financed and built aircraft would have to ascend to 62 miles (100 kilometers) high, twice within a period of two weeks, delivering three passengers safely to space and back. Diamandis claimed that creating an entirely reusable Space Shuttle would considerably decrease the cost of going to space, opening the space frontier to people who had not trained as professional astronauts. Diamandis intended to announce the winner of the X Prize on 18 May, beneath the St. Louis Gateway Arch. Creator of the Voyager and top contender for the prize Burt Rutan, as well as NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, planned to attend the award ceremony.
NASA researchers at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) completed the testing of the F- 16XL at Edwards Air Force Base. The tests had taken more than one year to complete. Scientists were studying how the modified F-16 flew with US$14 million laminar-flow gloves on its wings. The data they collected demonstrated that the glove had reduced the turbulent layer of air that passes over an airplanes wing during flight. Project Manager Carol A. Reukauf called the tests successful. NASA hoped the results would provide manufacturers with a new technology that would improve aeronautical design, decreasing air drag on airplanes and, consequently, reducing the fuel required to fly.(Jay Levine, Laminar Flow Tests Successful, Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 10 October 1996. 143 NASA, The X-Planes: 50 Years of High Desert Right Stuff, news release 96-204, 10 October 1996. 144 Reuters, Russia Postpones Mir Supply Rocket Mission, 16 October 1996.)
NASA announced that engineers from NASA and Lockheed Martin had completed successful tests on a prototype, lightweight, external fuel tank for the Shuttle. The tests measured the tanks strength and reliability under conditions exceeding recommended flight certification. NASAs External Tank Project Manager Parker V. Counts reported that the tests had demonstrated that the unique composition of the very lightweight tanks did not reduce their strength. NASA had awarded Lockheed Martin the contract to produce the lighter tanks, to enable the Shuttle to carry cargo to the high inclination orbit where the International Space Station (ISS) would reside. To build the tanks, NASA had used aluminum lithium, a material both lighter and stronger than the metal alloy used in previous tank construction. NASA had designed the tanks to weigh 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) less than the models used on earlier Shuttles.(NASA, Shuttle Super Lightweight Fuel Tank Completes Tests, news release 96-186, 11 September 1996. 129 NASA, First Global Image of Total Atmospheric Ozone Obtained from NASA Instrument Aboard Japanese Satellite, news release 96-188, 16 September 1996.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin informed employees that NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, would reduce its staff by more than 50 percent, citing increasing budget pressures. Under the reduction plan, staff at NASA Headquarters would decrease from 1,430 to between 650 and 700, in less than one years time. The Clinton administration had continued to push for government-wide budget cutbacks throughout the 1990s. Don Fuqua, President of the Aerospace Industries Association, described the staff reduction as a case of the federal government following the example of the private sector. According to Fuqua, before NASA decided to reorganize, most commercial aerospace business had already reorganized for greater efficiency.(NASA, Additional Personnel Reductions Planned for Agency Headquarters, news release 96-76, 17 April 1996; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Speeds Up Downsizing, Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Mike Causey, NASA To Lighten Pay Load, Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Warren Ferster and Jennifer Heronema, NASA Cuts Headquarters Jobs Deeper, Faster, Space News, 2228 April 1996, 45.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hosted members of Congress and other government and aviation industry leaders at a ceremony marking the start of NASAs General Aviation Propulsion program. NASA launched the endeavor to encourage the development of technologies and manufacturing practices that would create more cost-effective and environmentally friendly aviation-propulsion systems. NASA selected as its partners William International and Teledyne Continental Motors, along with the Federal Aviation Administration and the Industry Advanced General Aviation Transport Experiments Consortium. Aviation leaders praised the collaboration as the beginning of a movement to revolutionize aircraft engines and, consequently, the aviation industry.(NASA, Signing Ceremony To Initiate Development of Revolutionary Aircraft Engines, news release N96-80, 10 December 1996.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had purchased most of the aerospace and defense holdings of its competitor Rockwell International Corporation. The US$3 billion deal restructured the two companies in drastically different ways, permitting Boeing to increase significantly its potential to win government aerospace contracts, while Rockwell International turned its attention to the lucrative commercial market in automation. Whereas Boeing solidified its established dominance in the commercial jetliner construction business, Rockwell left behind its signature industrythe company had been nearly synonymous with NASAs piloted space program. However, in the face of dwindling government contracts, Rockwell had been concentrating for years on developing its commercial product lines. Although the merger was not a surprise, the sale of the company responsible for engineering the Apollo spacecraft and the B-(NASA, NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown, HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, Federal Employees Face Backlog Here, Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
Endeavours crew successfully tested a giant inflatable antenna, deploying the structure and gathering data during its orbit. Project Manager Steven Bard, a NASA scientist at JPL, called the successful test a giant step toward developing lightweight, cost-effective equipment for space research. The silver, inflatable antenna, about the size of a tennis court, cost US$14 million to develop. The Shuttle astronauts used the Shuttles robotic arm to launch the small satellite carrying the antenna. The crew situated Endeavour about 400 feet (122 meters) immediately above the antenna, to observe its behavior after deployment, but when the antenna made some unexpected tumbling rotations, the astronauts moved the Shuttle to a safer distance. After completing the test, the astronauts set off a series of small explosions to cut loose the antenna. Before the mission began, NASA officials had determined that deflating and recapturing the antenna would be too risky and costly to attempt.(William Harwood, Inflatable Antenna Passes Test, Washington Post, 21 May 1996; Associated Press, Space Shuttle Deploys Giant Antenna, Washington Times, 21 May 1996.)
NASA officials announced that a funding crisis in Russia would delay the human occupation of the International Space Station (ISS) up to eight months. Before the announcement, NASA had learned that the financial problems of the Russian Space Agency had virtually halted Russias work on the orbiting laboratorys nerve center. Without Russias contribution to the station, the crew of the ISS would have nowhere to stay during the construction of the station in space. NASA officials remained hopeful that Russia would release funding for the project and keep its commitment to the effort. Nevertheless, NASA officials began revisiting contingency plans to address reductions in funding. Russian Space Agency officials planned to meet with their NASA counterparts to discuss the situation.(William Harwood, Funding Crisis To Delay Occupation of Space Station, Washington Post, 6 December 1996.)
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. OConnor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. OConnor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, OConnor had voiced some concerns about NASAs planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, OConnor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, OConnor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. OConnor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, OConnor To Leave NASA, news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns, Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
The U.S. Space Walk of Fame, based in Titusville, Florida, recognized with a two-day celebration the 20,000 men and women who worked on the Gemini space program. NASA had launched 10 Gemini missions between 1965 and 1966, each spacecraft carrying two astronauts. Many staff members and astronauts involved in the Gemini program went on to work on the Apollo Moon program. Gemini astronauts included Neil A. Armstrong, Jim Lovell, and Edwin E. Buzz Aldrin Jr. The event organizers celebrated the achievements of the Gemini missions, in addition to raising funds to establish a permanent monument to the Gemini program.(Marilyn Meyer, History-Making Gemini Team To Reunite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 June 1996.)
NASA appointed Samuel L. Venneri as Chief Technologist at NASA Headquarters, reporting directly to Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. The appointment placed Venneri in charge of all of NASAs technology policy initiatives and programs. Venneri had served at NASA since 1981, after working as an aerospace consultant for Swales and Associates and as an engineer for Fairchild Space Electronics.(NASA, Venneri Named NASA Chief Technology Officer, news release 96-240, 15 November 1996.)
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucids stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a glove box, allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component, Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
China announced it would participate in an international collaborative space research project for the first time in its history. Chinese scientists planned to assist their colleagues from Russia and the United States in the future Discovery mission. Although China had no plans to send an astronaut on the Shuttle, Chinese aerospace engineers volunteered to construct the sophisticated magnets needed to build a magnetic spectrometer. The project was the first time the usually secretive Chinese space science program had opened itself to outside scrutiny.(United Press International, China To Assist U.S. Space Program, 3 October 1996.)
The Galileo spacecraft lost some of its collected data when a problem with one of its computer processors caused a shutdown of nonessential systems. Project Manager William J. ONeil said that much of the lost data was of little consequence to researchers, but that data from Galileos continuous study of Jupiters magnetic field had suffered a significant loss, creating an information gap of about one week. The episode, which occurred in the midst of NASAs string of impressive research achievements, highlighted the difficulty of directing a data-gathering probe thousands of miles from Earths surface.(Kathy Sawyer, Spacecraft in Orbit Around Jupiter Loses Data, Washington Post, 27 August 1996; Associated Press, Computer Error on Spacecraft Exploring Jupiter, 28 August 1996. See also Michael Meltzer, Mission to Jupiter: A History of the Galileo Project (Washington, DC: NASA, 2007).)
NASA announced the retirement of Jay F. Honeycutt, Director of KSC. A search for Honeycutts successor began immediately following the announcement. Honeycutt had joined NASA in 1966 after working as an engineer for Redstone Arsenal. He had begun as an engineer in flight operations and had worked at JSC, later training Apollo astronauts for the lunar landings, and had moved to NASA Headquarters in 1981. Honeycutt had transferred to KSC in 1989 as Director of Shuttle Management and Operations and had become Director of KSC in 1995. Honeycutt had won two Exceptional Service Medals, the Special Achievement Award, NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal, NASAs Equal Employment Opportunity Award, and the Meritorious Executive Presidential Rank Award.(NASA, KSC Director Jay Honeycutt To Retire, news release 96-215, 22 October 1996.)
In Marshall Space Flight Centers (MSFCs) underwater weightless simulator, NASA began testing a remotely controlled robot created by a team of researchers from the University of Maryland. Team leaders nicknamed the robot Ranger, predicting that it would one day assist astronauts aboard the Shuttle or the ISS. Project Manager Joseph Parrish pointed out that astronauts often use valuable spacewalk time completing mundane tasks, such as collecting tools, establishing footholds, and cleaning up. Scientists hoped Ranger could perform such tasks under the command of an operator located in space or even that of an operator at NASAs command center. The 8-foot-long (2.4-meter-long), 1,700-pound (770-kilogram) robot used gas thrusters, robotic arms, lights, and cameras. The academic project filled a void in experimental robot design, a program affected by NASAs budget cuts. Allowing university researchers and professors to design and test the robot cost NASA about US$8 million, far less than NASA would pay for similar projects contracted through an aerospace firm. During the tests, the University of Marylands team operated Ranger remotely from its campus hundreds of miles away from MSFCs facility in Huntsville, Alabama.(Martin Burkey, Ranger Gets a Workout, Huntsville Times (AL), 13 September 1996.)
NASA released its blueprint for the future, the NASA Strategic Plan 1996. The plan laid out NASAs vision for the United States space exploration; noted its history; and discussed possible changes in strategy, committing NASA to a threefold mission: scientific research, space exploration, and development and transfer of technology. Furthermore, the plan outlined NASAs quest to address sciences fundamental questions, such as, how did the universe, galaxies, stars, and planets form and evolve? and, does life in any form, however simple or complex, carbon-based or other, exist elsewhere than on planet Earth? NASA intended the document as the starting point for future decisions regarding the allocation of its resources.(NASA, NASA Strategic Plan 1998, NASA policy directive (NPD)-1000.1, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/nsp/ NSPTOC.html (accessed 5 February 2008); NASA, NASA Releases Strategy for the Future, news release, 14 March 1996.)
Hurricane Fran delayed the launch of Shuttle Atlantis. NASA managers decided to move the Shuttle off the launchpad when it became clear that the hurricanes path lay through the southeast region of the United States. Because of the slow rollback of the vehicle from the launchpad to the assembly building, managers determined that they would not be able to meet the scheduled 14 September departure date.(NASA, Atlantis Moved to VAB; STS-79 Delayed, launch advisory 96-181, 4 September 1996.)
A malfunction in an unpiloted test plane forced NASA officials to detonate the plane high above Edwards Air Force Base in California. The lightweight plane, dubbed Theseus, veered out of control during a routine test flight. Aurora Flight Systems had developed the US$5 million plane for long-term flights to observe climatic conditions from altitudes as high as 60,000 feet (18,300 kilometers). A spokesperson for Aurora indicated that the company had insufficient data to determine the cause of the failure. NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Systems to develop the plane as part of its Mission to Planet Earth initiative. At the time of the forced detonation, NASA had not designated funds to develop any subsequent Theseus models.
Shuttle Columbia landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The mission, lasting nearly 17 days, set a new space endurance record for the crew. The astronauts had bested their previous record by nearly 7 hours. Columbia had carried into space a torch for the 1996 Olympic relay, and upon landing, two members of the crew joined the Olympic torch relay team in a special ceremony. The astronauts had overcome several small malfunctions to conduct the successful mission and land the Shuttle on time. Less than 2 hours before the Shuttles scheduled arrival, the crew had discovered a clogged cooling line, but the astronauts were able to flush ice from the system to clear the line. In addition, the mission brought to light a potential ongoing problem for Columbia. In studying the launch, NASA officials had observed gas and flames issuing from the rocket boosters, probably through the O- ring joints used to connect the boosters fuel segments. Although Columbias crew was not in danger, NASA officials decided that the Shuttle would not launch again until scientists had determined how well the new water-based adhesive would function under extreme heat. NASA had discontinued the adhesive used previously on the rocket boosters, because the adhesive was an ozone-depleting agent.(William Harwood, Record Shuttle Flight Ends; Problem May Delay Next Launch, Washington Post, 8 July 1996; Associated Press, Columbia Ends 17-Day Mission, 8 July 1996.)
NASA released Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images revealing much of the surface of Pluto for the first time. The Pluto imaging team declared the quality of the pictures better than they had expected. Hubble has brought Pluto from a fuzzy, distant dot of light, to a world which we can begin to map, and watch for surface changes, remarked Marc W. Buie, a member of the team. The HST took snapshots of nearly the entire surface of the planet during 6.4 days of its rotation. The pictures showed Plutos complexity, revealing nearly a dozen distinct provinces, and confirming the existence of a polar ice cap, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to verify. NASA officials were optimistic that the images would pave the way for a proposed Pluto flyby mission in the coming years. Pluto remained the only planet not yet visited by a spacecraft.(NASA, Hubble Reveals Surface of Pluto for First Time, news release 96-43, 7 March 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a determined visionary, President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by working together, laughing together, and having a good time together. Lucids husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, President Clintons Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid, 2 December 1996; Associated Press, Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut, 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, Congressional Space Medal of Honor, 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASAs budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former Presidents call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the faster, better, cheaper mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, White House Releasing New National Space Policy, Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, Space Policy, 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, Fact Sheet: National Space Policy, 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
The trend of commercializing space exploration continued, as Pepsi-Cola Company announced the companys plan to use Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station to record the first TV advertisement filmed in space. PepsiCo planned to record images of a giant replica of a Pepsi can in space. PepsiCos Chief Marketing Officer Massimo F. dAmore called space the ultimate frontier of global marketing. The Russian Space Agency expected to receive nearly US$5 million for the advertising stunt, providing a welcome infusion of cash for the struggling, postcommunist space program. In response to its competitors advertisement plans, the Coca- Cola Company furnished Endeavours Mission STS-77 with a soda dispenser equipped for use in space. The machine cost Coca-Cola Company US$1.5 million to develop.(Melanie Well, Pepsi, Coke Go into Orbit, USA Today, 22 May 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers funds on NASAs research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy. The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame, news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
George W. S. Abbey became the seventh Director of JSC in Houston, Texas. Abbey had been Acting Director since Carolyn Hunter had stepped down from the post on 4 August 1995. According to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, Abbeys distinguished NASA career made him the right man for the job. Administrator Goldin announced, George Abbey is uniquely qualified to lead the Johnson team into the future. Over the course of his eminent career with NASA, he has distinguished himself as an innovator and pioneer at all levels of Agency management. Abbey had begun working at NASA in 1967 after serving as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force. He had worked on the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming Director of Flight Operations. NASA had recognized Abbeys superior service by awarding him its Exceptional Service Medal and two Distinguished Service Medals.(NASA, Abbey Named Director of Johnson Space Center, news release 96-11, 23 January 1996. 3)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space ShuttleMir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttles three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
As Congress prepared to vote on NASAs budget, Thomas J. Shulz of the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) testified before a U.S. Senate committee that NASA would likely exceed its projected budget for constructing the International Space Station (ISS) and making it operational. NASA refuted the claim. GAOs report suggested that NASA had made unrealistic cost estimates and that its system to monitor costs and schedule was inadequate. The report also outlined GAOs concerns about Russias continued commitment to the ISS endeavor. Shulz testified that in a worst-case situation, these issues could threaten the future of the program, especially if they result in significantly higher cost estimates and substantial schedule delays. NASAs spokesperson on the issue Wilbur C. Trafton defended NASAs projected budget and its relationship with Russia. Trafton pointed out that Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had procured a new agreement during a July meeting in Russia, indicating the solidity of the partnership between the United States and Russia. GAOs critique occurred against the backdrop of the continuing quest during the mid-1990s to make NASA more cost effective.(William E. Clayton Jr., GAO Criticizes NASAs Estimate on Cost of Building Space Station, Houston Chronicle, 25 July 1996; Larry Wheeler, Report: NASA Budget Much Too Rosy, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 July 1996.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeremiah F. Creedon as Director of LARC. Creedon succeeded Paul F. Holloway, who had served for 36 years at LARC. With this appointment, Creedon moved up from his position as LARCs Director of the Airframe Systems Program Office to return to the research center where he had begun his engineering career 33 years earlier. During his career at NASA, Creedon had received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Executive in the Senior Executive Service, NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Presidential Rank of Distinguished Executive in Senior Executive Service.(NASA, Dr. Jeremiah Creedon Named Director, Langley Research Center, news release 96-152, 31 July 1996.)
Furloughed NASA employees returned to work at the end of a federal government shutdown of 14 to 21 days. NASA had allowed some critical employees to return before others. The government shutdown, resulting from a budget stalemate between the Republican Congress and the Democratic White House, forced NASA to cease operations and to clear thousands of its employees from field centers across the country. Upon resuming its normal proceedings, NASA faced a backlog of work because of the disruption. Workers returning to Houstons Johnson Space Center (JSC) were especially anxious to catch up, because the Center had only three days to prepare for a scheduled Shuttle launch. A snowstorm delayed for a few more hours the return of workers to Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown, HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, Federal Employees Face Backlog Here, Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
Receiving congratulations from the rest of the international space community, Russia celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the Russian space station Mir. The pathbreaking spacecraft had hosted a steady stream of astronauts for long-term stays in space throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, transcending many of the changes in the political structure of its home country. The Soviet space program had launched the first Mir module on 20 February 1986 from the desert of Kazakhstan, but because of Cold War tensions, the Soviets had not released specific information about the station as it entered orbit module by module. Rockets had transported the individual modules into space, where cosmonauts assembled them. The fully assembled space station weighed 130 tons (120,000 kilograms or 120 tonnes). As tensions between the United States and the former Soviet Union lessened, Shuttle missions to Mir had become frequent. During the 1990s, many countries, including the United States, had paid the fledgling Soviet space administration, which became the Russian Space Agency, hundreds of millions of dollars to send their astronauts to Mir. Thus, Mir had provided the USSR with a needed source of revenue. However, since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian space program had received only one-fifth of the government funding provided to the Soviet space program. In 1996, even with Mir in an advanced state of decline, Russian officials remained committed to preserving the aging crafts lifespan. Marcia S. Smith, an aerospace expert with the Congressional Research Service, described Mirs state as akin to a car that has 200,000 miles [320,000 kilometers] on it. Nevertheless, the space station had provided scientists with the only spacecraft in space consistently occupied by humans for a decade, a significant contribution that deserved commemoration.(European Space Agency, news release, 15 February 1996; Associated Press, Russia-Space, 20 February 1996; Associated Press, Russian Space Program Drifting Toward Disaster? 19 February 1996.)
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rockets ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Marss atmosphere. The probes failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a terrible, terrible tragedy for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, Russians Mars Probe Crashes, Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy, Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttles appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans, 21 October 1996.)
NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russias Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, Crew Named to Sixth ShuttleMir Docking Mission, news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldins efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldins mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers, HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston, 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, Goldins Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
NASA announced the selection of eight proposals for its newly inaugurated Advanced Concepts Research Projects (ACRP) program. NASA had received more than 100 proposals for the program, founded in September 1995 to identify and support new ideas and technologies that might eventually improve the U.S. space program. The ACRP program, allowing up to US$250,000 in support for each selected proposal, included proposals covering a wide spectrum of technologies and fields, such as: fusion-based space propulsion, optical computing, robotics, interplanetary navigation, materials and structure, ultra-lightweight large aperture optics, and innovative modular spacecraft architectural concepts.(NASA, Innovative Space Concepts Selected for Negotiations, news release 96-28, 12 February 1996.)
NASA completed the first step in its transition to using a single contractor to conduct all Shuttle operations, signing two novation agreements with the newly formed United Space Alliance (USA). NASA had announced in 1995 that it would consolidate its Shuttle operations under a single contract with USA, on a noncompetitive basis. When Rockwell International Corporation and Lockheed Martin Corporation developed USA as a joint venture, the two companies already held nearly 70 percent of the dollar value of all Shuttle-related contracts. NASA officials expected that the move to a single contract would reduce costs by eliminating duplicative work and streamlining management.(NASA, Shuttle Contracts Take First Step Toward Consolidation, news release 96-73, 12 April 1996.)
Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, Russian Cosmonauts, 24 June 1996; Associated Press, Moscow, 21 June 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station, news release, 21 May 1996.)
G. Porter Bridwell retired after nearly 40 years of service at MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Bridwell had served as Director of MSFC from 1994 until his retirement. He left the Center with an annual operating budget of US$2.5 billion and more than 3,000 employees. Bridwell had spent most of his career at MSFC, serving briefly as Acting Director of Stennis Space Center in 1987, and at NASA Headquarters from 1993 to 1994. Bridwell had also been a member of the space station redesign team. During his tenure, Bridwell had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal, the Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Exceptional Achievement Medal, attaining the rank of Meritorious Executive.3 NASA announced that J. Wayne Littles would take over as the new Director of MSFC.(NASA, Littles Named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, news release 96-3, 16 January 1996. 1)
NASA announced that the tethered satellite experiment had failed. The 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, attaching the 0.5-ton (450-kilogram or 0.45-tonne) satellite to Shuttle Columbia, broke unexpectedly just as the tether had nearly reached its full extension. Before the tether broke, the experiment to use an orbiting satellite to produce electricity had been proceeding smoothly. The astronauts had been in the process of extending the satellite from the Space Shuttle for more than 5 hours, when they noted a decrease in tension and realized that the tether and satellite had broken away. NASA Commander Andrew M. Allen responded to the break immediately, directing the Shuttle away from the satellite to prevent a collision. However, the satellite never came close to the Shuttle; it was more than 18 miles (29 kilometers) away only a few minutes after breaking free. NASA officials could not immediately identify the cause of the break. The astronauts aboard the Shuttle managed to record images of the satellite trailing away from the Shuttle. This footage, a black and white rendering of the tether disappearing into space, reached Flight Command Center in Houston, Texas, shortly after the event. Those are some tether dynamics we did not want to see, stated one Mission Control operative. NASA dismissed the idea of attempting to retrieve the satellite, explaining that, although it was technically possible, such a mission would be too dangerous and too costly in consumption of fuel.(NASA, STS-75 Mission Control Status Report No. 10, 26 February 1996; Steve Marshall, Satellite Tether Snaps; Shuttle Safe, USA Today, 26 February 1996; William Harwood, Science Satellite Is Lost as Shuttle Tether Breaks, Washington Post, 26 February 1996.)
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucids return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttles reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rockets three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, Astronauts Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks, New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying Frances first female astronaut, Claudie Andre-Deshays. Andre-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of Andre-Deshays at Mir, the head of Frances space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew, Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station, 19 August 1996; Associated Press, Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says, 19 August 1996.)
NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russias withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd. Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation. The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew, 18 November 1996.)
NASA selected astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence to replace Charles J. Precourt as Director of Operations, Russia, making Lawrence the primary contact between NASA and Russian Space Agency officials. As Director of Operations, Russia, Lawrence became responsible for overseeing the training and preparation of U.S. astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia, outside of Moscow. Lawrence was the sixth astronaut to serve in this position.(NASA, Lawrence To Replace Precourt as NASA Manager in Russia, news release 96-49, 13 March 1996.)
NASAs Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panels findings against NASAs risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chretien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, Panels Give Astronaut a Go for Launch to Mir, news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission, news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off, USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir, 26 September 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin addressed the Experimental Aircraft Association fly-in convention, outlining NASAs vision to revitalize general aviation. Goldin boldly predicted that the U.S. aviation industry would be able to deliver 10,000 aircraft annually within 10 years, and 20,000 annually within 20 years. The fly-in convention, featuring flyovers by NASAs SR- 71, had the theme, Boomers Turn 50, celebrating both the 50th anniversary of the U.S. Air Force and that of the first breaking of the sound barrier. The Association announced the winner of the National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), a competition encouraging university engineering students to focus on the aviation industry. The conference also featured the unveiling of the new FAA flight- training curricula, as well as a national aviation safety initiative.(NASA, NASA To Showcase New Activities at Upcoming Aircraft Fly-In Convention, news release N97-51, 25 July 1997.)
During the terminal countdown of a demonstration test of the Titan IV-B rocket designed for the Cassini mission to Saturn, engineers noticed liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen leaking from the Centaur stage of the rocket. NASA had scheduled Cassinis launch for early October 1997. NASA officials delayed the launch until they could complete further tests, offering no immediate estimate of how long that might take. Interested scientists and engineers, however, predicted that the problem could postpone the mission by months or even years. Under the missions original timetable, NASA had expected Cassini to launch in October 1997, reaching Saturn in July 2004. Because of the length of the journey from Earth to Saturn, the scientific community expected that NASA would find it difficult to reschedule the flight. Moreover, experts warned that the alignment of planets providing an ideal launch date, such as that in October 1997, would not occur again for 12 to 14 years. At US$3.2 billion, Cassini was one of the last of NASAs high- stake, multibillion-dollar missions, drawing considerable attention during the climate of steady cost reductions that characterized the 1990s.(NASA, Countdown Test Reveals Fuel Leaks on Cassini Mission Centaur Upper Stage, 7 August 1997; Associated Press, Rocket Leak Could Postpone Landing on Saturn by Years, 8 August 1997.)
NASA announced the selection of four industry partners to study and develop a new Earth- imaging radar system. The proposed LightSAR system would use advanced technologies to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of radar-based satellites, which gather scientific data and provide commercial remote sensing. Project Manager Steven Bard of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pointed out the unique team approach planned for the project. NASA intended to work with industry partners from the start, to assess the potential commercial market for LightSAR products and services and to share the cost of developing the expensive new technology with private companies. The four primary contractors selected were DBA Systems Inc., Lockheed Martin Astronautics, Research and Development Laboratories, and Vexcel Corporation.(NASA, Teams Selected for Studies of Potential Partnership with NASA To Develop New Earth Imaging Radar System, news release 97-35, 6 March 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. I dont think the increased risk is worth the benefit, Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mirs safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASAs ShuttleMir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenners comments, I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself. The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldnt Board Mir, 19 September 1997.)
A group of astronomers announced that they had used NASAs Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer to observe a black hole literally dragging space and time around itself as it rotates. The discovery confirmed the existence of frame dragging, an extrapolation of Albert Einsteins general theory of relativity. According to the findings, the black hole had such a massive gravitational field that nothing nearby, not even light, could escape its pull. To make the discovery, the team of researchers brought together academic scientists from Italy and the United States, as well as NASA personnel. By studying x-ray emissions, the astronomers were able to find a pattern of forces that clearly revealed the strength of the black holes gravitational pull. Alan N. Bunner, Director of the Structure and Evolution of the Universe Program at NASA Headquarters, called the discovery exciting work, encouraging scientists to test the findings. Before the discovery, frame dragging persisted as one of the last unverifiable theories of relativity, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to observe. Popular press reports touted the breakthrough as another victory for Einstein.(NASA, First Observation of Space-Time Distortion by Black Holes, news release 97-258, 6 November 1997; K.C. Cole, Finding Backs Einsteins Theory of Gravity, Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997; Kathy Sawyer, Score Another One for Einstein, Washington Post, 7 November 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Rodney E. Slater, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin joined in leading an aviation safety event at Dulles International Airport in Virginia. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had invited media representatives and interested spectators to the event, to observe demonstrations of the new technologies that the agencies had developed to improve the safety of flying aboard commercial, private, and government aircraft. NASA made available one of its Boeing B-757 research aircraft, providing hands-on demonstrations of the new techniques and technologies produced by NASAs and the FAAs Task Force on Aviation Safety.(NASA, Vice President To Showcase Aviation Safety Technologies Developed by NASA and FAA, news release N97-47, 14 July 1997.)
NASA announced the retirement of Wilbur C. Trafton, who had guided NASAs International Space Station (ISS) planning for nearly four years. Trafton resigned from his position as Director of the Space Station Program one week after a contentious hearing, in which NASA officials informed Congress that cost overruns on the ISS had reached nearly US$1 billion. However, at Traftons departure, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised him, stating, Will Trafton has met or exceeded all of the challenges I have placed before him. During Traftons tenure, Russia had officially joined the ISS effort as a full partner, and the ISS had moved from planning stage to construction.(NASA Trafton Announces His Departure from NASA, news release 97-264, 13 November 1997; Orlando Sentinel (FL), NASAs Space Station Chief Resigns, Washington Post, 14 November 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Columbia, consulting with NASA ground support, decided to cut short their planned 16-day mission because of the potential for an explosion in the Shuttles electronic generator. NASA decided to abort the mission after the crew had attempted for two days to fix the balky generator. Despite the fact that the Shuttles two other generators could provide enough power for the Shuttle, NASAs procedure required the Shuttles return, to prevent subsequent problems. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway clarified that the astronauts faced no imminent danger and that terminating the mission was a precaution rather than an emergency. The conservative thing to do is land on Tuesday, Holloway said at a news conference. Columbias early return to Earth in Mission STS-83 was only the third time in the history of the Shuttle program that NASA had ended a mission early. The astronauts had time to complete only a few of the planned 33 experiments on the mission, which cost nearly US$500 million.(William Harwood, Shuttle Flight Cut Short as Risk Persists, Washington Post, 7 April 1997; Warren Leary, Power Problem on Shuttle Forces a Tuesday Landing, New York Times, 7 April 1997; Associated Press, Deteriorating Generator Cuts Short Mission, 6 April 1997.)
After a four-month mission, NASA officials announced that Mission Control had halted communications with Mars Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner. Sojourners batteries were nearly drained, and many of the rovers instruments had frozen in Marss harsh climate. Mission controllers expected the rover simply to come to a halt on Marss vast plains, ceasing signal transmissions altogether. Nevertheless, NASA considered the US$266 million mission largely successful. The mission had lasted much longer than planned, transmitting, from the surface of the Red Planet to Earth, nearly 10,000 pictures of the Martian landscape, including images showing evidence of erosion, as well as more than 1.2 billion bits of data. Sojourners remarkable service, even in the midst of harsh dust storms and temperatures reaching
NASA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and the Federal Aviation Administration signed a joint memorandum of agreement providing guidelines for commercial spaceports. The agreement was the culmination of a long debate over how the federal government could encourage private companies and state governments to use available federal launch sites. The White House Office of Science and Technology initiative had proposed the agreement, which sought to limit the regulatory steps a private company would have to take to become a launch-site operator. The measure continued the federal governments trend of encouraging private industry to explore space.(NASA, NASA, DOD, and FAA Sign Joint Agreement on Spaceports Launch Guidance, news release 97-194, 11 September 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, less than three days after its liftoff. The mission, planned for 16 days, ended early, and the Shuttle completed the return flight without incident. Columbia weighed more than 236,000 pounds (107,000 kilograms) at landing, the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, because of its load of unused supplies for experiments. Almost immediately after the safe landing, NASA officials began to consider repeating the flight as soon as possible, to allow the Shuttle crew to accomplish its original objectives and to avoid the substantial cost of launching an entirely new mission.(William Harwood, Columbia Lands After Aborted Mission, Washington Post, 9 April 1997. 66)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Roy D. Bridges Jr., retired U.S. Air Force Major General and Shuttle astronaut, as Director of KSC. Goldin called Bridges the right person to take KSC into the next century. As Director of KSC, Bridges assumed responsibility for the only site for launches of the Shuttle. At the time of Bridgess appointment, about 2,000 employees worked at KSC, along with 14,000 contractors. Bridgess appointment followed years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Air Force and NASA. Graduating with distinction from the U.S. Air Force Academy, he had served in several leadership positions in the Air Force and had received recognition as a distinguished graduate of the U.S. Air Force Pilot Training and Test Pilot Schools. Among other awards, he had received the Distinguished Service Medal, the Defense Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, the Legion of Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, the Meritorious Service Medal, the U.S. Air Force Commendation Medal, and NASAs Flight Space Medal.(NASA, Roy Bridges Selected as KSCs New Center Director, news release 97-17, 24 January 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a once-in-a-career opportunity for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94, news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission, Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April, New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission, 1 July 1997.)
The U.S. Capitols Statuary Hall installed a bronze statue of Apollo 13 astronaut John L. Swigert Jr., a native of Denver, to represent the state of Colorado. Each state chooses two statues for the hall to honor its most prominent citizens. Swigert was, perhaps, most famous for uttering the words, Houston, weve had a problem. Colorado had elected Swigert to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982, but he had died of cancer before his swearing-in. Swigerts statue took its place alongside that of fellow Coloradoan Florence Rena Sabin, who led the crusade for womens admission to medical schools. Astronaut Thomas Kenneth Mattingly II, whom Swigert replaced only three days before the Apollo 13 launch, attended the statue dedication, along with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and other dignitaries.(Paul Leavitt, New Statue, USA Today, 23 May 1997; Associated Press, Newest Congressional Statue: Apollo 13 Astronaut John Swigert, 22 May 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the crafts hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the stations safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenners suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel, New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station, Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past, 25; David Hoffman, U.S. Questions on Mirs Safety Anger Russia, Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky, USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
After altering the spacecrafts path to move it farther away from Marss violent winds, NASA launched Mars Global Surveyor from its safe elliptical orbit of the Red Planet, sending the spacecraft into the planets harsh atmosphere. NASA officials indicated that, because of the change in flight plans, Mars Global Surveyor would begin its mapping mission of Mars in 1999, one year later than originally planned. The change of plan highlighted both the difficulty of exploring Mars and NASAs ability to adapt to difficult conditions. When Marss atmosphere had proven more hostile than previously anticipated, mission controllers had proven able to readjust Surveyors orbit. In effect, the move had placed Surveyor in a holding pattern, keeping it from harm. Once conditions had improved, however, NASA would not be able simply to proceed as planned. Because Surveyor ran on solar power, the mission planners must wait for Mars and the Sun to realign, to provide energy for the craft. However, although NASA would have to postpone the mission for one year, the delay would provide an added benefit, allowing NASAs researchers to set Surveyor on a circular orbit that would actually bring Surveyor closer to the planet than originally projected.(John Noble Wilford, Mars Map Will Come a Year Late, New York Times, 11 November 1997; Mark Carreau, Mars Map Still on Tap, Houston Chronicle, 11 November 1997; A. J. Hostetler, Surveyor Has New Course, Times-Dispatch (Richmond, VA), 13 November 1997.)
The White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security, chaired by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., released its recommendations for reforming the United States aviation industry. The Commission challenged NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and the U.S. Department of Defense to combine their efforts, with the goal of reducing aircraft accident rates by 80 percent over the next five years. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin voiced immediate support for the challenge, explaining, Were looking for solutions that will save lives. He pledged NASAs commitment to interagency cooperation and committed US$500 million in NASA funds, to achieve a major reduction in aircraft-related fatalities. Both NASA and the FAA cited previous successful collaboration efforts between their agencies. The Gore Commissions most controversial recommendation was the use of computerized databases to identify potential terrorists. Critics quickly called the plan an exercise in profiling, which would foster biased treatment, especially toward Arab Americans and passengers with Arab- sounding names. Other safety proposals included requiring children under the age of two to sit in their own seats, rather than on the lap of an adult, as the airlines had long permitted. The Commission further suggested that user fees, rather than ticket taxes, fund air-traffic control; that airports deploy a new satellite-based, air-traffic-control system, as soon as possible; and that airports make all airmail packages weighing more than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) subject to inspection. In total, the Commission recommended 53 changes to the current system.(NASA, NASA, FAA, and DOD Challenged To Achieve White House Commission Goal To Reduce Aircraft Accidents, news release 97-26, 12 February 1997; John Mintz, Gore Panel Proposes Aviation Safety Steps, Washington Post, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, FAA Ready To Depart on Clear Path of Action, USA Today, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, 53 Air Safety Changes Urged, USA Today, 13 February 1997.)
NASA Administer Daniel S. Goldin praised the Clinton administrations budget proposal for 1998 as a sign that NASAs deep budget cuts were leveling off. NASA had braced itself for a budget as low as US$13.1 billion, and, therefore, found President William J. Clintons US$13.5 billion proposal a pleasant surprise. The request still entailed a US$200 million budget cut, and Congress might reduce the budget further. Nevertheless, Goldin responded to the proposed budget exuberantly, exclaiming, Holy mackerelthis is a great program, and remarking that for the first time during his five-year tenure, NASA could hope for budgetary stability. The proposal also projected that NASAs budget in 2000 would be approximately US$13.2 billion, rather than the US$11.6 billion forecast in previous Clinton administration proposals. NASA planned to absorb the small reduction in funding by increasing efficiency, especially in the Shuttle program, having recently transferred management of the program to the privately held United Space Alliance. NASA officials believed that NASA could continue sending up seven or eight Shuttle missions annually, if budget trends continued to stabilize. On the day of the budget announcement, however, a NASA advisory panel warned once again that a drastic decrease in the Shuttles funding would compromise its safety. Nevertheless, Goldin maintained that the proposal would allow NASA to continue fostering faster, better, cheaper science.(Anne Eisele, Budget Plan Brings Stability by 2000, Space News, 1016 February 1997; Larry Wheeler, NASA Makes Do on Slimmer Budget, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1997; Sean Holton, NASA Cheers Budget that Cuts Agency Only a Bit, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, we dont need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. Its called the International Space Station. GAOs report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, Space Station, 11 June 1997.)
At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue. NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASAs announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, I told you so. Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved 15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers, keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module, New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day, 11 April 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. began talks with officials in Russia, focused primarily on the International Space Station (ISS), economic cooperation, and controlling nuclear proliferation. The talks occurred in the context of a torrent of problems aboard Russias Mir space station and in Russias failures to meet its commitments to help build the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin traveled with the Vice President to participate in the space-related discussions.(Reuters, Al Gore in Moscow for Talks on Space, Energy, 21 September 1997; Associated Press, Gore Calls for Reforms To Boost Investment in Russia, 22 September 1997.)
Cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov and Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski made a 5-hour spacewalk outside Mir to test jetpack systems and to retrieve experiments for return to Earth. The two men, who left Atlantis while the Shuttle remained docked with Mir, became the first Russian-American team ever to conduct a spacewalk from a NASA Shuttle. The joint spacewalk was also the first in which Mir crew members used NASA spacesuits rather than those provided by the Russian Space Agency. On this busy day of operations, two of the Russian crew also successfully installed a new guidance computer, which Atlantis had transported to the station.(Robyn Suriano, Spacewalk, USA Today, 1 October 1997; Mark Carreau, Atlantis, Mir Crews Prepare for Spacewalk, Computer Task, Houston Chronicle, 1 October 1997.)
U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN) sent a harshly worded letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, decrying NASAs chronic cost overruns and promising investigative hearings before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Although McCain and Frist both expressed support for NASA, and for space exploration in general, they wrote that continual, unabated overruns undermine the public faith in the space program.(Sean Holton, Senators Blast NASA for Program Overruns, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1997.)
The Russian Soyuz spacecraft lifted off from Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov on a mission to repair the disabled Mir space station. Russian space officials tasked the two men with restoring power to Mir after the 25 June collision with a cargo craft cut by half the orbiting research centers energy. Regarding the importance of the mission, some observers of Russian space activity went so far as to say that the countrys piloted space program depended on Solovyev and Vinogradovs success.(Associated Press, 2 Russians Blast Off on Mir Repair Mission, 6 August 1997.)
NASA announced that it would join an international consortium of space agencies to support the launch of a Japanese satellite designed to create the largest astronomical instrument ever. The launch of the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) Space Observatory would create a radio telescope more than twice the diameter of the Earth, giving astronomers their sharpest view yet of the universe. Astronomers praised the Japanese-led launch as a significant advance for space research. VLBI satellites would allow radio astronomers to link together widely separated radio telescopes, so that they would function as a single instrument with extraordinarily sharp resolving power. The farther apart the telescopes, the greater would be the images resolution. NASA equated the power of the new tool with the ability to see a grain of rice in Tokyo from Los Angeles. Scientists hoped that the new tool would allow for further exploration of active galaxies with massive black holes. Researchers also hoped that the instrument would foster understanding of the mysterious quasars, which pour out tremendous amounts of energy and host or create black holes. Creating the enormous VLBI network involved 40 radio telescopes from 15 nations. Japans Institute of Space and Astronautical Science led the international consortium of science agencies, including NASAs JPL, the U.S. National Science Foundations National Radio Astronomy Observatory, the Canadian Space Agency, the Australia Telescope National Facility, the European VLBI Network, and Europes Joint Institute for VLBI.(NASA, Launch Will Create a Radio Telescope Larger than Earth, news release 97-24, 7 February 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 25.)
Jurgen H. Rahe, NASAs Science Program Director for Exploration of the Solar System, died when a tree collapsed on the car he was driving during a severe storm in Maryland. Rahe, 57 years old, had enjoyed a distinguished career in the field of astronomy and at NASA. At the time of his death, he was responsible for overseeing visionary NASA programs, such as the Galileo Mission to Jupiter and the much-anticipated July 1997 landing of Mars Pathfinder. Rahe had guided NASAs efforts to make more frequent and cost-effective exploratory missions of the solar system. According to one colleague, Rahe had presided over the planetary exploration programs unparalleled period of major discoveries. Before his tenure at NASA, Rahe held tenured positions at California Institute of Technology and Germanys University of Erlangen- Nuremberg.(Associated Press, Obituary: Jurgen Rahe, 57, NASA Official, 20 June 1997; NASA, NASA Mourns Dr. Jurgen H. Rahe, Solar System Exploration Science Program Director, news release 97-137, 19 June 1997.)
Two members of Columbias crew, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott and Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, conducted a spacewalk, successfully recapturing the unresponsive Spartan satellite released on 21 November. After the 3,000-pound (1,400-kilogram) satellite had failed to turn toward the Sun, Columbias robotic arm had bumped it away from the Shuttle. NASA officials had cancelled the missions originally planned spacewalk to rescue the US$10 million spacecraft. Astronauts Scott and Doi later received a telephone call from President William J. Clinton congratulating them on grabbing the satellite.(William Harwood, Satellite Designed To Study Sun Fails, Washington Post, 22 November 1997; Associated Press, Columbia Crew Prepares Plan To Recover Spinning Satellite, 24 November 1997; William Harwood, Space Walkers Grab Satellite, Wrestle It Back onto Shuttle, 25 November 1997; Reuters, Spacewalking Astronauts Grab Errant Satellite, 25 November 1997; Associated Press, Clinton Calls Shuttle Crew with Thanks, 28 November 1997.)
Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger surprised onlookers at KSC when he bounded off Shuttle Atlantis only minutes after its landing. Physicians credited Linengers excellent condition after spending more than four months aboard the Mir space station to his regimen of orbital exercise. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was on hand to greet Linenger and the other astronauts returning home on Atlantis. The Shuttles safe landing returned Linenger to Earth after 132 days in spacethe second longest stint by an American.(Los Angeles Times, Returning Astronaut Surprises Even Himself; Shuttle: Four Months on Mir Sap Less Strength than Traveler Jerry Linenger Expected. He Credits the Exercising He Did in Orbit, 25 May 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his cardiovascular system. The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt irregularities while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyevs test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyevs place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mirs exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mirs challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, Latest Mir Trouble: Commanders Heart, USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task, New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities, 14 July 1997; Reuters, Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem, 14 July 1997; Associated Press, Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut, 15 July 1997; Reuters, NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale, 17 July 1997; New York Times, A Rescue Assignment for NASA, editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs, 19 July 1997.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task forces findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the projects cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrows report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his teams figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russias participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner chastised the Clinton administration, remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected the low priority the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, Space Plans Costs Increase amid Delays, New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
At the 13th annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented five aerospace companies with the 1998 George M. Low Award, NASAs highest quality and excellence award for contractors and subcontractors. The companies, representing both large and small businesses, were ILC Dover Inc. of Frederica, Delaware; Allied Signal Technical Services Corporation of Lanham, Maryland; DynCorp, Johnson Support Division of Houston, Texas; BST Systems Inc. of Plainfield, Connecticut; and Advanced Technology Company of Pasadena, California. Administrator Goldin said, these companies exemplify excellence and outstanding achievements that prove beneficial to NASA and the [n]ations industry. Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory added, each of these companies has definitely made a positive impact on NASAs performance goals.(NASA, NASA Awards Five Firms the George M. Low Award, news release 98-74, 1 May 1998.)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASAs new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency, and part to the fact that NASAs primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.
Kenneth J. Szalai ended his 34-year NASA career to join IBP Aerospace Group Inc. as the companys president and chief operating officer. In his last position at NASA, Szalai was Director of Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Szalai had directed DFRC since December 1990. Before becoming the Centers director, Szalai had been head of the research engineering division at DFRC for eight years. NASA had awarded Szalai, an internationally recognized expert on flight control and flight systems, the Exceptional Service Medal in recognition of his work on the first Digital Fly-by-Wire aircraft. He had also received NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal during his NASA tenure. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Kevin L. Petersen Acting Director of DFRC, effective 1 August.(Jim Skeen, Dryden Director To Leave NASA for Private Sector, Los Angeles Daily News, 11 July 1998.)
On NASAs 40th anniversary, President of the Space Frontier Foundation Richard N. Tumlinson and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about space exploration and the possibility of privatizing space ventures. Tumlinsons organization advocated limiting NASAs role to supporting technology and research programs. He proposed commercializing the Shuttle fleet and privatizing NASA field centers, to reduce the costs of space exploration and eventual colonization. Goldin advocated reducing costs as well, but did not respond to Tumlinsons proposals. He also outlined new technologies that NASA was developing, to cut the cost of rockets and satellites. Goldin remarked that NASA would form partnerships with industry for cutting-edge research development, also emphasizing NASAs support of government loans to fuel the growth of the space industry in the United States.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, UPI Science News, 2 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, NASA Urged To Sell Shuttles, 1 October 1998.)
At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASAs purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russias failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASAs proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, NASA Defends Space Station Plans, 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, NASA Chief Concedes Space Station DelaysHas Contingency Plans If Russia Cant Do Its Part, San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
Michael I. Mott, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Technical), one of NASAs top three managers, announced his decision to leave NASA to join Boeing Space Transportation in Seal Beach, California, as Vice President of Business Development. Mott had served as NASA Associate Deputy Administrator since January 1994.(NASA, Michael I. Mott To Leave NASA, news release 98-99, 8 June 1998.)
Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planets polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyors data; the Arizona researchers believed that a concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes. The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, Mars Discovery, 28 May 1998; Washington Times, Minerals Suggest Life in Mars Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers, 28 May 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer. As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program, 26 March 1998.)
The U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee responsible for allocating funding for the space program voted on a US$13.3 billion budget for NASA, US$138 million less than President William J. Clinton had requested and US$300 million less than the U.S. Senate subcommittee had approved. Subcommittee Chairperson Jerry Lewis (R-CA) stated that the House had reduced the budget allocation because NASA planned to fly fewer Shuttle missions in the next fiscal years and because of the delays in assembling the ISS. Unlike the Senate, the House did not vote to monitor the budget of the program by creating a separate account for space station funding.(Brett Davis, House Panel Approves $300 Million Less for NASA Budget than Senate Panel, Huntsville Times (AL), 19 June 1998.)
NASA announced it had renamed the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility the Chandra X-ray Observatory, in honor of the late Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. NASA chose the name Chandra because it was the late scientists preferred name among friends and colleagues, and because it means moon or luminous in Sanskrit. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented that Chandrasekhar had made fundamental contributions to the theory of black holes and other phenomena, which the Chandra X-ray Observatory would study. NASA also announced that it had set a new launch date for the observatoryno earlier than 8 April 1999.(NASA, NASA Renames Telescope and Sets New Launch Date, news release 98-225, 21 December 1998. 644 Bill Scanlon, CSU Will Lead NASA Cloud Study $145 Million Project Is Designed To Improve Weather Forecasts, Study Global Warming, Rocky Mountain News (Denver), 30 December 1998.)
Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon. A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepards spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard, news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74, news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard, government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, Shepards Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age, USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: Pioneers Pioneer also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon, Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Arthur G. Stephenson, President of Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, as the new Director of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. MSFCs previous director had retired in January, and at that time, NASA had appointed MSFCs Deputy Director Carolyn S. Griner as Acting Director of the Center. Before his tenure at Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, Stephenson had worked 28 years for TRW Inc. of California. His last position was as Director of TRW Inc.s Space Transportation and Servicing Advanced Programs. During his 34-year career, Stephenson had worked on various projects related to MSFC, including the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, during the 1970s and 1980s; the Gamma Ray Observatory; automated rendezvous and docking; and the space-welding inspection, extravehicular-activity tool. He had also directed the International Space Station (ISS) robotic-system engineering support to the Boeing Company.(NASA, Arthur Stephenson Named To Head Marshall Space Flight Center, revised news release 98-163a, 11 September 1998; Space News, Marshall Gets Director After Eight-Month Wait, 1420 September 1998.)
During a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin directed MSFC officials to draw up a new plan for meeting the goals of the Bantam Program. The programs original goal had been to develop, by 2001, a rocket capable of launching 150-kilogram or 0.15-tonne (331-pound or 0.2-ton) payloads, at a cost of no more than US$1.5 million. None of the rockets developed with NASA funding would have met that cost target. Bantam Program Manager Sherry Buschmann reiterated NASAs commitment to achieving a capability to launch small payloads frequently at an affordable cost, saying that the plan would meet a legitimate need within the science community.(Warren Ferster, NASA Shifts Gears on Low-Cost Launcher: Goldin Renews Commitment to Bantam Goals, Space News, 814 June 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space, New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth, 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, Russias Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth, 25 August 1998.)
Wesley T. Huntress Jr. announced that he would resign from NASA in the near future. As NASAs Associate Administrator for Space Science, Huntress had been responsible for programs in astrophysics, planetary exploration, and space physics. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin credited him with the revitalization of NASAs Space Science Enterprise, in particular, with overseeing critical components of the program such as the HST and Mars Pathfinder. Huntress had joined NASAs JPL in the 1960s, a research scientist specializing in ion chemistry and planetary atmospheres, and NASA had appointed Huntress to head the Office of Space Science in March 1993. In his retirement announcement, Huntress stated, I have served in this position for more than five years now and it is simply time to move on.(NASA, Huntress Announces His Departure from NASA, news release 98-31, 18 February 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttles mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The days temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the hottest launch day anyone could remember. The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the ShuttleMir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2, news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final ShuttleMir Docking, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, Cosmonauts Fix Mirs Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed, 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Discovery Soars on NASAs Last Voyage to Mir, 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission, 1 June 1998.)
NASA officials at Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, announced the new five- year collaborative program of LERC and Case Western Reserve University. The programs name, the Glennan Microsystems Initiative, honored the late T. Keith Glennan, the first NASA Administrator, who had served from 1958 to 1961. Glennan was also President Emeritus of Case Institute of Technology, forerunner of Case Western Reserve University. Backed with US$16 million in federal funds and US$4.5 million in state funds, the initiative planned to develop and apply the technology known as microelectricomechanical systems for industry and for NASA. LERC planned to develop systems for use a decade into the future, including power systems for the next space station.(Jennifer Arend, Lewis Research Launches Effort To Develop Technology, Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 20 June 1998.)
The Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, an independent task force convened at the request of NASA and charged with analyzing the cost and schedule of constructing and maintaining the ISS, released its official report. The task force concluded that program size, complexity, and ambitious schedule goals were beyond that which could be reasonably achieved within the [US]$2.1 billion annual cap or [US]$17.4 billion total cap. The task force concluded that the International Space Station will be delayed by up to three years and cost as much as [US]$250 million more per year relative to the FY 1999 budget submission, recommending that NASA revise the current [s]tation plan so that it is achievable with the funds available. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who had appointed Jay Chabrow to lead the task force, told members of the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies that he would not accept the task forces conclusions, because he had not yet fully reviewed the report. Goldin told the panel that everyone involved in the space station program was very concerned about cost overruns and schedule slips, but that if Congress imposed a cap on ISS funding, it could affect the schedule significantly, delaying the project up to two years. Goldin warned, such a funding shortfall would hurt relations with the international partners. The report also placed much of the blame for the budget and schedule issues on Russia. In 1993 the Clinton administration and top officials at NASA had advised Congress that, were Russia not involved in the project, NASA would save an estimated [US]$2 billion, expand the stations capabilities and enable the research station to be completed sooner. However, the task forces report concluded that those assumptions were faulty.(NASA Advisory Council, Report on the Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force on the International Space Station, 21 April 1998, http://history.nasa.gov/32999.pdf (accessed 24 September 2007); Larry Wheeler, Russias Role in Station Has Project over Budget, Behind Schedule, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 April 1998; Aerospace Daily, Goldin Not Sold on Report Finding Space Station Overruns, 24 April 1998.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, Station Cost Overrun.)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced the winners of the 1998 National General Aviation Design Competition, in which undergraduate and graduate students, enrolled at U.S. engineering schools participating in a major national effort to rebuild the U.S. general aviation sector, compete individually or as teams. A 27-member undergraduate team from Virginia Polytechnic Institute won first place for its design, called VicTor, a single-engine, four- seat, high-performance aircraft. VicTors special design elements included an ergonomic cockpit with adjustable, side-control sticks and dual airbags; a choice between two high-performance engines; and advanced technology instrument displays. The design also included an upgrade option, to allow autonomous flight if it becomes a reality. A 15-member, Pennsylvania State University team won second place for their high-performance, two-person, single-engine, composite-fuselage, tractor-prop light airplane. Third place went to 13 undergraduate students from the University of Virginia for their computer program predicting drag in the design of new small passenger airplanes.(NASA, NASA and FAA Announce Design Competition Winners, news release 98-140, 1 August 1998.)
A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs, 22 January 1998.)
NASAs Inventions and Contributions Board announced the winners of its 1998 Software of the Year Award. The first winner, Tempest, a breakthrough technology originally developed to support the science experiments on the ISS, had spawned new markets, and NASA predicted that the technology would continue to do so. NASAs Ames Research Center had designed the second winner, Center TRACON Automation System Software, a set of three software tools for managing air-trafficcontrol systems at major airports, to optimize flight operations. Analyzing and predicting aircraft paths, the software created visual representations of arriving traffic flow, providing controllers with up-to-the-second advisories of information for pilots, thus reducing time between landings to a minimum. The Federal Aviation Administration had chosen the software for immediate implementation at all major airports.(NASA, Space Flight, Aviation Programs Receive NASA Software Award, news release 98-124, 15 July 1998. 543 NASA, New NASA Facility Will Complete Worldwide Communications Coverage, news release 98-122, 13 July 1998.)
James B. Willet, a nuclear astrophysicist who had worked for NASA, died of cancer at his Maryland home. Willet had worked for 20 years on the scientific staff of NASAs JPL in Pasadena, California, and for three years as JPLs liaison to NASA Headquarters before joining the Space Research Association in 1993. At JPL, Willet had acted as a science coordinator and team chief for the Galileo Mission. Galileo was orbiting Jupiter at the time of his death. Willet was also a field operations team leader for the Mars balloon-testing program and had conducted research in gamma-ray astronomy. Willets duties as liaison officer involved him in the Voyager, Ulysses, and Pioneer programs.(Buffalo News (NY), James B. Willet Nuclear Astrophysicist, 20 June 1998.)
After problems with one of two network-signal processors caused a 24-hour delay, Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-90) blasted off on the Shuttle programs final Neurolab mission, carrying 26 experiments for basic research in neurosciences to expand understanding of how the nervous system develops and functions in space. Test subjects aboard the Shuttle included crew members, rats, mice, crickets, snails, and two kinds of fish. The Neurolab mission was the joint effort of NASA, several U.S. partners, the space agencies of Canada, France, and Germany, the ESA, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan. Crew members included Commander Richard A. Searfoss; Pilot Scott D. Altman; Mission Specialists Richard M. Linnehan, Dafydd Rhys Dave Williams, and Kathryn P. Hire; and Payload Specialists Jay C. Buckey Jr. and James A. Pawelczyk. Mission Specialist Hire was the first KSC employee that NASA had selected as an astronaut candidate. Mission STS-90 was Columbias 25th flight.(NASA, Neurolab Shuttle Mission To Launch April 16, news release N98-25, 3 April 1998; NASA, Mission Archives: STS-90, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-90.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discoverys Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenns spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discoverys planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.(NASA, Sen. Glenn Gets a Go for Space Shuttle Mission, news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, Russia-Space Station, 18 January 1998.)
The Russian Space Agency nominated veteran cosmonaut Valery V. Ryumin to fly as a mission specialist aboard Discovery during Mission STS-91 in May. In his last spaceflight in 1980, Ryumin was a member of the Soyuz 35 Mission. During that mission, he had spent 185 days in space from April through October. Ryumin had spent a total of 362 days in space in the course of his three missions.(NASA, Veteran Cosmonaut Nominated To Fly on Final Shuttle/Mir Mission, news release, 21 January 1998.)
NASAs ER-2 aircraft, a close relative of the U-2 spy plane, officially broke the altitude record for medium-weight planes when it flew to 68,700 feet (20,900 meters), nearly twice the cruising altitude of commercial airliners, during a mission to measure components of the atmosphere. A Canadian P-42 aircraft had set the previous record of 62,500 feet (19,050 meters) in 1988. NASA officials said the craft had flown at such altitudes in the past, but this flight was the first time that scientists had documented its altitude and made it public.(Agence France-Presse, NASA Airplane Flies High into Sky: ER-2 Able To Break Record for Altitude, Washington Times, 23 November 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science, news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive Drizzle, USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The studys principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Womens Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenns Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenns crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenns disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight, New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
As part of the Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA officials chose more than 300 research proposals to share US$23 million in funding. Out of 28 award categories, 21 focused on space-based applications, such as achieving routine space travel, exploring and settling the solar system, and developing new technologies in astrobiology. The range of topics indicated that research associated with high-profile space transportation and exploration efforts, curtailed because of cuts in NASAs 1999 budget, would continue on a smaller scale.(Anne Eisele, Small Business Grants Span Range of NASA Goals, Space News, 23 February1 March 1998.)
Endeavour lost power to its small forward-maneuvering jets for 30 minutes. Because the jets, which deliver 25 pounds (11 kilograms) of thrust, keep the complex stabilized as it orbits Earth, the loss of power left the EndeavourMir complex adrift. During this malfunction, the crew continued its main task, to transfer supplies and equipment from the Shuttle to the space station. NASA officials explained that the crew had never been in danger. However, if the Shuttles small maneuvering jets had not regained power, Endeavour would have had to rely on its primary jets, which deliver 875 pounds (397 kilograms) of thrust. Using the primary jets would have risked damage to Mir upon separation of the two spacecraft.(Brad Liston for Reuters, Faulty Jets Are Fixed, and Space Complex Is Stabilized, New York Times, 27 January 1998.)
The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center. NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac, the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test, news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight, Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASAs request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not go along with NASAs request to start bailing out the Russian space program, stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, would make good use of the money.(Paul Recer, Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money, San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
NASA officials announced that the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, which had operated the science program for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1983, would also manage the science operations for the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST). As one of the cornerstone missions of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems, a major project within its space science program, NASA expected the NGST to provide a critical follow-on to the Hubble Space Telescope. With capabilities unavailable in existing ground- based or space telescopes, the NGSTs purpose was to observe the first stars and galaxies in the universe, to understand better how the universe formed after the Big Bang. After consulting advisory committees, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Space Science, had decided that the most cost-effective and scientifically sound way to proceed would be to expand the [Space Telescope Science] Institutes responsibilities to include the management of the new telescope.(NASA, NASA Selects Home for Next Generation Space Telescope, news release 98-96, 8 June 1998.)
Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellitesOrihime and Hikoboshiin outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment an impressive feat. NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japans Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi, associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly, New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
Research scientists working on a US$33 million experiment to search for antimatter in space, spoke at a news conference, announcing that the communication-system breakdown on Space Shuttle Discovery had ruined their tests. The astronauts had been unable to repair Discoverys main antenna system, which had broken shortly after launch, rendering the Shuttle unable to transmit high-speed data or video back to Earth. Scientists working on the project needed continuous, high-speed data to calibrate the AMS, which was searching space for rare subatomic particles known as antimatter. However, using a patchwork system, they had only been able to receive a few minutes of data each hour, which meant that, although they could see that the AMS was working, the spectrometer was not providing them with enough data to fine tune the magnet. According to Project Manager James Bates, the scientists had failed to accomplish their objectives because of the malfunction.(Seth Borenstein, Shuttle Physics Testing Thwarted; A Glitch Has Undermined an Antimatter Experiment, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 June 1998.)
In a vote of 66 to 33, the U.S. Senate defeated Senator Dale Bumperss (D-AK) amendment to the appropriations bill for the Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. The amendment would have cut the United States US$2.3 billion share of the FY 1999 budget for the International Space Station (ISS), cancelling the ISS program. During floor debate preceding the vote, Senator Bumpers, who had been trying to eliminate U.S. funding for the space station for the past eight years, referred to the previous months U.S. General Accounting Office report. The report had projected that the cost to develop, assemble, and operate the space station over several years would reach US$100 billion, in part because of recurring cost overruns. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) countered Senator Bumperss arguments against the space station, citing the incredible scientific possibilities that could result from research on the ISS, in such areas as neurology, sleep disorders, and balance.(Frederic J. Frommer for Associated Press, Space Station, 7 July 1998; Vickie Allen for Reuters, International Space Station Survives Senate Vote, 7 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, Bumpers Amendment Would Ground Space Station, government news release, 7 July 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin publicly acknowledged for the first time that the ISS would cost more than originally proposed, with a revised cost of US$21.3 billion, and would take longer to assemble than was initially planned, with a revised completion date of December 2003. Since 1993, NASA had consistently reported that the cost of the ISS would be US$17.4 billion, and had targeted a 2002 completion date. The revised cost was 200 percent more than the original US$8 billion estimate in President Ronald Reagans 1984 proposal.(Larry Wheeler, Station Cost Overrun Now Pegged at $6 Billion, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 March 1998. 436 NASA, New Global Surveyor Data Reveals Deeply Layered Terrain, Magnetic Features and Genesis of a Martian Dust Storm, news release 98-45, 13 March 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Ghassem R. Asrar as the new Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise. Before this appointment, Asrar had served as Chief Scientist for the Earth Observing System in the Office of Earth Science Enterprise at NASA Headquarters. He led an international team in developing scientific priorities and measurements to be obtained from a series of advanced Earth-orbiting satellites that promise fundamental new insights into the connections between Earths land, oceans, atmosphere, ice, and life.(NASA, Asrar Named Associate Administrator for Earth Science, news release 98-19, 2 February 1998.)
NASA announced the astronaut candidate class of 1998, including 8 pilot candidates and 17 mission specialist candidates, and composed of 21 male and 4 female candidates. Among the candidate class was teacher Barbara R. Morgan, the former understudy to Christa McAuliffe. NASA had designated Morgan as Educator Mission Specialist in January 1998.(NASA, NASA Names Astronaut Class of 1998, news release 98-97, 4 June 1998. 142)
402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, Space Shuttle, 30 January 1998; NASA, STS-89. Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, Space Station Accord Signed, 30 January 1998; Associated Press, Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station, 29 January 1998; NASA, Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington, news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin submitted a 29-page report to lawmakers of the U.S. House of Representatives, officially responding to an independent review panels damning assessment that the [ISS] could cost US$7.3 billion more than NASA estimated. The panel had also reported that NASA would likely complete the ISS more than four years behind schedule. Goldin acknowledged significant budget and schedule problems but maintained that NASAs plan remained manageable, despite its shortcomings.(Larry Wheeler for Gannett News Service, NASA Chief Admits Space Station Project Has Major Woes, 17 June 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronauts error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawlas efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttles robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawlas crewmates could have helped her verify the command but did not do so because such vigilance was not part of the plan. The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the boards findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
Pursuant to H. Res. 572, the U.S. House of Representatives agreed to an amended version of H.R. 1702, the Commercial Space Act of 1998.595 The legislation gave the Federal Aviation Administration the authority to issue licenses to private companies for the launch of reusable space vehicles like NASAs Shuttle. Supporters of the measure stressed that enactment of the law would better enable American companies to compete in an increasingly competitive international marketplace, warning that, without this law, the United States would risk losing the space industry to overseas markets. The legislation also required NASA to submit a report and an independently conducted market study to Congress, identifying commercial opportunities and evaluating commercial interest in the development of the ISS.(Jim Abrams for Associated Press, House Bills Help Federal Workers, 5 October 1998; Associated Press, House Sends Senate Bill To Allow Private Space Launches, 5 October 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Lori B. Garver as Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Policy and Plans, effective immediately. Garver had served as Acting Associate Administrator since September 1998. She had begun working for NASA in 1996 as Special Assistant to the Administrator. Before joining NASA, she had been Executive Director of the National Space Society, since 1987, and a president of Women in Aerospace. Goldin remarked that Garvers experience inside and outside NASA had proven invaluable, and that she had demonstrated the management skills and policy leadership that her new position required.(NASA, Garver Named Associate Administrator for Policy and Plans, news release 99-6, 25 January 1999.)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, to head the Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter had disappeared on 23 September as it entered orbit around Mars. Goldin tasked the board with independently reviewing all aspects of the missions failure, to verify whether it had been the result of an inadequacy in NASAs interplanetary navigation systems. Preliminary findings from an internal peer review at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory indicated that a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California had caused the loss of the spacecraft. Goldin instructed the board to report its initial findings by 3 November.(NASA, Head of Mars Climate Orbiter Investigation Board Named, news release 99-117, 6 October 1999.)
NASA released an image of Jupiters volcanic moon Io, captured at the closest range ever accomplished. The image, which NASAs spacecraft Galileo took during a flyby of the moon on 10 October, showed a lava field near the center of an erupting volcano named Pillan, with visible new lava flows from its volcanic center. To capture most of the new images of Io, Galileo had used a fast camera mode, in which the camera preprocesses the image, averaging the brightness in its adjacent parts. However, Ios radiation had disrupted the process, degrading the quality of the images. Radiation had not affected images, including the newly released image of Pillan, taken in other camera modes. Galileo Project Manager James K. Erickson remarked that Galileo would not use the fast camera mode during the next Io flyby.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Closest-Ever Picture of Volcanic Moon Io Released, news release, 22 October 1999.)
Mission controllers indicated that chances of ever contacting the US$165 million Mars Polar Lander were remote at best, after they failed to detect a signal during their last best chance of communicating with the probe. NASA officials announced that the loss of Lander meant that NASA would need to drop the timetable for future Mars missions and rethink the entire Mars exploration program, including the scheduled launch of the next lander in 2001. NASA had already spent US$193 million on the planned 2001 launch. Edward J. Weiler, head of NASAs Office of Space Science, indicated that NASA would convene a panel of experts to diagnose the Mars Polar Lander failure and to suggest a new architecture for its Mars program. Although they had set no dates, members of Congress said that they planned to hold hearings about NASAs procedures and budget.(Down Jones Newswire, NASA Fails To Detect Signal from Mars Polar Lander, 7 December 1999; Peter Kendall and Vincent J. Schodolski for the Chicago Tribune News Service, Mars Exploration Put on Hold: NASA Scraps Its Timetable, and the Launch of a $193 Million Lander Set for 2001 Is Uncertain, Oregonian (Portland), 8 December 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Kevin L. Petersen, who had been serving in an acting capacity since August 1998, as Director of NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Petersen had joined Dryden as an aerospace engineer in 1974 and had worked on flight-research projects, including the F-8 Digital Fly-by-Wire, the HiMAT (the Highly Maneuverable Aircraft Technology), and the X-29 forward-swept wing projects. He had served as Chief of the Vehicle Technology Branch, Chief of the National Aerospace Plane Projects Office, and, since January 1996, as DFRCs Deputy Director.(NASA, Petersen Named Dryden Director, news release 99-14, 8 February 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin selected NASA Chief Engineer Daniel R. Mulville to replace General John R. Dailey as Associate Deputy Administrator, effective 1 January 2000. Dailey was leaving to become Director of the National Air and Space Museum. NASA had appointed Mulville as Chief Engineer in 1995, responsible for overall review of technical readiness and for execution of all NASA programs. From 1990 to 1995, Mulville had been Director of the Engineering and Quality Management Division in NASAs Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, and, from 1986 to 1990, he was Deputy Director of the Materials and Structures Division in NASAs Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Before that appointment, Mulville had served as the Structures Technology Manager at the Naval Air Systems Command since 1979, where he led the development of structural design, testing, and certification methods, as Program Manager for the Development of Composites for the AV-8B and F/A-18 aircraft, and advanced aircraft and missile programs. Mulville had received NASAs Distinguished Service Medal, NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal, and NASAs Exceptional Service Medal, among other awards. Goldin expressed his pleasure at Mulvilles acceptance of the position, remarking that, as Associate Deputy Administrator, Mulville would be his most senior advisor on NASA operations and commenting on Mulvilles outstanding work as NASAs Chief Engineer.(NASA, Mulville Named Associate Deputy Administrator, news release 99-146, 14 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-146.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
At a scheduled 13 December ribbon-cutting ceremony, NASA announced the opening of FutureFlight Central (FFC) at Ames Research Centers Moffett Field in Mountain View, California. NASA had designed the two-story facilitythe worlds first full-scale, virtual, airport control towerto test methods of solving, under realistic conditions and configurations, potential air and ground traffic problems at commercial airports. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration had jointly funded the US$10 million project. The design of FFC permitted integration of tomorrows technologies in a risk-free simulation of any airport, airfield, and tower-cab environment.(NASA, NASA Opens New, Virtual Airport Control Tower at Ames, news release 99-143, 10 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-143.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
Although crosswinds caused a late touchdown, Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely after its eight-day servicing mission to HST. NASA managers had instructed Discovery to fly an extra orbit before landing, while Mission Control monitored the weather on the ground. NASA had shortened the mission to eight days from the scheduled 10 because of numerous launch delays, and because Discovery must return to Earth before New Years Eve to avoid potential Y2K computer problems.(Washington Times, Shuttle Back on Earth after Hubble Repairs, 28 December 1999; Robyn Suriano, Welcome Back to Earth, Discovery: Shuttle Astronauts Come in for Late but Safe Landing, USA Today, 28 December 1999.)
Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution I. Michael Heyman announced the appointment of General John R. Dailey, U.S. Marine Corps (Retired), Associate Deputy Administrator of NASA, as Director of the Smithsonians National Air and Space Museum, effective January 2000. Dailey succeeded Vice Admiral Donald D. Engen, U.S. Navy (Retired), who had died suddenly in a glider accident in July after serving as the museums director for three years. Dailey had begun work at NASA in 1992, after retiring from 36 years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Marine Corps. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Daileys leadership at NASA had been unparalleled, and that he had shaped and strengthened the [A]gency, and was responsible for developing an infrastructure that [would] carry NASA into the new millennium. Secretary Heyman commented on Daileys selection from a strong field of candidates, describing him as a most impressive individual, who had earned confidence and admiration throughout the air and space community and would continue the strong, dedicated leadership expected at the museum. In addition to managing 260 employees and a US$25 million budget, Daileys appointment placed him in charge of construction of the museums new 710,000-square-foot (66,000-square-meter), hangar-style facility, expected to open at Dulles International Airport in December 2003. The Smithsonian had conceived the idea of the new facility to display its vast aeronautics and space holdings; the original National Air and Space Museum building was too small to house the additional collection of more than 180 aircraft and 100 spacecraft.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, New Director of the National Air and Space Museum To Take Office in January, news release, 24 November 1999, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm? releaseID=97 (accessed 19 March 2008); Peter Carlson, New Air & Space Chief: General Succeeds Director Killed in Crash, Washington Post, 24 November 1999.)
Robert S. Ruggeri, a retired NASA engineer and pioneer in de-icing research, died at the age of 75. Ruggeri had begun working for NASAs predecessor agency in 1944, retiring from NASA in 1980. NASA had applied his findings from studying ice buildup on airplane wings in the 1940s and 1950s, to the development of rockets and Space Shuttles. When the United States sought to speed up its space program following the Soviet Unions launch of Sputnik, Ruggeri had also researched the effects of cavitationpartial vacuums in flowing liquidson cryogenic rocket pumps, looking for ways to make the pumps more efficient for rockets. Later in his career at NASA, Ruggeris work had focused on the design of compressors for advanced aircraft engines, as he sought ways to increase fuel efficiency, reduce air pollution, and minimize the noise of jet engines.(Robert Ruggeri, NASA Engineer Was a Pioneer in Aircraft De-Icing, Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 26 December 1999.)
A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASAs Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiters moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data. James K. Erickson of NASAs JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileos instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, If we didnt have the automatic restart software, we wouldnt be getting any data at the encounters.(Michael A. Dornheim, Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo, Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Irans missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russias cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilmans legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was assisting Irans programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles. If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction. An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency, Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
NASA announced that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin would present Simon Ramo and Bernard A. Schriever with NASAs Distinguished Public Service Medal on 5 November at the start of a daylong conference. NASA, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, the National Air and Space Museum, the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, and the National Space Society were cosponsoring the conference, Developing U.S. Launch Capability: The Role of Civil-Military Cooperation. The award recognized the leadership of Ramo and Schriever during the early years of the U.S. space program. Ramo had been the chief scientist and leading civilian in the Air Force program to build the first U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile system. His work had fostered cooperation between the U.S. Air Force and aeronautics industry, the necessary foundation of the space program. Schriever had pioneered the development of the first ballistic missile for the United States; the resulting rocket technology had led to NASAs successes in its early human spaceflight programs.(NASA, NASA Honors Missile Pioneers at Launch Vehicle Conference, news release N99-56, 2 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/1999/n99-056.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars, awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASAs Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeings Delta rocket more and more the launch vehicle of choice. Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had changed the face of the space program.(PR Newswire, Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASAs Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards, 27 January 1999.)
NASA announced its decision to end a US$240 million project to land a small spacecraft on a comet, so that scientists could learn how to destroy a comet if it were on course to collide with Earth. NASA had planned to launch the probe in 2003 and to land it on the surface of Comet Tempel 1 in 2005. After landing, the probe was to drill into the nucleus of the comet, helping scientists understand the comets composition. Manager of the Space Technology 4 project Brian Muirhead remarked, we know very, very little about how comets are formed and what their constituency is, adding that anyone serious about planetary protection must learn more about comets. NASAs JPL was in the early stages of developing the Space Technology 4/Champollion project and had only spent US$10 million. NASA had also considered canceling Mars Surveyor 2001, but had already spent US$100 million on that project. Other projects were experiencing cost overruns also, such as the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, which needed an extra US$60 million to cover last-minute development problems. NASA intended to redirect some funds from Space Technology 4 to other missions experiencing funding difficulties, such as Chandra.(Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, Comet Lander, 29 June 1999.)
NASA announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, as Director of NASAs Astrobiology Institute, effective immediately. NASA had created the Astrobiology Institute in July 1998, a virtual organization comprising NASAs centers, universities, and other scientific entities for the study of the origin, evolution, distribution, and destiny of life in the universe. The Institute, with a multidisciplinary focus, sought to bring together astronomers, biologists, chemists, exobiologists, geologists, and physicists, to search for the origins of life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the announcement of Blumbergs appointment at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, the site of the Institutes headquarters. Goldin stated that NASA had tasked the Astrobiology Institute with providing the intellectual underpinnings for building new types of instruments and space probes for finding life in the solar system and beyond.
NASA officials announced that the Galileo spacecraft was operating normally again after entering safe mode on 31 January. Galileos computer had become confused while flying past Jupiters moon Europa. David A. Senske, a member of the Galileo imaging team at NASAs JPL, explained that the unusual angle Galileo required for studying Europa had caused the computer to malfunction.(Associated Press, Galileo Craft Resumes Its Jupiter Mission, 13 February 1999.)
A large section of the outer wall of one of the Lockheed Martin X-33 rocket planes two liquid hydrogen fuel tanks separated 2 hours after completing pressure and structural tests at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center. Lockheed intended the X-33 prototype to lead to the development of its VentureStar TM Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV), and NASA planned to replace its fleet of Space Shuttles with a fleet of Lockheeds VentureStarTM RLVs after 2012. The latest problem potentially delayed the X-33s first test flight at least an additional six months, essentially guaranteeing that Lockheed Martin would be unable to produce an operational VentureStarTM vehicle by 2004. NASA had placed a huge wager on the VentureStar TM, committing US$941 million to the X-33 program, which had been threatened by technical problems and cost overruns for more than a year. U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) examiners had criticized the project for its rising costs, warning that delays in the prototype would harm NASAs plans for a full-scale reusable vehicle.(Jeff Leeds, Test Mishap Delays Development of Lockheeds X-33 Rocket Plane, Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named A. Thomas Young to chair the Mars Program Independent Assessment Team, charged with reviewing NASAs approach to robotic exploration of Mars following the recent loss of the Mars Polar Lander Mission. Among the review teams tasks were the evaluation of several recent NASA missions to deep space, including Mars Pathfinder, Mars Global Surveyor, Mars Climate Orbiter, Mars Polar Lander, Deep Space 1, and Deep Space 2. The team would analyze the projects budgets, content, schedule, management structure, and scientific organization, assessing how roles and responsibilities of those missions related to the missions safety, reliability, and success.(NASA, Young To Lead Mars Program Assessment Team, news release 99-147, 17 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-147.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbias launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety stand down. NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted full responsibility for wiring damage found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch teams skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panels Attention, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
NASA announced the student winners of the 19981999 National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). A team of 33 students at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Florida, had produced the winning design, aimed at attracting customers who want to move from propeller-driven craft to jets without needing a significant increase in pilot skill. A 13-member team from Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pennsylvania, won second place for their Baracuda, an acronym for Boldly Advanced and Refined Aircraft Concept Under Development for AGATE, a national, general aviation revitalization program. The teams conventional-layout, modern- composite airplane featuring advanced aerodynamics, systems, and avionics was a four-place, single-engine, jet-powered aircraft. A three-university teamthe University of Virginia, Old Dominion University in Hampton, Virginia, and Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New Yorkwon third place for a highly innovative design known as the Yeah Man, a craft with two tail booms, each with vertical tails. The aircraft, which NASA scientists had tested in the Full Scale Wind Tunnel at Langley Research Center, showed good aerodynamic characteristics.(NASA, NASA and FAA Pick Student Aircraft-Design Contest Winners, news release 99-87, 2 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-087.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA scientists lost contact with the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its Martian orbit and disappeared behind the planet, a little less than a year after the launch of its Mars mission in December 1998. Mars Surveyor Project Manager John B. McNamee said that the orbit-insertion burn, a 16-minute-long burn to slow the spacecraft down as it enters orbit, had begun on time. The team of NASA scientists observed 5 minutes of the burn before the craft went behind Mars. At that point, the craft stopped communicating. Communication did not resume at the time the team expected the craft to reappear from the far side of the planet. McNamee reported that the latest navigation results showed that the craft had entered its orbit lower than his team had planned, indicating that NASAs navigation predictions at the tracking station may have been incorrect. Carl B. Pilcher, Science Director for Solar System Exploration at NASA Headquarters, commented that, although losing the spacecraft was very serious, the loss was not devastating to the Mars Surveyor Program as a whole, because the mission of Mars Polar Lander, scheduled to arrive at Mars two months after Mars Climate Orbiter, was independent of that of Orbiter.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASAs Mars Climate Orbiter Believed To Be Lost, news release, 23 September 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mcolost.html (accessed 3 March 2008); Reuters, NASA Loses Contact with Mars Orbiter, 23 September 1999.)
NASA released new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images of the cores of spiral galaxies like the Milky Way, and astronomers studying the images for clues about galactic development discussed their findings at a briefing at NASA Headquarters. Two complementary surveys by independent research teams had concluded that the Hubble images confirmed the evolutionary link between a disc-like cloud of dust and gas at the center of a galaxy and a bulge of millions of stars at the center of the disc-like cloud. The central bulge stabilizes a galaxys development, controls the birth of stars in the galaxys core, and holds secrets as to how and when a galaxy formed. Reynier F. Peletier of the University of Nottingham in the United Kingdom confirmed that central bulges of more tightly wound spirals formed at approximately the same time in the early universe. C. Marcello Carollo of Columbia University, who had led a team studying galaxies with small bulges and bar-like structures that bisect the nucleus, had discovered that such galaxies developed more recently. Both teams had used HSTs visible-light and infrared cameras to determine the stars true colors, a measure of the age of the stars inside the galaxies core.(NASA, Starry Bulges Yield Secrets to Galaxy Growth, news release 99-107, 6 October 1999; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, Hubble Tackles Questions About Cosmic Bulges, 6 October 1999.)
NASA announced the departure of Gretchen W. McClain, a senior space station official at NASA Headquarters, naming as her replacement in an acting capacity, W. Michael Hawes, NASAs Chief Engineer for the ISS. In 1997 NASA had appointed McClain as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station). In that position, she was responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and undertaking liaison activities with the executive branch, Congress, industry, and international partners. McClain left NASA to return to private industry.(NASA, McClain To Leave NASA; Hawes Named Acting Chief of Space Station, news release 99-50, 8 April 1999.)
Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from Californias Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Forces Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, collecting data on the Earths global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs, as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmarks Orsted and South Africas SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earths magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit, 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field. George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASAs predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewiss death in 1948, NACA had named the facility Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to Lewis Research Center in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to two of Ohios famous namesone an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.(NASA, NASA Announces Field Center Name Change, news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
NASA officials and Mars Polar Lander Mission scientists were unable to communicate with Lander following its scheduled landing. The team had expected the first signal to arrive from the spacecraft at a tracking station in the Mojave Desert in California, approximately 30 minutes after the scheduled touchdown at 3:01 p.m. (EST). A second attempt to communicate with the craft had produced nothing. Before the crafts landing, tracking data indicated that Lander had veered slightly off course. Flight controllers had fired its thrusters briefly to alter its approach angle slightly. Flight Operations Manager Sam Thurman had expressed his satisfaction with the new tracking data, which showed the craft heading for a point within a mile of its target.(John Noble Wilford, Probe to Mars Becomes Silent, Its Fate Unclear, New York Times, 4 December 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of ShuttleMir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector, news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
Ukraines Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstans Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rockets lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.)
Donald D. Engen, Director of the Smithsonian Institutions National Air and Space Museum, and William Ivans, an internationally known, award-winning pilot from La Jolla, California, died when the motorized glider that Ivans was piloting broke apart and crashed. Investigators were attempting to determine the cause of the accident. Larry Sanderson, President of the Soaring Society of America, remarked that both victims were top pilots in an extremely well-built aircraft. So it had to be a very unusual set of circumstances that stressed the craft. Both Engen and Ivans were officers of the Soaring Society, and Ivans, a pioneer in the field, had won many awards for high-altitude soaring. Engen had retired from the U.S. Navy in 1978, with the rank of vice admiral and had been a test pilot for many years. After retiring from the Navy, he had served for two years on the National Transportation Safety Board and as administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration between 1984 and 1987. He became Director of the National Air and Space Museum in 1996, following the resignation of Martin O. Harwit.
NASA disclosed that a sequence of computer commands issued by flight controllers on the ground had failed to fire the ISSs engines, placing the uninhabited space station in potential danger. The cause of the failure was human error. Flight controllers had sent commands directing the new space station to move out of the path of a piece of space junk, which posed a danger to the craft. A U.S. military organization tracking such objects had predicted that the fairly large piece of space junk of Russian origin would pass within 0.6 miles (1 kilometer) of the space station on 13 June. However, the debris came no closer to the new ISS than 4.5 miles (7.2 kilometers). A collision could have destroyed the uninhabited space station. NASAs Deputy Program Manager for Space Station Operations, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., explained that, because the space stations computers had rejected the flight controllers faulty commands, the station had no motion control for an entire orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Space Station, 18 June 1999.)
Oleksandr Serdiuk, head of the International Relations Department of Ukraines Space Agency, announced that Ukraine and Brazil had signed an agreement the previous week, allowing Ukraine to use Brazils Alcantara space complex to launch a new generation of Cyclone-4 booster rockets, medium-weight rockets capable of putting 4 tons (3,600 kilograms or 3.6 tonnes) of payload into a geostationary orbit. In 1992, when the USSR dissolved, Ukraine had retained part of the former Soviet Unions space program, using several former Soviet factories to build rockets and selling rocket space to commercial satellite companies. Before the agreement with Brazil, Ukraine had only used launchpads in other former Soviet countries. However, Ukraine wanted to take advantage of the location of the Alcantara space complex near the equator, where spacecraft reach orbit more easily and commercial launches a
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earths atmosphere. Director of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event a bittersweet day for NASA. The spacecraft, NASAs gamma-ray equivalent of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellites control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earths atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASAs efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earths atmosphere.(NASA, Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns, news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth, news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, A Satellites Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project, Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross reported that the Boeing Company would have to forfeit most of its profit from the ISS contract because of its nearly US$1 billion in cost overruns. NASAs incentive-laden contract with Boeing allowed for significant bonuses for meeting timeline and cost limits. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had ordered an audit of the NASA-Boeing contract in 1999, because projected cost overages had continued to rise. Nonetheless, as Boeing neared completion of the construction of its portion of the ISS, both NASA and the aerospace giant were optimistic that cost overruns had stabilized, and that the space station hardware would perform well in space.(Tony Capaccio, Boeing Overruns on Space Station Near $1Billion, Los Angeles Times, 23 February 2000.)
William G. Fastie, known for helping establish the prestigious Johns Hopkins University space program and for inventing the spectrometer, died in Baltimore at the age of 83. Fastie, often called the father of the Hopkins space program, was one of the United States preeminent astrophysicists. His spectrometer, which measured the spectrum of light, helping scientists gather data about other planets, was not only innovative but also rugged enough to travel into space.(Alice Lukens, William G. Fastie, 83, Hopkins Astrophysicist Designed Spectrometer, Baltimore Sun (MD), 17 July 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after completing the 11-day Mission STS-97 at the ISS, where the crew had installed and deployed the stations new solar array. Shortly before touchdown, the ISS sailed above KSC, a reminder of the pressure on NASA to support more flights to the ISS as the stations assembly accelerated. Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore remarked that the successful mission of Endeavour to the ISS was a good way to end this yeara very successful five missions.(William Harwood, Endeavour Returns from Station Work, Washington Post, 12 December 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin began an official visit to Morocco to discuss space cooperation. He planned to meet with several Moroccan officials, particularly in the fields of scientific research and advanced technology, and to visit facilities in Morocco capable of launching Space Shuttles.(BBC, Morocco: NASA Official Visits for Talks on Space Cooperation, RTM TV (Rabat, Morocco), 9 August 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recognized members of the Space Shuttles ice and debris inspection team for their work on 10 October, leading to the discovery of a stray 4-inch (10- centimeter) pin near the Shuttles external fuel tank, hours before the scheduled launch of STS- 92. In response to the find, NASA had delayed the launch for 24 hours to allow the team to retrieve the pin, thereby preventing the damage that would have ensued if the pin had been sucked into the Shuttles thermal protection system or into a main engine. Goldin awarded employees Gregory N. Katnik and Jorge E. Rivera NASAs Exceptional Achievement Medal, an honor recognizing significant contributions to the mission of NASA through substantial and significant improvements in operations, efficiency, service, financial savings, science, or technology. United Space Alliance employees Michael Barber, John B. Blue, and Thomas F. Ford received NASAs Public Service Medal, an award given to individuals who are not government employees but make exceptional contributions to NASAs mission.(NASA, Space Shuttle Inspection Team Rewarded for Its Eagle Eyes, news release 00-165, 18 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-165.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
In another escalation of the increasingly tense debate over how to handle Russias repeated delays in building and launching the service module of the International Space Station (ISS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, if Russia did not meet a July 2000 deadline, the United States would provide a substitute module. Russia was already more than two years behind schedule, affecting the ISSs timeline and hampering the cooperative international effort. Goldins decision followed Russias announcement of its plan to direct more resources to the failing Mir space station. Some space experts perceived Russias designation of scarce financial funds to Mir, rather than to the ISS, as a signal of Russias reluctance to participate fully in the international space consortium. In his strongest criticism to date, Goldin said of Russias ISS involvement: To say we are frustrated and disappointed is an understatement . . . We want the Russians to be there, but we felt we had to be responsible custodians to keep the program on track.(Warren E. Leary, NASA Dictates Date for Russia on Station Port, New York Times, 4 February 2000; Associated Press, NASA: Well Launch if Russia Fails, 4 February 2000.)
The United States and Brazil signed a treaty giving U.S. aerospace firms access to Brazils Alcantara launch site, located just 3 south of the equator. The treaty was the first accord signed by the United States that allowed U.S. satellites to launch from foreign soil. The launch sites location near the center of the globe would save money for aerospace companies, because satellites could take a shorter path to equatorial orbit, requiring less fuel. Brazil benefited from the boost to its embryonic space program and the possibility of capturing a portion of the lucrative commercial-satellite business. At the time of the agreement, U.S. firms controlled two- thirds of the annual US$66 billion commercial satellite industry.(Reuters, Brazil: Joins Space Race with U.S. Satellite Treaty, 17 April 2000; Peter Fritsch, Brazil To Sign U.S. Accord To Enter Satellite Business, Wall Street Journal, 18 April 2000.)
In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellors Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years, U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASAs next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, Red Planet Is Next Frontier, 2 May 2000.)
Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell, at NASAs JPL, announced the resumption of the spacecrafts observations. Cassini had operated without any problems, since scientists had reactivated its reaction-wheel system on 21 December.(Associated Press, NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter, 28 December 2000; NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Cassini Passes Through Asteroid Belt, news release, 28 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=4 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would merge the Office of the Chief Technologist and the Office of Aero-Space Technology, to better facilitate NASAs technological advancements. According to Goldin, placing a range of issues, from IT operation to technology-based research, under the domain of a single leader would promote IT compatibility. Goldin appointed Chief Technologist Samuel L. Venneri to head the new Office, giving Venneri the responsibility of developing a long-term strategy to keep NASA at the forefront of technological development. Goldin also tasked Venneri with forging new relationships with companies using technologies similar to the type that NASA developed and used. Venneri had been NASAs Chief Technologist since 1996.(NASA, Goldin Names Venneri To Head Merged Technology, Aero-Space Office; New Chief Engineer Appointed, news release 00-21, 7 February 2000.)
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARCs chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASAs astrobiology program and to establish NASAs Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffens two loves, and that the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.(NASA, NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies, news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official, 27 November 2000.)
NASA controllers began sending signals to the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to perform a series of maneuvers that would ultimately end in the satellite crashing into the Pacific Ocean. The endgame commands marked the conclusion of a successful nine-year mission, which had recorded data on more than 2,500 gamma-ray bursts. The US$670 million satellite, launched on 5 April 1991 aboard Mission STS-37, had provided researchers with never-before-seen images of explosions throughout the universe. It will be like losing a member of the family, remarked one NASA scientist who had worked on the program since 1979. NASA officials had decided to end the satellites space tenure because of the possibility that the aging satellite might become unresponsive and plummet out of control to Earth. By initiating the satellites demise, NASA could control the landing area of the 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) spacecraft. Some critics charged NASA with being too conservative, because it had based its decision on the 1-in- 1,000 odds that an uncontrolled descent of the satellite to Earth would result in injuries.(James Orberg, Plan To Scrap Satellite Sacrifices Science, USA Today, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, NASA To Destroy Compton Satellite After Nine Years, 28 May 2000.)
NASA suspended all of Cassinis observations of Jupiter that required the spacecraft to pointto take magnetic-field measurementsin order to capture images, after the craft developed a problem with a maneuvering system. NASA permitted Cassini to continue making observations that did not requiring pointing. On 17 December, Cassinis No. 2 reaction wheel had begun to require extra force to turn, prompting the craft to switch from electrical power to a hydrazine- thrusting system, which Cassini needed to conserve for use in its primary Saturn mission. Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell remarked that, if tests of the maneuvering system were favorable, the craft could begin its observations again in a week to 10 days.(Los Angeles Times, NASA Halts Spacecrafts Observation of Jupiter, 21 December 2000; Associated Press, NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter, 28 December 2000.)
President William J. Clintons proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administrations previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASAs plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor, Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 1112.)
The National Partnership for Reinventing Government (NPR) released the results of a survey indicating that NASA employees had the highest level of job satisfaction among federal government employees. NASA employees rated very favorably in the categories of employee job satisfaction, customer orientation, making reinvention a priority, management communication, and employee participation in cross-functional teams. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the surveys findings, stating, I am incredibly proud of these results. They represent a strong statement of the top-to-bottom excellence of the NASA team. NPR and the Office of Personnel Management administered the survey to understand employees perspectives on reinvention and workplace issues. When informed of NASAs outstanding score, Keith Cowing, the editor of Nasawatch.com remarked, Im not at all surprised. I used to work there. I loved my job.(NASA, Survey Shows NASA Employees Among Most Satisfied Federal Workers, news release 00-52, 31 March 2000.)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institutions National Air and Space Museum for its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built. NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASAs predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonians National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners, news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
NASA and the Boeing Company announced an agreement to use Boeings Delta Launch Services Inc. for a variety of NASA missions. The contract, estimated to be worth at least US$168 million, included options to extend the agreement. NASA also awarded both Boeing and Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services Inc. indefinite deliveryindefinite quantity contracts for 10 years. The agreements solidified NASAs partnerships with the two major aerospace companies. A NASA spokesperson clarified the reasons for the extension of the relationships, saying that Boeing and Lockheed were selected based on their ability to meet NASAs highly critical future mission requirements and their proven track records for providing a quality product. At the time of the agreement with Boeing, the company had flown 82 missions for NASA with a success rate of 98 percent.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Delta Rockets To Launch Next-Generation NASA Space Craft, news release, 16 June 2000; NASA, NASA Awards Launch Services Contracts, news release c00-e, 16 June 2000; Seattle Post- Intelligencer (WA), Boeing Wins $168 Million NASA Order for 3 More Delta II Launches, Options, 19 June 2000.)
NASAs JPL named Thomas C. Duxbury Project Manager for JPLs Stardust Mission, launched in February 1999 to collect a sample from Comet Wild-2 and return it to Earth. Duxbury, who had served as the Missions Acting Project Manager for the past year, replaced Kenneth Atkins, who had been heading a program to develop leadership for JPLs projects. Duxbury had joined the Stardust project in 1996 as Mission Manager, responsible for navigation, mission design, the ground-data system, science-data management, and mission operations. Before working on the Stardust project, Duxbury had served on planetary mission teams, including several Mariner missions, the Mars Viking mission, Pioneer 10 and 11 to Jupiter and Saturn, Voyager 1 and 2 to the outer planets, the Soviet Phobos Mission to Mars, the Mars Observer Mission, and the Clementine Mission to study the Moon. Concurrent with his position as Stardust Project Manager, Duxbury planned to continue to serve as a member of the science teams for Mars Global Surveyors laser altimeter and for the ESAs Mars Express orbiter and lander, as well as continuing as lead scientist for geodesy and cartography in the Mars Exploration Office.
Laurence Vico released a study on astronauts loss of bone density because of time spent in space. Vico and his team of researchers had examined the bone-mineral density of 15 cosmonauts who had spent from one to six months aboard the Mir space station. They had found a striking loss of bone density, in some cases as serious as that experienced by paraplegic patients. The team of doctors suggested that physicians should examine astronauts more closely for susceptibility to bone-weakening conditions such as osteoporosis, before they traveled into space, and that postflight recovery periods should be much longer than previous standards dictated. The sample study found that astronauts experienced an average bone-density loss of more than 5 percent, and that the lost bone did not immediately regenerate after postflight recovery periods. Scientists had long been aware of the physical challenges posed by the lack of gravity in the space environment. Therefore, NASA and the space agencies of other countries had carefully dictated diet and exercise programs for astronauts. The study had special relevance, however, because the international space community was continuing work on the ISS and anticipating even longer stays in space.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, 1976 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physiology and Medicine, as Senior Advisor to the Administrator, effective immediately. While continuing in his position as Director of NASAs Astrobiology Institute, Blumberg would also provide guidance to NASAs newly created Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR), an interdisciplinary effort combining research in biology, physics, chemistry, and engineering. Goldin also announced that NASA would begin a search, headed by Blumberg and NASA Chief Scientist Kathie L. Olsen, to fill the position of Associate Administrator for the new OBPR and other key positions. Olsen would serve as Acting Associate Administrator until NASA had filled the position.(NASA, Nobel Prize Laureate Appointed as Senior NASA Advisor, news release 00-164, 16 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-164.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
Robert R. Gilruth, an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronauticss Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.(NASA, Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies, news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Shuttle Endeavour returned safely to Earth after a successful 11-day voyage. The scientific community and the public greeted the Shuttles return with even more fanfare than usual, because the crew had obtained stunning images of Earth. Endeavours six-person crew had worked nearly around the clock, keeping radar antennas running to compile the data for three- dimensional digital maps of Earths surface. The crew had gathered more than 300 digital tapes of radar data during the mission, which NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called one of the most challenging, difficult missions we ever undertook. The mission had successfully mapped 43.5 million square miles (113 million square kilometers) of Earths terrain. NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency expected that transferring the data into readable maps would take between one and two years. NASA had obtained the images primarily for the U.S. Department of Defense, to improve the accuracy of missiles and to assist in navigation for military planes and troops.(Associated Press, Endeavour Returns with Dazzling Images of the Home Planet, 22 February 2000; Los Angeles Times, Endeavours Astronauts End Earth-Mapping Work, 22 February 2000; Chicago Tribune, Mission: Map the Earth, 22 February 2000.)
The U.S. Department of Justice filed a lawsuit against Rockwell International Inc., Boeing North American Inc., and United Space Alliance for concealing millions of dollars in fraud committed by a subcontractor. According to the suit, the subcontractor had used funds from the Shuttle program to purchase homes, jewelry, and vacations. The subcontractor accused of the fraud had pled guilty to all charges five years earlier, and the culpability of the major aerospace companies in concealing the theft was the last significant legal matter to come to trial. The three companies claimed that they had cooperated with government investigations into the 180 felony fraud violations and were not liable for the actions of the rogue subcontractor.(Associated Press, Government Sues Three Companies, Including Boeing North American, over Space Shuttle Program Fraud, 12 January 2000.)
In the wake of the failure of the Mars Polar Lander Mission, an independent assessment team appointed by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin assembled for the first time to begin a review of NASAs approach to the exploration of Mars. The 16-member team included aeronautics experts from NASA, aerospace industries, the U.S. Air Force, and academia. Although NASA officials held out hope that Lander would eventually respond to signals from Earth, Goldin tasked the team with evaluating NASAs successful and unsuccessful missions to Mars. The independent investigation continued NASAs pattern of scrutinizing all failures to improve its proficiency in the exploration of space.
After nearly two years of delays and many questions regarding the Russian Space Agencys commitment to the ISS, Russia successfully launched the Zvezda module aboard a Proton rocket. Building the 22-ton (20,000-kilogram or 20-tonne), US$320 million module, to provide living quarters for researchers aboard the ISS, had severely taxed the Russian space program. To bring the project to fruition, Russia had relied on the resourcefulness of its scientists and engineers, as well as resorting to creative financing arrangements, such as selling the U.S.-based Pizza Hut Company an advertisement for display on the side of the Proton launch rocket. Russia had insured Zvezdas launch for more than US$1 billion. Hundreds of spectators, representing aerospace companies from Russia and Western countries, witnessed the launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Watching the launch with Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised the successful completion of the long-awaited module: The Russians have gone through all sorts of difficulty with their economy, the political changes, and a whole variety of other problems, and they came through and did what they said they were going to do. Koptev made clear the high stakes for future Russian space projects, based on the successful launch and linkup of Zvezda: This is 10 years of work and the success of this launch will determine to a large extent whether the Russian space programme continues or not. The international space community greeted news of the launch as a sign that the much-postponed ISS was nearing completion. Although Russia had plans to contribute further portals to the ISS, none of its subsequent contributions had as much potential to delay the international effort.(Associated Press, Russian Launching Clears Way for Space Station, 13 July 2000; USA Today, Russia Sends Module of Space Station into Orbit, 12 July 2000; Newsday (Long Island, NY), Launch of Key Module for Space Station Is Set, 11 July 2000; Reuters, Russia Space Station Launch Insured for over $1 Bln, 12 July 2000; Reuters, Kazakhstan: Update 2-Russia Launches Key Module for ISS, 12 July 2000.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and H. Fisk Johnson, President of the Wisconsin-based private venture-capital company Fisk Ventures Inc. (FVI), signed an agreement to explore a new frontier in biotechnology. Johnson had approached NASA regarding its efforts to commercialize space activities, suggesting a partnership. NASA and FVI agreed to use NASAs bioreactor to develop commercial medical products. The bioreactor technology creates a near- weightless environment enabling cells to grow three-dimensionally. When raised in a traditional Petri dish, growing cells are flat. FVI had formed a joint venture with In Vitro Technologies Inc., called StelSys LLC, to focus on commercializing microgravity research in areas related to biological systems. StelSys paid NASA a US$100,000 licensing fee and a royalty of 5 percent of the companys profits, capped at US$2 million, for the rights to 13 patents for the bioreactor technology for five years. NASA planned to use the bioreactor on the ISS, and StelSys intended to use it to research infectious diseases and to develop a liver-assist device for patients in need of transplant surgery. Goldin remarked that the agreement was a symbol of the success that can be achieved when government, private industry, and academia work together on the exploration of new frontiers for scientific, technological, and economic growth.(NASA, Landmark Commercial Agreement Gives Biotechnology Research a New Dimension, news release 00- 143, 14 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-143.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Laura Heinauer, NASA Signs First Major Contract for Private Biotech Development, Wall Street Journal, 14 September 2000.)
NASA successfully launched the GOES-L satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The new weather satellite would provide the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with detailed readings on severe weather systems affecting the United States. NASA deemed the GOES-L satellite a top priority because of the declining returns of the aging GOES-8 satellite. NASA had delayed the US$220 million satellite project because of engine problems, causing anxiety to weather forecasters who depended on the satellites to track the powerful hurricanes that affected the United States in 1999. As Director of the National Weather Services Southern Region, William Proenza explained, It is vitally important that we have continuity of data or we may be finding ourselves impaired in our ability of forecasting. NASA had kept the May 2000 launch of the GOES-L on track, despite some calls to postpone it so that NASA could launch Shuttle Atlantis on an urgent repair mission to the International Space Station (ISS). However, NASA officials had determined that the risk of inadequate weather forecasting was too great to take a chance on delaying the launch.(Associated Press, NASA Launches Hurricane-Tracking Satellite, 3 May 2000; Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, Weather Satellite Has Successful Launch, Heads for Orbit, 3 May 2000.)
NASA named award-winning broadcast journalist Bob Jacobs as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters. Before joining NASA, Jacobs had served for four years as Projects Manager for the Washington-based Broadcast Technology Division of the Associated Press, where he helped to develop and implement newsroom management technology. Clients had included the British Broadcasting Corporation, ESPN, National Public Radio, and CBS News. Jacobs had won an Emmy award and other regional honors for excellence in journalism.(NASA, News Chief Named at NASA Headquarters, news release 00-150, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-150.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
United Space Alliance finalized its investigation into the loose pin that had delayed the October launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, reporting that the pin had come from the Vehicle Assembly Building. Technicians had incorrectly installed the pin, intended to secure a platform above part of the Shuttles fuel tank. During the Shuttles transport to the launchpad on 8 September, the 4- inch (10-centimeter) metal pin had fallen 73 feet (22 meters), landing on a fuel line near one of the tanks connections to the Shuttle. After inspectors had found the pin on 10 October, NASA officials had delayed Discoverys launch 24 hours, so that technicians could remove the pin, preventing damage during liftoff.(Kelly Young, Pin Found on Shuttle from VAB, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 November 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts attempted to deploy the new solar array at the ISS, but only one of the two panels unfurled as planned. Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega conducted a spacewalk to assist in attaching a 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) power assembly, while Marc Garneau maneuvered the Shuttles robotic arm from inside Endeavour. The spacewalkers were unable to open the latches on the storage boxes containing the folded solar panels, delaying their attempts to unfurl the array. They began to unfurl the first panel 1 hour behind schedule, but although it reached its full length in 14 minutes, the panel did not appear to have the correct tension. NASA officials decided to delay expanding the second panel for a full day, to give them time to determine the cause of the inadequate tension of the first panel. The ISS crew did not witness the deployment of the solar array, because the Shuttle crew carried out their work during the ISS crews sleep period.(Warren E. Leary, Space Station Gets Its Wings, but Only One Is Deployed, New York Times, 4 December 2000.)
Chester M. Lee, who had served as Mission Director for six Apollo Missions to the Moon, including Apollo 13, died from complications of open-heart surgery. Lee had begun his 23-year career with NASA in 1965 after retiring from the U.S. Navy, specializing primarily on the Apollo Missions. He had also served as Program Director for the 19731975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the first joint venture between the United States and the former Soviet Union.(Associated Press, Chet Lee, Former NASA Worker, Dies at 80, 7 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, Obituaries Chester Lee; Navy Captain, Apollo Mission Director, 9 March 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle programs history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crewincluding toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipmentand installing the stations toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully, 20 September 2000.)
NASA celebrated the 20th anniversary of its Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP), created to encourage promising high school students, especially minorities, to pursue careers in math, science, and engineering. During the first 20 years of the program, nearly 3,000 students participated, and 3,300 NASA employees served as SHARP mentors. Most SHARP student participants had served as interns at one of NASAs research centers during the summer months. NASA had begun the program and had continued to fund it as part of its educational mission.(NASA, NASAs SHARP Program Celebrates 20 Years of Excellence, news release 00-96, 19 June 2000.)
NASA announced that, on 3 September 2000, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) aboard NASAs Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) satellite had detected an 11 million-square-mile (28.5 million-square-kilometer) ozone-depletion areasurpassing the ozone holes record of 10.5 million square miles (27.2 million square kilometers) set on 19 September 1998. Scientists investigating the extent of the ozone-depletion area expressed their surprise, suggesting that early-spring conditions and an extremely intense Antarctic vortexan upper-altitude stratospheric air current that moves around the continentmight partly explain the record-setting size. Jack A. Kaye of the Office of Earth Sciences, Research Director at NASA Headquarters, remarked that, although scientists expect variations in the size of the ozone hole from one year to the next, they plan to observe the evolution of the ozone-depletion area in the coming months, to compare it with previous years. Manager of NASAs Upper Atmosphere Research Program Michael J. Kurylo suggested that the new data reinforced concerns about the fragile nature of the ozone layer, indicating that, although international agreements had curbed the production of ozone-destroying gases, concentrations of those gases in the stratosphere were just reaching their peak levels. Therefore, he warned that it would be decades before the depletion area in the ozone layer would no longer occur annually. Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar commented that such discoveries demonstrated the value of long-term observations.(NASA, Largest-Ever Ozone Hole Observed over Antarctica, news release 00-137, 7 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-137.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASAs exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commissions report and Collinss response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America, news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
The government of the Peoples Republic of China released a document outlining its policy regarding its future human spaceflight program and satellite-launch industries. The document, which provided the outside world with information about Chinas top-secret space program, described the Chinese space industry as an integral part of the states comprehensive development strategy and stated, exploration and utilization of outer space should be for peaceful purposes and benefit the whole of mankind. The paper provided details of Chinas satellite program, stating that as of October 2000, China had developed and launched 47 satellites with a success rate of over 90 percent. China had four satellite series in operation: the Dongfanghong telecommunications series; the Fengyun meteorological series; the Shijian research and technology series; and the Ziyuan Earth-observation series, which had recently launched its first spacecraft. The paper also outlined Chinas efforts toward international cooperation, notably Chinas signing of an agreement with a dozen countries, including the United States, Russia, Japan, and several European countries, allowing for scientific exchange and joint development of spacecraft components, as well as for commercial launch services. To date, China had launched 27 foreign-made satellites using its Long March series of rockets.(Stephen Clark, China Temporarily Lifts Its Veil on Its Secret Space Program, Spaceflight Now, 24 November 2000.)
After completing four months of on-orbit checkout and verification, Terra, the newest in NASAs series of Earth Observing System Satellites, became functional. NASA had developed and launched Terra to monitor Earths atmosphere on a daily basis. Researchers hoped that gathering frequent data would allow a more comprehensive assessment of Earths climate change. According to Yoram J. Kaufman, Project Scientist for Terra at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Terra is measuring and documenting the Earths vital signs, many of them for the first time. In the midst of public and scholarly discussions of global warming and climate change, the new research satellite was a step toward understanding the causes of the changes. The data will help us understand our planet, aid in our distinguishing between natural and human-induced changes, and show us how the Earths climate affects the quality of our lives, Kaufman clarified. The satellites first transmitted images thrilled scientists. The satellite surveyed North America, creating images in many different layers, to reveal how different levels of population and types of vegetation affected the climate. NASA officials planned to make the images obtained by Terra available to business, scientists, and the public.(NASA, Terra Spacecraft Open for Business, news release 00-62, 19 April 2000; NASA, New Views of Earth from Terra Satellite Wednesday, news release N00-16, 18 April 2000.)
Lockheed Martin announced that for the third time in four years, the Air Traffic Control Association had awarded the company its Industry Award, recognizing Lockheeds outstanding achievement in and contribution to the science of air traffic control. The award specifically recognized Lockheed Martin Air Traffic Management for its worldwide support of air traffic control systems. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the German Civil Aviation Authority, and the United Kingdoms National Air Traffic Services Ltd. Had all nominated the company for the award.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Receives Prestigious Air Traffic Control Association Award, news release, 27 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinReceivesPrestigious Ai.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
NASAs Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler announced that NASA had decided to send two large scientific rovers to Mars in 2003, rather than a single craft. The new plan called for the two craft to launch within weeks of each other, reaching Mars in January 2004 after their respective seven and one-half-month-long journeys. The two 300-pound (136- kilogram) rovers, exact duplicates of each other and similar to the highly successful Sojourner rover of 1997, would head to different locations on Mars. Mars Program Director G. Scott Hubbard explained that NASA had undertaken an extensive study of the two-rover option, weighing the excellent launch opportunity in 2003 against resource requirements and schedule constraints. The study teams concluded that it would be possible to successfully develop and launch identical packages, and that the new plan would not only double NASAs scientific return but also add resiliency and robustness to the Mars exploration program. Although NASA had yet to select the two landing sites, Mars Program Scientist James B. Garvin suggested that possible locations included those with evidence of the existence of water in the past. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Principal Investigator for the rovers Athena science package, explained that the goal of each rover would be to learn about ancient water and climate conditions on Mars. Each craft would operate as a robotic field geologist, reading the geological record at its landing site to discover what conditions had formed the local rocks and soils.(NASA, NASA Plans To Send Rover Twins to Mars in 2003, news release 00-124, 10 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-124.txt (accessed 7 May 2008).)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantiss thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISSs orbit, Atlantiss astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantiss visit.(Los Angeles Times, Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries, 24 May 2000.)
In a letter to Acting NASA Administrator Daniel Mulville, NASA Advisory Council (NAC) issued its recommendations on the management and future development of the ISS. NAC provided the recommendations two weeks after it had received an assessment created by the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force. NASA and the OMB had created the IMCE to perform an independent external review of the ISS. In its letter, NAC stated that NASA needed to resolve budgetary and management problems with the space station. NAC also recommended that NASA clarify its scientific priorities for the ISS and focus on a reduced configuration of the ISS that could serve three crew members. However, NAC also recommended that NASA continue funding components of the ISS that could serve a larger crew, such as a lifeboat vehicle and crew quarters.(New York Times, NASA Report Endorses Cuts at Space Station, 21 December 2001; NASA, NASA Advisory Council Releases Space Station Recommendations, news release N01-76, 20 December 2001.)
The ISS Management and Cost Evaluation Task Force (IMCE) held its first meeting on 20 and 21 August at NASA Headquarters. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had created the IMCE in July 2001 to consider the ISS programs budget and management challenges and to determine a more efficient and effective method for NASA and its partners to construct the orbiting space station. Goldin had appointed A. Thomas Young, former president of Martin Marietta, to chair the 20-member Task Force, composed of Nobel Laureates and a highly regarded surgeon. In addition, a Financial Management Team and a Cost Analysis Support Team would support the IMCE in its efforts. On 1 November 2001, the Task Force would report its findings to the NASA Advisory Council, which would, in turn, present its recommendations to the NASA Administrator for NASAs official response.(NASA, Space Station Program Review Team To Meet Aug. [2021]; Reporters Invited To Attend, news release N01-047, 16 August 2001; NASA, NASA Administrator Announces Distinguished Team To Review International Space Station Program, news release 01-152, 31 July 2001.)
NASA announced that it would delay Shuttle Missions STS-104 and STS-105 for several weeks because of a series of computer problems on the ISS. The computer difficulties had limited the control of the new robotic arm delivered to the ISS in April 2001. Despite the efforts of the astronauts aboard the ISS and of hundreds of experts on the ground, the malfunctions had continued to render control of the Canadian-built robotic arm impossible. NASA officials had determined that, until the situation was resolved, NASA would have to delay an Atlantis mission, scheduled for 20 June, and a Discovery mission, scheduled for 12 July, both carrying cargo that the arm must move. The delay also meant that the ISS crewYury V. Usachev, James S. Voss, and Susan J. Helmswould remain aboard ISS longer than originally planned.(Warren E. Leary, Problems with Space Stations Robotic Arm Delay Shuttle Visits, New York Times, 1 June 2001; Mark Carreau, Glitch Postpones 2 Space Station Missions, Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2001.)
NASA announced that it had canceled the X-33 rocket development project, an endeavor that many in the space industry had hoped would produce a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. NASA ended the five-year program after having invested nearly US$1 billion in developing a reusable launching vehicle. The X-33 program, contracted to Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company, had sought to build the worlds most technologically advanced space vehicleshaped like an arrowhead and protected by a heat-resistant metallic covering. Because of its capability to ascend to space without having to drop weight by discarding boosters after launch, the new vehicle would have significantly improved on the Shuttle. NASA officials had hoped that the X- 33 would lead to development of the VentureStar vehicle, for transporting people and cargo into space. Operating at considerably less expense to NASA than the Space Shuttles, the VentureStar would permit more space missions per year. NASAs decision to cut funding for the X-33 was part of its general effort to reduce its budget. NASA officials in charge of the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) had determined that, although the X-33 program had yielded significant new knowledge, it had not advanced to a point at which NASA engineers could readily implement the new technology. Arthur G. Stephenson, the Director of NASAs MSFC, which had managed the program, called the decision to deny further funding a very tough decision.(NASA, NASA Reaches Milestone in Space Launch Initiative Program; Also Announces No SLI Funding for X- 33 or X-34, news release 01-31, 1 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, NASA Ends Project on Rocket Meant To Replace Space Shuttle, New York Times, 2 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Kills $1.3 Billion Space Plane Project, Washington Post, 2 March 2001; Los Angeles Times, NASA Ends X-33 Project that Sought To Cut Spaceflight Costs, 2 March 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, to honor the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks, NASA would carry American flags into space and give the flags to survivors of the attacks and families of the victims. NASA called the memorial to the people who had lost their lives in the events of 11 September Flags for Heroes and Families. Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to launch on 29 November 2001, would carry nearly 6,000 flags. NASA would later have the flags mounted on specially designed memorial certificates and would distribute them to survivors and to victims families.(NASA, NASA Administrator Launches Flags for Heroes and Families Campaign, news release 01-195, 11 October 2001.)
In preparation for the final descent of the Mir space station, the Russian Space Agency negotiated a US$200 million insurance policy covering any damage that might occur if pieces of the craft landed in populated areas. Russian officials planned to fire the engines of the cargo ship attached to the space station, thereby pulling Mir from orbit and sending the space station hurtling into Earths atmosphere. Scientists predicted that intense heat would destroy most of the station during reentry, but that some fragments would hit Earth. Although space agencies had successfully deorbited many rockets and satellites to final resting places in the ocean, Russia faced increasing international consternation regarding the damage Mirs reentry might cause. Japan was at higher risk from fragments of Mir than other countries, because the space station would pass over Japan in its final, low orbit.
U.S. Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta allowed privately owned and operated aircraft to use the nations airspace as part of a phased restoration of the national airspace system. However, the Department of Transportation would allow this category of aircraftoften referred to as general aviationto resume flights only if they complied with certain restrictions. For example, general aviation flights would have to operate according to the Instrument Flight Rules, which required certified pilots to operate under direction from air traffic controllers subsequent to filing specific flight plans with the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). In addition, the Department of Transportation would not permit general aviation flights to fly within 25 nautical miles of New York City or Washington, DC.(FAA, Secretary Mineta Re-opens Skies to General Aviation, news release DOT 97-01, 14 September 2001, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsid=5432 (accessed 28 January 2010).)
John F. Yardley, who had worked at the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation, serving as the Launch Operation Manager for the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft and the Technical Director for the Gemini program before joining NASA in 1974, died at the age of 76. NASA had awarded Yardley its Public Service Medal in 1963 and in 1966 for his work on the Mercury and the Gemini. From 1981 to 1989, Yardley had been President of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Yardley as responsible as any individual for getting the Space Shuttle Program off the ground.(NASA, John F. Yardley, Human Space Flight Pioneer, Dies, news release 01-130, 27 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, John Yardley, 76, Dies; Had Central Role in Space Flight, New York Times, 28 June 2001.)
On the 15th anniversary of the launch of the Mir space station and with its doom imminent, Russian scientists and other space enthusiasts protested the plan to use a controlled descent to destroy the aging vessel. Once a point of pride for the Soviet space program, Mir had remained in use far beyond its planned lifespan and had fallen into disrepair. Russian Space Agency Chief Yuri Koptev attempted once again to explain why Mir had to come down: The Mir has lived a wonderful life and must end it in a graceful way. We must discard it while we are still capable of controlling it, not turn its descent into roulette that threatens the entire global community. Russia had planned to initiate Mirs final descent in mid-March 2001.(Associated Press, Report: Russia Puts Off Dumping of Mir for a Week, 15 February 2001; Associated Press, Russia Marks Mirs 15th Anniversary by Assuaging Fears of Its Demise, 19 February 2001; Associated Press, Scientists Protest on Mirs 15th Anniversary, 20 February 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and President of the Italian Space Agency Sergio DeJulio signed a framework for cooperation agreement for the construction of the habitation module for the ISS. The ISS partners planned the module to house the ISS crew, providing a galley and a Treadmill Vibration Isolation System among other features. In exchange for designing and manufacturing the habitation module, the Italian Space Agency received a commitment from NASA to provide Italian astronauts with access to the Shuttle and the ISS, as well as to help train Italian astronauts for their time in space. The bilateral agreement continued the trend of cooperation among nations, making the ISS a truly international endeavor.(NASA, NASA Administrator Goldin and ASI President Dejulio To Sign Framework for Cooperation, news release N01-24, 19 April 2001; NASA Watch, NASA/ASI International Space Station Habitation Module Project Framework for Cooperation, http://www.nasawatch.com/iss/04.19.01.nasa.asi.hab.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
NASA, conducting a test over the Pacific Ocean, aborted a planned attempt at the speed record for aircraft when the Pegasus rocket carrying a prototype X-43A jet veered out of control. NASA had employed a B-52 to carry the X-43A and the Pegasus rocket to 45,000 feet, where the test was to begin. According to the plan, the plane would release the Pegasus, which would then carry the X-43A to 100,000 feet (30,500 meters) before releasing the jet. Instead, however, the Pegasus rocket had gone out of control almost immediately after its release. NASA spokesperson Alan Brown explained: The Pegasus went out of control. It appeared parts were breaking off of it. NASA ordered the Pegasus destroyed after only a few seconds, and the ensuing explosion resulted in the loss of the scramjet as well. NASA officials and flight enthusiasts had hoped that the US$185 million experimental plane would top speeds of Mach 7. Instead, engineers scrambled to determine the cause of the accident.(Peter Pae, Hypersonic Aircraft Test Fails; Plane Is Destroyed, Los Angeles Times, 3 June 2001; New York Times, NASA Halts Scramjet Test, 3 June 2001; Washington Post, NASA Aborts Bid for Speed Mark, Blows Up Rocket, 3 June 2001.)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASAs global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASAs JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deeres NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASAs Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm, news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of Viking 1 Landers safe descent to the surface of Mars. The successful mission, marking the first time that humankind had sent a spacecraft to the Red Planet and the first landing of an American probe on another planet, inaugurated a series of research-oriented missions to Mars. In celebrating this banner day in its history, NASA looked forward to new challenges and opportunities for the study of Mars. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin delivered a keynote address, Continuing the QuestCelebrating Viking and Looking to the Future of Mars Exploration, at the National Geographic Societys Grosvenor Auditorium in Washington, DC. Viking 1 Lander had remained on Mars for six years, gathering images and data invaluable for scientists. Following up on the success of the first probe, Viking 2 Lander had arrived on Marss Plain of Utopia in September 1976. The two probes had taken more than 4,500 pictures while slowly crawling over Marss surface. Perhaps as significant as the finds of Viking 1 and 2 on Mars was the fact that the probes did not find any evidence of life on the Red Planet. NASAs Langley Research Center (LaRC) had equipped both probes with biological sensors, setting a precedent for future probes to other planets to continue the search for signs of life outside of Earth. As NASA celebrated the pathbreaking Viking missions, the 2001 Mars Odyssey traveled toward the Red Planet to continue the tradition of exploring Marss hostile but fascinating landscape.
The Task Force assigned to assess NASAs management of the ISS program released a report of its findings and recommendations. NASA and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) had established the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force to analyze the space stations cost, budget, and management and to recommend how the numerous space agencies supporting the project could derive maximum benefit from their investment. The Task Forces report stated that, although the ISS programs technical achievements to date had been extraordinary, problems concerning the programs budget, management, and other matters threatened future development of the ISS. In addition, the IMCE Task Force recommended numerous changes to establish a core-complete program for the ISS, including altering program management; identifying and applying additional funding; and implementing more clearly defined programs to build the ISS so that its crew would be able to conduct high-priority research at the space station. With regard to maximizing research under the proposed FY 2002 budget, the Task Force recommended establishing research priorities, implementing a plan to execute them, and allocating more ISS crew time to high-priority research.(NASA, Report by the International Space Station Management and Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force to the NASA Advisory Council (report, Washington, DC, 1 November 2001), http://history.nasa.gov/youngrep.pdf (accessed 26 November 2008).)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the worlds leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the companys missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Societys Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist, Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk, Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
NASA collaborated with George Washington Universitys Space Policy Institute to host a symposium commemorating 40 years of human spaceflight, an era that had dawned with Alan B. Shepard Jr.s 15-minute suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin opened the conference, followed at the speakers podium by astronauts and space experts. The conference, Looking Backward, Looking Forward, provided a valuable forum, not only for discussing the accomplishments of the United States space program, but also for considering space explorations possible future evolution.(NASA, NASA Conference To Commemorate 40 Years of Human Space Flight, news release N01-28, 1 May 2001; NASA and Space Policy Institute, Looking Backward, Looking Forward: Forty Years of U.S. Human Spaceflight, (program, symposium organized by Space Policy Institute, Elliott School of International Affairs, George Washington University, in collaboration with NASA History Office, NASA Office of Policy and Plans, American Astronautical Society, and National Space Society, Washington, DC, 8 May 2001), http://history.nasa.gov/40hsconf.pdf (accessed 29 July 2008).)
The Mars Odyssey spacecraft launched successfully aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The craft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems and controlled by scientists at NASAs JPL, had headed to orbit Mars in search of evidence of water on the Red Planet. NASA officials expected the trip to Mars to take more than six months and the data collection to continue for more than two years. NASA had designed Mars Odysseyequipping it with a thermal-emissions imaging system, a gamma- ray spectrometer, and a radiation monitorto investigate further the question of whether Mars might have once supported life. By collecting data about the climate and geology of Marss surface, scientists hoped to explore theories regarding the planets seemingly harsh climate change. NASA and members of the scientific community watched the US$300 million craft closely, hoping for success. In 1999 Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander had both failed to accomplish their missions. Upon the successful launch, NASAs chief Mars program scientist celebrated: Weve got a program! This is the next step . . . Its kind of like setting off on the Lewis and Clark voyage across North America. Were bound for a new frontier.(Lockheed Martin Space Systems, Lockheed Martin-Built 2001 Mars Odyssey Successfully Launched, Begins Journey to Mars, news release, 7 April 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/ LockheedMartinBuilt2001MarsOdysseyS.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Harwood, Mars Odyssey Takes Off for Red Planet; NASAs Stalled Exploration Program Resumes with $297 Million Mission, Washington Post, 8 April 2001; Mark Carreau, Flawless Odyssey Launch Fuels Hoe: Three-Year Mission to Mars Follows Pair of NASA Failures, Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASA Succeeds in Launching Craft To Survey Mars Anxious Time Ahead for Scientists, 8 April 2001.)
The Peoples Republic of China launched a robotic spacecraft from the Gobi desert, a significant step in the countrys long-term plan to join the United States and Russia as one of the only nations capable of sending humans into space. The Shenzhou 2 craft reached orbit about 10 minutes after launch. China had shrouded its 31-year-old space program in secrecy, releasing few details about funding or about Chinas future goals. Peoples Daily, however, called the launch an important step in realizing manned spaceflight. President Jiang Zemin urged Chinese space officials to further accomplishments, saying, I hope you will work persistently and unremittingly to achieve even greater victory. Space experts speculated that a successful Shenzhou 2 mission could mean that China would be ready to send a man or woman to space in the next two to five years. Chinese officials remained circumspect regarding their exact plans.(Associated Press, Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program, 11 January 2001; Associated Press, Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth, 16 January 2001.)
The government of France named NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin as Officer of the Legion of Honor, the countrys highest award. Napoleon had created the Legion of Honor in 1802 to honor civil and military service to France. The award honored Goldin for his contribution to the cooperation of France and the United States in space endeavors. NASA and the French space agency, Centre National dEtudes Spatiales, had collaborated on Earth observation and Mars exploration, and French astronauts had flown on the Space Shuttle. Ambassador Francois Bujon de lEstang presented the award to Goldin at the residence of the French Ambassador.(NASA, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Receives French Legion of Honor Award, news release 01-202, 31 October 2001.)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASAs Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silversteins work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASAs predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASAs true founding members, who had made possible NASAs robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies, news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program, New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA, 4 June 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canadas contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISSs exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crewCommander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakovincluded astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttles fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASAs history.(NASA, Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, Endeavours International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand, news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station, Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, Endeavours Mission Will Extend Space Stations Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19, news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
Spains Prince of Asturias Foundation granted the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation to the ISS partnership, in recognition of the cooperation among the partnering space agencies that had created the orbiting space station. The Prince of Asturias Felipe de Borbon was the heir to the throne of Spain. The foundation granted the Award for International Cooperation to recognize the cultural, humanitarian, scientific, social, and technical efforts of individuals, groups, and institutions. The prince presented the award to officials representing the space agencies participating in the ISS, namely the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japans NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. Earlier in the day, the prince had called the astronauts at the ISS to congratulate them on their efforts.(NASA, International Space Station Receives 2001 Prince of Asturias Award, news release 01-206, 26 October 2001; Fundacion Principe de Asturias, The Aims of the Foundation, http://www.fundacionprincipedeasturias.org/ing/00/objetivos.html (accessed 28 November 2008).)
The ISS Partnership agreed to allow space tourist Dennis A. Tito to travel to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TM-32, scheduled to launch at the end of April. The agreement among the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States followed months of disagreement regarding the safety and propriety of allowing the wealthy American businessman to purchase passage into space for US$20 million. Without conferring with NASA or with other members of the ISS Partnership, the Russian Space Agency had made an agreement with Tito permitting him to take a place on Russias Soyuz spacecraft. NASA had protested against including an individual who was not a trained astronaut on the spaceflight at such an early point in the ISSs development. After Russia had reached the agreement with Tito, he had undergone months of training. The ISS Partnership required Tito to sign a waiver absolving NASA of any liability for his safety and required him to promise that he would pay for anything he damaged. The ISS Partnership also announced plans to formalize the criteria for future visits to the station.(Warren E. Leary, Deal Reported in Long-Running Dispute on Putting Tourist on Space Station, New York Times, 21 April 2000; NASA, International Space Station Partnership Grants Flight Exemption for Dennis Tito, news release 01-83, 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASA Continues To Resist Visit by First Tourist, 15 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, Financiers Spaceflight Gets Final Clearance, Washington Post, 25 April 2001.)
NASA named Daniel R. Mulville as Acting Administrator, to serve until the U.S. Senate had officially confirmed a new Administrator. Mulville was to replace previous NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin while Sean OKeefePresident George W. Bushs nominee for the positionwas awaiting Senate confirmation. Before becoming Acting Administrator, Mulville had served as Associate Deputy Administrator for NASA since the beginning of 2000. Mulville, who had a PhD in structural mechanics, had begun working at NASA in 1986.(NASA History Division, Biographies of NASA Administrators: Daniel R. Mulville, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/mulville.htm (accessed 19 December 19, 2008).)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Sean OKeefe as NASAs Administrator. With the confirmation, OKeefe replaced Daniel S. Goldin as Administrator and, at the age of 45, became the youngest person ever to lead NASA. Before becoming NASAs Administrator, OKeefe had served as Deputy Director of OMB, a post he had held since March 2001. OKeefe had also served as Secretary of the Navy under former President George H. W. Bush.(Kristen Mack and Mark Carreau, Senate Approves OKeefe as NASA Administrator, Hammond as NEA Head, Houston Chronicle, 21 December 2001.)
Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 572, 1 July 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx572.html (accessed 4 August 2008). The mission called for the astronauts to attach the new American-made Joint Airlock to the ISS and to conduct important repairs to the station during three separate spacewalks. The design of the new airlock permitted the ISS crew access to and from space, wearing either Russian or American spacesuits. During the days leading up to the launch, Mission Specialist Michael L. Gernhardt explained: The term Joint Airlock means that its applicable to both the U.S. [space]suit, the EMU [Extravehicular Mobility Unit], and to the Russian suit, the Orlan suit. The main objectives of our flight are to install four High Pressure Gas Tanksthat would be two oxygen, two nitrogento activate and check out the airlock and then to make the first spacewalk from the Joint Airlock and demonstrate the viability of the whole process and sort of usher in the space station era of EVA.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573, 1 August 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx573.html (accessed 11 August 2008); William Harwood, Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Crew To Install Airlock, Expanding Capabilities, Washington Post, 13 July 2001; NASA, NASA Prepares To Open a New Doorway to Space, news release 01-138, 9 July 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin received the Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy presented by the National Space Club, one of the United States most prestigious space awards. Leaders from the aerospace industry, governmental space programs, and academics had selected Goldin for the award. I am both honored and humbled by the award which validates and supports NASAs continuing mission to pioneer the frontiers of space, Goldin remarked upon receiving the honor.(NASA, NASA Administrator Receives Premier Space Honor, news release 01-61, 30 March 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his resignation, effective 17 November 2001. Goldin, who had become the head of NASA on 1 April 1992, was NASAs longest-serving Administrator. During his tenure, Goldin had overseen numerous successes for NASA, including the launch of Mars Pathfinder, the repair of the HST, and the redesign of the ISS. Goldin stated that he was leaving for personal reasons and that he had accepted an interim position at the Council on Competitiveness, an organization promoting U.S. economic competitiveness, both at home and abroad. However, newspapers noted that Goldin had made the announcement during a time of budgetary difficulties for NASA. Moreover, media reported that White House officials had already sought candidates to replace Goldin, although, according to NASA, President George W. Bush had not yet selected his replacement.(NASA, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Announces Resignation, news release 01-191, 17 October 2001; William Harwood, NASA Chief to Step Down, Washington Post, 18 October 2001.)
The National Research Council (NRC), the research arm of the National Academy of Sciences, released a report on the ISS, outlining NASAs efforts to limit cost overruns on the project. The report concluded that, if NASA proceeded with its plans to halt construction, once the ISSs core was complete, and to limit the stations crew, equipment, and other components, the ISS would be unlikely to become a first-class laboratory. NRC reported that capping the crew to three persons would have a highly detrimental impact on the quality of scientific research conducted on board the ISS, because a crew of such a small size would have to devote most of its time to station maintenance and operation. In addition, NRC stated that NASA had made its decision to cancel or delay equipment for experiments without assessing scientific priorities or determining which research plans the curtailments would affect most. NASAs official representative responded that NASA was committed to building the ISS beyond the core-complete stage. Moreover, NASA intended to continue developing the ISS based on decisions concerning the stations scientific priorities and planned to take any steps necessary to achieve those goalsfor example, increasing the size of the stations crew.(Warren E. Leary, Cuts Lessen Space Stations Value to Science, Report Says, New York Times, 20 September 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle, news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post, 16 May 2002.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Frederick D. Gregory as NASAs Deputy Administrator, making Gregory the first African American to serve as NASAs second-in-command. Before becoming Deputy Administrator, Gregory had served as NASAs Associate Administrator for Space Flight from December 2001 to August 2002 and as Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance from June 1992 to December 2001. In addition, Gregory had been an astronaut on three Shuttle missions and had served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years.(Kelly Young, Senate Names New NASA Official, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 August 2002; NASA, NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory, http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/gregory_bio.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
James S. Martin, former NASA Manager of the Viking missions to Mars, died at the age of 81. Martin had led the nationwide team of 750 engineers, scientists, and technicians that had developed the Viking 1 and Viking 2 spacecraft. The two craft had launched in 1975 and landed on Mars a year later, making Viking the first mission to successfully soft-land on the surface of another planet. Martin had joined NASA in 1964 as an Assistant Project Manager for the Lunar Orbiter, and in 1967 he had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal for his contribution to that project. He had departed from NASA in 1976 to work for Martin Marietta Aerospace, and in 2000 NASA had asked him to leave retirement to lead its effort to restructure its Mars Exploration Program.(NASA, Mars Viking Leader, James S. Martin Jr. Dies, news release 02-72, 18 April 2002.)
NASA officials announced the delay of the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113, scheduled for 21 July. Engineers had discovered fuel-line cracks, the same problem that had previously led NASA to ground some Space Shuttles. At the time of the announcement, NASA officials remained uncertain of the new date of Endeavours launch, suggesting that, although the Shuttle would be ready to fly by September 2002, NASA might delay the launch until at least the end of 2002.(Warren E. Leary, Delay Likely for Shuttle Mission with Israeli, New York Times, 20 July 2002.)
NASA selected the National Consortium for Aviation Mobility (NCAM)a consortium of more than 100 public and private entities involved in transportation issuesas its partner in a joint venture to develop air-mobility technologies for small aircraft and small airports. By mid-2005 NASA and NCAM intended to create a flight demonstration, called a proof-of-concept, of NASAs Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS). Engineers planned for the system to provide on-demand, point-to-point transportation with 4- to 10-passenger aircraft operating from nearly 5,400 public-use landing facilities. NASA officials hoped SATS would improve the affordability, efficiency, reliability, and safety of small aircraft servicing small communities throughout the United States. However, NASA wanted to determine the projects feasibility and to share its costs through partnerships with public and private entities. NASA expected that funding from the Department of Transportation and other federal agencies, along with its own contributions, would total nearly US$40 million for research over four years.(NASA, NASA Selects Partner for Aviation Research, news release 02-89, 14 May 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced his selection of an independent task force to assess the productivity and priorities of the research produced by NASAs Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) and to provide a report to the NASA Advisory Council. OKeefe expected the task force, designated the Research Maximization and Prioritization Task Force (ReMAP), to recommend strategies the OBPR could use to achieve its research goals and still remain within President George W. Bushs requested budget. In addition, OKeefe requested the task force to offer assessments and recommendations to guide NASA in maximizing the scientific returns of the ISSs missions and of its other programs. OKeefe selected Rae Silver, the Helene L. and Mark N. Kaplan Professor of Natural and Physical Sciences at Columbia University, as the chairperson of ReMAP.(NASA, NASA Administrator Names Task Force To Review Biological and Physical Research Programs, news release 02-61, 29 March 2002.)
The Office of Space Flight at NASA Headquarters decided that Palmdale Manufacturing Facility in California would no longer perform major modifications to Space Shuttle orbiters. Instead, NASAs KSC, already responsible for preparing the Shuttles for launching, would also provide the modifications. The Palmdale facility had served as the manufacturing site for all orbiters since the Space Shuttle programs inception, as well as providing periodic maintenance and safety upgrades. Based on cost and risk assessments, the Office of Space Flight had determined that maintaining two modification facilities for four Shuttle orbiters was no longer financially feasible, and that performing such work at KSC would minimize associated costs and risks. The change was part of NASAs effort to absorb President George W. Bushs proposed budget cuts. Because it overhauled one of the four Shuttle orbiters every two to three years, NASA estimated that transferring this work to KSC would save approximately US$30 million per overhaul.(NASA, Kennedy Space Center To Perform Shuttle Modifications, news release 02-22, 5 February 2002; Mark Carreau, NASA To Overhaul Shuttles in Florida, Houston Chronicle, 6 February 2002.)
NASA announced that it would keep all four Space Shuttles grounded until at least September 2002 because of potentially dangerous fractures discovered in the fuel lines of all four Shuttles. NASA officials also reported that engineers now considered the cracks less of a safety concern than they had feared when NASA first discovered them in June 2002.(William Harwood, NASA Grounds Space Shuttle Fleet over Fuel Line Cracks, Washington Post, 13 July 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of two proposals for space missions for its Earth System Science Pathfinder small-satellite program, developed to research Earths carbon cycle and the relationship of climate change and oceans. Specifically, the selected proposals would support the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO), which would provide global measurements of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and the Aquarius mission, which would map salt concentrations on oceans surfaces to learn how they affect ocean circulation and global heat redistribution. NASA planned to provide up to US$175 million for each of the two proposals selected for the program. NASA appointed David Crisp of JPL as Principal Investigator for the OCO mission and Chester J. Chet Koblinsky of GSFC as Principal Investigator for the Aquarius mission. NASA had numerous university, corporate, and international collaborators for both missions, including the Argentine Space Program, a significant partner in the Aquarius mission.
NASA officials stated that NASA had used Web sites such as Yahoo! and eBay to find discontinued electronic equipment. NASA had continued to use electronic components such as 8-inch-floppy-disc drives, circuit boards, and computer chips, not in the Space Shuttles themselves, but in equipment used to service and support the Shuttles. For example, NASA had purchased outdated medical equipment to acquire the increasingly scarce Intel 8086 computer chip, a variant of the chip used in IBMs first personal computers in 1981. NASA had continued to use the Intel 8086 chip in diagnostic equipment for the Space Shuttle booster rockets, also developed in the early 1980s. Although NASA planned to develop various systems with new hardware, some crucial systems remained dependent on antiquated electronic parts.(William J. Broad, For Parts, NASA Boldly Goes . . . on Ebay, New York Times, 12 May 2002.)
The five partner space agencies of the ISSthe Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japans NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency approved the 2002 Program Action Plan for the ISS at a meeting held in Tokyo, Japan. The partner agencies agreed to expand the stations capabilities, to increase the number of permanent ISS crew members, and to provide additional crew rescue vehicles. They also agreed to a process for selecting an ISS configuration, once the ISS had accommodated the remaining components. In this process, each of the stations partner agencies would make additional programmatic and technical assessments, cost estimations, and internal budget reviews. In addition, the agencies announced that they would approve a station configuration option by March 2003, select a revised configuration by June or July 2003, and agree upon a final configuration by December 2003.(NASA, Space Station Action Plan Approved, news release 02-241, 6 December 2002.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASAs budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASAs accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASAs FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASAs lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASAs 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASAs accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAOs auditing methodology rather than in NASAs system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, NASA Space Station Cost Limits (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced that, after international partners had completed certain portions of the ISS, former schoolteacher Barbara R. Morgan would fly on a Space Shuttle mission to the station. NASA had selected Morgan as a mission specialist in the astronaut class of 1998. She had subsequently worked in ISS Mission Control, relaying instructions between ISS Mission Control and the crew of Expedition 4 aboard the ISS. Morgan had previously served as a backup candidate for the Teacher in Space Program, training with Christa McAuliffe and the STS-51L crew of Space Shuttle Challenger. At the time of OKeefes announcement, Morgan was part of a new Educator Astronaut Program administered by NASA and the Department of Education, designed to attract students to engineering, math, and science.(NASA, Press Briefing Scheduled with NASA Administrator and Astronaut Barbara Morgan, news release N02-28, 15 April 2002; William Harwood, McAuliffes Backup Will Go to Space in 2004, Washington Post, 13 April 2002.)
The leaders of the space agencies participating in the ISS met at ESAs headquarters in Paris to discuss the programs status. The attendees included representatives of NASA, the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, Japans NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. All of the agencies reaffirmed their commitment to work on developing, assembling, and using the ISS for both applied and scientific research. In addition, the agencies agreed on a timeline for the next measures they would undertake to ensure that the construction and operation of the ISS met system engineering and safety requirements, so that participants could use it for various research objectives.(NASA, Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting, news release 02-105, 3 June 2002.)
The ISSs international partners made several decisions during a meeting held in Houston, Texas. The meetings purpose was to discuss the provision of crew return vehicles (CRVs) for the ISS and plans for the stations construction, through 2008. NASA announced that the collaborating space agencies had agreed to a modified launch schedule for components provided by Canada, Japan, and ESA. In addition, they had discussed the possibility of Russias continuing to provide Soyuz CRVs until NASA had completed the construction of a replacement vehicle.(John Kelly, International Space Station Partners OK Modified Launch Schedule, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 October 2002.)
Citing terrorism concerns, NASA officials stated that NASA planned to change the manner in which it released information about launch times to the public. NASA officials said that NASA would no longer publicize launch times until 24 hours before liftoff, at which time NASA would announce a 4-hour time slot during which liftoff would occur. The change was a reversal of NASAs previous practice of announcing specific launch times months in advance of liftoff.(Steve Siceloff, NASA To Withhold Shuttle Launch Times, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 March 2002. 64)
NASA announced the selection of TRW Inc. to lead the team to build the HSTs successor, a new space-based observatory planned to launch in 2010. NASA planned to call the new satellite the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), in honor of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Under the US$824.8 million contract, TRW and its partner organizations would build an observatory capable of viewing deeper into space than the HST. The telescopes main mirror would unfold to a diameter of at least 20 feet (6.1 meters), thereby providing six times more light-gathering area than the HST, which had an 8-foot (2.4-meter) primary mirror. The telescope would also have instruments highly sensitive to infrared light, which would help astronomers understand the universes creation and evolution. In addition, NASA planned for the new telescope to orbit 940,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth, within the second Lagrange point or L2, where a spacecraft maintains a balance between the gravity of the Sun and of Earth. Although the L2 orbit would be too far from Earth to allow astronauts to service the observatory, it would enable the observatory to cool to very low temperatures without the use of complex refrigeration equipment.(NASA, NASA Announces Contract for Next-Generation Space Telescope Named After Space Pioneer, news release 02-171, 10 September 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe named Jeremiah F. Creedon, Director of NASAs LaRC, as the new Associate Administrator for the Office of Aerospace Technology at NASA Headquarters. Creedon had begun working at LaRC in June 1963 as an engineer, eventually succeeding Paul F. Holloway to become LaRCs seventh director. Delma C. Freeman Jr., LaRCs Deputy Director, became its Acting Director.(NASA LaRC, NASA Administrator Names Langley Director Associate Administrator of Aerospace Technology, news release 02-037, 14 May 2002; NASA History Division, NASA Center Directors, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
The U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space began hearings on legislation to reauthorize NASA programs. Subcommittee chairman Ron Wyden (DOR) expressed concern about the agencys financial management, particularly cost overruns for the ISS. He also urged NASA to maintain the excellence of the Shuttle program while research continued on a next-generation space vehicle. Members of the subcommittee heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, who addressed them for the first time, and from William F. Readdy, Deputy Associate Administrator of the NASA Office of Space Flight. The members of the subcommittee questioned OKeefe about his vision for NASA and his plans to reduce NASAs budget by ending particular programs. In his prepared statement, OKeefe discussed the status of the ISS and Space Shuttle programs.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, NASA Reauthorization, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 May 2002; Karen Masterson, JSC Mission May Hit Detour, Houston Chronicle, 9 May 2002.)
NASA announced that it had grounded all four Space Shuttles because of newly discovered mechanical problems, postponing indefinitely the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia. Previously, NASA had scheduled Columbias launch for 19 July 2002. According to NASA officials, engineers had found small fissures in metal liners within the fuel pipes of the main engines of Shuttles Atlantis and Discovery. If left unrepaired, the cracks could cause pieces of the liners to break off, possibly damaging a Shuttles engine while in flight.(Warren E. Leary, Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded To Fix Cracks, New York Times, 26 June 2002.)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearingNASA Workforce and Management Challengesto garner information about NASAs efforts to address concerns regarding its human capital, competitive sourcing for the Space Shuttle program, and other matters. Committee members heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe; David M. Walker, Comptroller General of the United States; and Mark D. Roth, General Counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees. OKeefe discussed NASAs Strategic Human Capital Plan, a systemic method of managing human capital according to NASAs vision and mission. In addition, OKeefe announced the termination of the comprehensive Strategic Resources Review initiated during the Clinton administration to create a blueprint for NASAs future facility, missions, and workforce requirements. Roth argued that, because NASA expected a high number of retirements in the near future, its existing and proposed personnel policies were inadequate to address the resulting loss in human capital. Walker discussed methods NASA could use to strengthen its human capital and to address its difficulties with contract management, as well as the increasing expense of the ISS program and of space exploration.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Workforce and Management Challenges, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 18 July 2002, http://science.house.gov/publications/hearings_markups_details.aspx?NewsID=1424 (accessed 21 August 2008 through Lexis-Nexis Congressional); Larry Wheeler, OKeefe Scraps Review of NASA, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 July 2002.)
The White House informed NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe that it was withdrawing Major General Charles F. Bolden as its nominee for NASAs Deputy Administrator. According to a White House spokesperson, President George W. Bush had withdrawn the nomination so that Bolden could serve the military in the war on terrorism. At the time of the nomination, Bolden, a former astronaut, was the commanding general for the Third U.S. Marine Aircraft Wing, which had nearly 11,000 U.S. Marines in Afghanistan as part of Operation Enduring Freedom.(NASA, Deputy Administrator Nomination Withdrawn, news release 02-49, 13 March 2002; Mark Carreau and Bennett Roth, Nomination Is Withdrawn for Deputys Post at NASA, Houston Chronicle, 14 March 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe testified before the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, which has primary jurisdiction for setting NASAs annual funding levels. The subcommittee hearing was held in preparation for markup of FY 2003 appropriations legislation. Major media reported that subcommittee members were critical of NASAs plans to eliminate certain programs to achieve President George W. Bushs proposed reduction of US$1 billion in funding from NASAs human spaceflight programs. In response to the comments of some members of the subcommittee, OKeefe noted that, because NASA planned to complete its review of human spaceflight programs later in the year, he could not yet identify the programs that the budget cuts would affect. OKeefe also said that NASA would provide Congress with a review of its scientific priorities by June and an independent cost assessment by August.(Karen Masterson, DeLay Calls Plans for NASA Timid, Houston Chronicle, 18 April 2002; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Apropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations for 2003, Part I, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 17 April 2002.)
GAO released a report examining NASAs established mechanisms for learning lessons from past failures. The report, NASA: Better Mechanisms for Sharing Lessons Learned, noted that NASAs investigations of its past failures and its evaluations of its programs had led it to establish various mechanisms to ensure that NASAs personnel had learned from past successes and failures and had applied their knowledge to future programs and projects. These mechanisms included a Web-based database of lessons learned, program reviews, and the development of a business strategy called knowledge management. However, GAOs report also noted that, according to interviews with NASA managers, NASAs established policies, procedures, and systems were not facilitating the use of lessons learned. GAO indicated that this was largely because managers faced challenges, such as lack of time to note, submit, and share lessons learned, and cultural barriers, such as reluctance to discuss mistakes for fear of their colleagues disapproval. Among the reports main recommendations were that NASA develop a strong managerial commitment to sharing knowledge and create technological systems capable of facilitating access to this information.(U.S. General Accounting Office, NASA: Better Mechanisms Needed for Sharing Lessons Learned (report no. GAO-02-195, Washington, DC, January 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02195.pdf (accessed 31 July 2002). 181 NASA, Aging NASA Spacecraft To Reenter Earths Atmosphere, news release 02-16, 29 January 2002; NASA, EUVE Spacecraft Re-enters Earths Atmosphere, news release 02-19, 31 January 2002; NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, EUVE Guest Observer FacilityThe Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Mission, http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/euve/euvegof.html (accessed 30 July 2002).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced that Peggy A. Whitson would be NASAs first ISS Science Officer. In the future, NASA planned to assign one of its astronauts to the post for each ISS expedition crew. The objective of the assignment was to increase the ISSs emphasis on research. According to NASA, the ISS Science Officer would focus initially on U.S. research conducted on the ISS. As the stations research capabilities expanded in the future, NASA would discuss with the ISSs international partners the possibility of expanding the ISS Science Officers role. NASAs ISS Science Officer would be responsible for working with the U.S. research community on the requirements and objectives of ISS experiments, acting as the point- of-contact between ISS crew and NASA-sponsored principal investigators, payload developers, and other ISS stakeholders. As a crew member of Expedition 5 in June 2002, Whitson, who had a PhD in biochemistry, would become the first resident scientist on the ISS.(NASA, NASA Administrator Names Whitson First NASA ISS Science Officer, news release 02-175, 16 September 2002.)
The Research Maximization and Prioritization Task Force (ReMAP) presented the executive summary of its external review to the NASA Advisory Council. NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe had created ReMAP in March 2002 to recommend strategies that NASAs Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) could use to achieve its research goals within budgetary limits. Among its recommendations, ReMAP suggested that the ISS include a chief science officer on board, and that NASA increase the ISSs equipment, the ISS crews work time, and the frequency of Shuttle flights, to enable the crew to conduct first-rate research aboard the station.(NASA, ReMaP Task Force Recognized by NASA Administrator and NASA Advisory Council Chair, news release 02-123, 10 July 2002; Warren E. Leary, Panel Asserts Reduced Space Station Plans Will Limit Scientific Work, New York Times, 11 July 2002.)
In a meeting with reporters, newly appointed NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe emphasized that, although he wanted NASA to remain at the forefront of science and technology, he also wanted to address NASAs financial and management problems. OKeefe, who had received the U.S. Senates confirmation on 20 December 2001, said he would spend the next few months learning about NASA. Explaining that he wanted both to refocus NASA and to keep it within its budget, OKeefe did not rule out the possibility of closing field centers and laying off employees to achieve his objectives. However, he stressed that he considered the budgetary problems of the ISS his immediate concern, and that he would first devote his attention to implementing the ISS Management and Cost Evaluation Task Forces (IMCEs) recommendation to scale back the ISS, at least temporarily, to reduce costs.(Warren E. Leary, New NASA Administrator Says Money Troubles Are Solvable, New York Times, 9 January 2002; William Harwood, Panel Urges Space Station Reforms, Washington Post, 3 November 2001; NASA, People: Former NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/AN_Feature_Administrator.html (accessed 31 July 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although OKeefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
The GAO presented testimony to the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space regarding the impact of the Shuttle fleets grounding on ISS construction and maintenance. Based on a GAO report published in September, a report that the full Senate committee had requested, GAO testified that the grounding of the Shuttle fleet would increase the cost of completing the ISS and could expose the stations two-person crew to additional risk. NASA had originally estimated the cost of the ISS at US$10 billion, but since 1985, the U.S. Congress had appropriated US$32 billion to the project. The Bush administration had cancelled several planned ISS modules in 2001, to offset US$4 billion in cost overruns. Since the grounding of the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, several components of the stationcompleted and ready to launchhad reached their storage limit, necessitating their replacement or refurbishment. The inability to ferry heavy items to the ISS had hampered NASAs ability to correct known safety concerns, such as the delivery of additional shielding to protect the ISS crew dormitory from orbital debris. Furthermore, NASA had estimated that the probability of space debris penetrating ISS living quarters increased by 1.6 percent for each year that the ISS partners postponed installing new shielding. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had requested the report from GAO. Members of Congress had repeatedly asked NASA to provide financial details about the effect of the Columbia accident on the ISS program. However, GAOs September report stated that neither NASA nor GAO could accurately estimate the costs associated with the grounded Shuttle fleet. GAO testified that it would be able to make such an estimate once NASA had identified precisely when Shuttle flights would resume. NASA officials agreed with GAOs findings.(U.S. General Accounting Office, Shuttle Fleets Safe Return to Flight is Key to Space Station Progress (report no. GAO-04-201T, Washington, DC, 29 October 2003), 111, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04201t.pdf (accessed 8 May 2009); Marc Carreau, Costs Up for Space Station, Report Says, Houston Chronicle, 15 October 2003; Larry Wheeler, Report: Shuttles Absence Hurts ISS, GAO Claims Station Is in Survival Mode, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 October 2003.)
NASA officials and a CAIB spokesperson stated that NASA had recovered intact, from a field in Texas, the Orbital Experiment Support System, an electronic box containing vital information from Space Shuttle Columbias descent. NASA had designed the system to activate at about 400,000 feet, when Earths atmosphere first affects the Shuttle. The box contained data that the Shuttle had not transmitted to NASAs Mission Control via telemetry.(CNN, Crucial Columbia Part Found, 20 March 2003.)
A 66-foot-high (20-meter-high) VLS-1 O3 rocket exploded on its launchpad during tests at Alcantara Launch Center in Brazil, delivering a serious blow to Brazils nascent space program. Brazil had hoped to be the first Latin American nation to place a satellite in orbit. According to the Brazilian Ministry of Defence, the accident, which occurred three days before a scheduled launch, killed 21 people, mostly civilian technicians, injured 20 others, and destroyed two research satellites. The rocket had successfully completed two days of tests before the explosion. Brazils Minister of Defence Jose Veigas Filho stated that, for unknown reasons, one of the four main motors of the US$2.2 million rocket had ignited, leading to the explosion that destroyed the launchpad. The accident was Brazils third failed attempt to launch a rocket with a research satellite.(Brazils Rocket Test Kills 21, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 August 2003; Stan Lehman, Brazil Mourns Dead, Vows to Reinforce Space Program, Houston Chronicle, 25 August 2003.)
The Partnership for Public Service announced the results of the first survey measuring employee satisfaction in the federal government, conducted several months before the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. The survey results ranked NASA first, overall, among 28 major government agencies; NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, ranked first, and its JSC in Houston, Texas, ranked second, among 200 smaller divisions. NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe attended a news conference to publicize the results of the survey, describing the findings as a proud day for NASA. OKeefe remarked that, although NASA was in the midst of working through the tragedy of the Columbia accident, the survey results established that NASA had a very good foundation upon which to work.(Mark Carreau and Megh Duwati, Federal Employees Rate NASA Tops, Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2003; Jeffrey McMurray for the Associated Press, Huntsville Space Center Named Best Federal Place To Work, 12 November 2003; David Lerman, Study: Its Good To Be at NASA Langley, Hampton Roads Daily Press (VA), 13 November 2003.)
Senator John McCain (R-AZ), chair of the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, and U.S. Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY), chair of the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, cochaired a joint hearing of congressional leaders, focusing on the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. Recommendations resulting from the hearing prompted NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe to issue a second amendment to the charter of the Space Shuttle Accident Investigation Board, an independent panel led by retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr. and known as the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) or, informally, as the Gehman Board. The amendment removed any requirement, real or perceived, instructing Gehman to coordinate or await approval from NASA for any dimension of the panels investigation.(NASA, Joint Congressional Hearing Results in Second Charter Amendment for Gehman Board Columbia Accident Briefing, news release 03-069, 12 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03069.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
The CAIB questioned NASA flight managers and tank engineers about damage from launch debrisa key concern of the CAIBduring 4 hours of technical testimony at a public hearing. The CAIB sought to uncover why NASA officials had considered the recurrent problem of foam falling during launches a maintenance issue rather than a flight safety concern. NASA testimony included the description of the layers of checks, justifications, and paperwork required to certify a Shuttle for launch, as well as evidence of NASA engineers collective conviction that the shedding foam did not present a threat to flight safety and, therefore, was not a sufficient reason to cancel a launch. In October 2002, foam falling from the bipod area of its external tankthe area where two metal struts connect the fuel reservoir to the orbiterhad struck Space Shuttle Atlantis. The foam that had fallen from Space Shuttle Columbia striking its wing had come from the same area of Columbias external tank as the foam that had struck Atlantis. However, engineers and managers had examined Atlantiss debris incident and had determined that falling foam did not present a safety-of-flight concern for Columbia. Nevertheless, because of the Atlantis incident, managers had requested that engineers responsible for the Shuttles external tank develop a plan to prevent debris from breaking away from the bipod area of the tank. Engineers had not completed the plan at the time of Columbias flight.(Todd Halvorson, Engineers: Launch Debris Troublesome Since Start, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Foam Problem, 8 April 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe accepted the resignation of all members and staff of the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), which the U.S. Congress had first chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire. ASAPs function was to provide an independent body to advise NASAs Administrator about the safety of NASAs operations, facilities, and personnel. In her resignation letter, ASAP Chairperson Shirley C. McCarty stated that the panel had decided to resign so that the NASAs Administrator and Congress would have an opportunity to revitalize ASAP and to reshape its charter and mission. The panel also noted its frustration that, over the years, legislation had weakened its authority and that the CAIB final report had described the ASAP as often not very influential. Experts had noted that NASA had often ignored warnings that the safety panel issued and that ASAP had possessed no authority to enforce its recommendations. In accepting the ASAP members resignations, OKeefe pledged to strengthen the panel by studying its original concept and determining how to help its successor panel best meet the needs of NASA.(NASA, NASA Administrator Accepts Aerospace Safety Panel Resignation, news release 03-301, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03301_asap_resign.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Paul Recer for Associated Press, Nine NASA Safety Panel Members Resign, 24 September 2003.)
NASA filed a request for proposal with Federal Business Opportunities, inviting companies to define their schedules for Orbital Space Plane (OSP) design completion, development, testing, and delivery. NASA requested the completion of a crew-rescue vehicle by 2008 and a crew- transfer vehicle by 2012, despite congressional requests that NASA slow down its work on the OSP project. The Boeing Company and a Lockheed MartinNorthrop Grumman team had both been developing concepts for the OSP, a vehicle anticipated as the next space vehicle to ferry astronaut crews to and from the ISS. NASA had hoped to award the prime contract in August 2004 at the earliest. On 29 October, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, responsible for authorizing NASA programs, had restated its position that NASA should halt work on the OSP Program until the White House, Congress, and NASA had agreed on the direction the U.S. human spaceflight program would take after completion of the ISS. Congressional leaders had also questioned NASAs funding profile for the program.(Jason Bates, NASA Releases Request for Orbital Space Plane Plans Despite Congressional Concern About the Program, Space News, 4 November 2003.)
U.S. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN), senior Democrat on the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, introduced H. R. 2450, the Human Space Flight Independent Investigation Commission Act, in an effort to ensure that future investigations of human spaceflight accidents would remain independent and free from any perception that [NASA] is hiding something. Gordon had wanted President George W. Bush to appoint an independent commission, free of any NASA personnel, to investigate the Columbia disastersimilar to the commission that had investigated the Challenger accident in 1986. Instead, NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe had to revise the charter of the CAIB three times before the Board had attained a measure of independence. Moreover, the Board still included one NASA official and relied on NASA staff, an arrangement that Gordon feared would undermine the credibility of the CAIBs final report. H.R. 2450 proposed that, in the event of another disaster, the investigative panel would follow the Challenger model, requiring a 15-member commission, with the chairperson of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) serving as a member and the President of the United States appointing the other 14. Under the terms of the Act, commission members would have diverse backgrounds, although some would also have spaceflight and accident investigation experience. The resolution also stipulated that NASA personnel could not serve, either on the investigative panel or on its staff. The commission would have subpoena powers and would report its findings simultaneously to the President, Congress, and the public.(Leonard David, Lawmaker Calls for Independent Space Accident Investigations, Space.com, 16 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_gordon_030616.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of 15 organizations from industry, government, and academia to carry out 22 propulsion-technology research proposals in five areas of the In-Space Propulsion Program: aerocapture, advanced chemical propulsion, solar-electric propulsion, space-based tether propulsion, and solar-sail technologies. The goal of the program, under the management of the Office of Space Sciences at NASA Headquarters, was to make exploration of deep space more practical, affordable, and productive.(NASA, NASA Selects In-Space Propulsion Innovations for Research, contract release C03-q, 16 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03Q.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
NASA released its first preliminary return-to-flight plan, briefing reporters at JSC in Houston, Texas. The 158-page report, which Associate Administrator William F. Readdy called an evolving document, indicated that 11 March 2004 was the earliest possible date for a Space Shuttle to return to flight. However, Readdy emphasized that NASA would be safety-driven, not schedule-driven, in its efforts to launch the first Shuttle to fly since the Columbia disaster. NASA had tentatively scheduled Atlantis for a launch between 11 March and 6 April 2004. In the preliminary plan, NASA indicated that it had changed Atlantiss original mission of ferrying supplies and a new crew to the ISS. Instead, the mission would be a developmental flight during which the crew would test the new procedures and safety equipment that the CAIB had recommended. Although the ISS would still be Atlantiss destination, the mission would not carry ISS replacement crew. NASAs Space Shuttle Program Manager William W. Parsons Jr. said that the greatest challenges for future Shuttle missions would be developing methods to minimize the shedding of foam from the orbiters external tank and to repair tile and protective heat panels while in space. In addition, NASA would have to install cameras and sensors on the Shuttles and on the ISS robotic arms, to detect vehicle damage.(John Schwartz and Warren E. Leary, NASA Says It Wont Rush Shuttle Back to Space, New York Times, 9 September 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced the members of the Space Shuttle Mishap Interagency Investigation Board, also known as the Gehman Board. To chair the Board, NASA had appointed retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr., who had cochaired the independent commission that investigated the attack on the USS Cole in Aden, Yemen, on 12 October 2000. Other members included Rear Admiral Stephen A. Turcotte of the U.S. Naval Safety Center; Major General John L. Barry of the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio; Major General Kenneth W. Hess of Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico; James N. Hallock of the U.S. Department of Transportation; Steven B. Wallace of the FAA; and Brigadier General Duane W. Deal of the 21st Space Wing at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado. Several senior- level NASA leaders were also named to the panel: G. Scott Hubbard, Director of NASAs ARC; Bryan D. OConnor, NASAs Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance and a former astronaut; and Theron M. Bradley Jr., NASAs Chief Engineer. NASA intended the Gehman Board to make a parallel investigation, complementing NASAs own internal investigation. The Board would have access to the same scientific information and to the cooperation of the same agencies as NASA.(NASA, NASA Announces Space Shuttle Columbia Accident Investigation Board (The Gehman Board), news release 03-034, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-034.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); David Arnold, Specialist Panel Convenes, Begins Search for Cause, Boston Globe, 4 February 2003.)
Four witnesses appeared before the CAIB at its first public hearing. Director of NASAs JSC Jefferson D. Howell Jr. and Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore spoke about workforce issues, particularly, about NASAs concern regarding the erosion of its skill base. Keith Chong, a senior scientist at the Boeing Company, discussed Boeings work on the foam insulation applied to large propellant tanks such as the Shuttles external tank and the Boeing Delta 4 booster. Henry McDonald, former Director of NASAs ARC, discussed the Space Shuttle Independent Assessment Team (SIAT), which he had led before leaving NASA. The SIAT report had identified problems within the Shuttle program. McDonald expressed disappointment that NASA had not implemented some of the SIATs recommendations. He said that he believed some of the recommended improvements, such as modernized records, could have significantly influenced decisions that NASA had based on risk assessments.(Leonard David, Columbia Accident Hearing Probes NASA Workforce Erosion, Shuttle Safety Issues, Space.com, 6 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/caib_hearing_030306.html (accessed 29 August 2008); Matthew L. Wald, NASA Records in Disarray, Study Leader Tells Board, New York Times, 7 March 2003. 385 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593, 1 April 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx593.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Reuters, Delta 4 Sends Up Its First U.S. Air Force Satellite, 10 March 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced the appointment of the team that would lead the new NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC), chartered in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. NASAs Office of Safety and Mission Assurance would assume oversight of the NESC. Based at NASAs LaRC, the NESC would coordinate and conduct testing and safety assessments in support of critical NASA projects and programs. OKeefe had charged Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. with assembling a team to get the Center up and running. OKeefe remarked that Bridges had assembled a dynamic group of recognized experts in the fields of engineering analysis and risk mitigation. The group comprised new Director of the NESC Ralph R. Roe Jr., formerly Manager of the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office at NASAs JSC; new Deputy Director Paul M. Munafo, formerly Manager of Materials, Processes and Manufacturing at NASAs MSFC; and new Deputy Director of Safety J. Larry Crawford, formerly Director of Research Engineering at NASAs DFRC. Roes appointment as Director of
In the CAIBs second public hearing, expert witnesses discussed what they knew about the reentry of Space Shuttle Columbia on 1 February. William H. Ailor III, Director of the Center for Orbital and Reentry Debris Studies at the Aerospace Corporation, explained to the CAIB that part of the difficulty of deciphering the precise cause of the orbiters breakup was that space agencies had done little work over the past years in reconstructing spacecraft breakups. The lack of a systematic effort to retrieve debris from such incidents compounded the problem. R. Douglas White, Director for Operations Requirements, Orbiter Element Department for United Space Alliance, the prime contractor for NASAs Space Shuttle Program, provided a dramatic portrayal of Columbias troubled trajectory from orbit. He drew attention to the behavior of Columbias aileron, the hinged control surface attached to the crafts trailing edge, remarking that its behavior was a first indication that something odd was happening to the space plane. Paul Hill, Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Director at NASAs JSC and leader of the team piecing together the still and video images of the Shuttles final minutes, told the CAIB about the work of the image analysts. Hill also expressed gratitude to the public for submitting amateur photographs and videos for analysis.(Leonard David, Columbia Board Hearing: Clues, Critical Events Destroyed on Reentry, Space.com, 18 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030318.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASAs KSC, to head NASAs LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a natural selection to lead the Agencys premiere center for aviation and space research, according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director, news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred, 13 June 2003.)
NASA announced that Administrator Sean OKeefe had appointed three new members to the CAIB in compliance with a request from CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. The new members were Douglas D. Osheroff, the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Physics and Applied Physics at Stanford University and a 1996 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics; Sally K. Ride, a physicist and professor of Space Science at the University of California, San Diego, as well as a former NASA astronaut and the first American woman in space; and John M. Logsdon, Director of the George Washington University Space Policy Institute. OKeefe had also appointed NASA astronaut retired U.S. Air Force Colonel Michael J. Bloomfield, in response to Gehmans request that Bloomfield replace former astronaut Bryan D. OConnor as Astronaut Advisor to the Board. OConnor would return to NASA Headquarters in his role as NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, New Members Added to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, news release 03-097, 5 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03097.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
A reentry section of the Peoples Republic of Chinas Shenzhou 4 spacecraft landed in Inner Mongolia after Shenzhou 4 had orbited Earth for nearly a week. Phillip Clark, a U.K. observer of Chinas space program, remarked that the Shenzhou 4 mission was key to flying Chinese astronauts in the future, noting that orbital control of the craft during this flight had been far tighter than in the two preceding tests. Furthermore, during two back-to-back Shenzhou launches, the Chinese had completed all the maneuvers necessary for a rendezvous and docking mission, indicating that China would progress quickly to an orbital docking. Clark predicted that either Shenzhou 7 or Shenzhou 8 would complete a nose-to-nose docking.(Leonard David, After ShenzhouChinas Space Plans Boosted Following Successful Mission, Space.com, 5 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/after_shenzhou4_030105.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe named the commander, the pilot, and a mission specialist of the next Space Shuttle mission, even though NASA had not selected any dates for future Shuttle missions since the suspension of Shuttle flights following the Columbia disaster. OKeefe said that NASAs target to resume Shuttle flights was the end of the calendar year. OKeefe said that the crewCommander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of Japans NASDAwould be challenged with the opportunity to be the first crew to return to flight. OKeefe said that the ISS partners would probably fill the other three slots with a three-member crew headed for the ISS.
NASA announced the appointment of James W. Kennedy as the new Director of NASAs KSC, effective 10 August, succeeding Roy D. Bridges Jr. On 13 June, NASA had appointed Bridges to lead NASAs LaRC. Kennedy had served as KSCs Deputy Director since November 2002 and, before that, he had served as Deputy Director of NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Kennedy had also served as Project Manager for the X-34 and DC-XA initiatives and had led KSCs OneNASA effort to coordinate teamwork across all field centers. He had managed MSFCs Space Shuttle Projects Resident Office at KSC in 1996, returning to MSFC later that year to manage the Solid Rocket Booster Project. In 1998 he had become Deputy Director of Science and Engineering and, one year later, Director of Engineering. In those positions, he had established and maintained a nationally recognized research and development capability in space research and technology.(NASA, James W. Kennedy Named Director, NASA KSC, news release 03-217, 26 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03217_Kennedy_KSC.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Kelly Young, Kennedy Takes Over KSC, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 June 2003.)
Japan merged its three space agencies with the goal of saving US$89.8 million a year. According to the new configuration, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) would manage the unified entities of the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, NASDA, and the National Aerospace Laboratory. Modeled on NASA but about one 10th of the size of its American counterpart, JAXA had 1,800 employees and an initial annual budget of US$1.66 billion.(Reuters, Japan Streamlines Its Space Effort: Three Agencies Merged into JAXA; Tokyo Keeps Its Eye on Beijing, 2 October 2003.)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz had won Discover Magazines Innovation Award for Space Science and Technology in the Space Explorer category. The annual awards, presented in the categories of Space Explorer, Communications, Space Scientists, Technology for Humanity, and Aerospace, honored scientists whose work had benefited the U.S. space program and all of humanity. A veteran of seven spaceflights, a record he shared with only one other astronaut, Chang-Diaz was Director of the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory at NASAs JSC in Houston, Texas, where he was leading a team to develop the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) Engine. The team was working on a conceptual engine that would eventually enable humans to explore distant regions of Earths solar system and, perhaps, regions beyond the solar system. A native of Costa Rica, Chang-Diaz had earned undergraduate and advanced degrees in mechanical engineering and applied plasma physics from the University of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming an astronaut in 1981. He had first traveled to space in 1986 and, most recently, had participated in the ISS assembly and crew-exchange mission in June 2002, during which he undertook three spacewalks.(NASA, Astronaut Chang-Diaz Wins Discover Magazine Award, news release 03-335, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03335_ChangDiaz_Award.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASAs Deputy Chief of Staff Scott Pace announced that NASA would not seek a waiver to the Iran Non-Proliferation Act of 2000 (Pub.L.No.106-178) The law prohibited NASA from purchasing space hardware from Russia unless Russia certified that Russian aerospace companies had not aided Iranian missile programs for at least a year. If the White House did not grant a waiver, NASA would be unable to buy Russian Progress and Soyuz vehiclesthe United States only viable means of reaching the ISS after the suspension of Shuttle flights. Pace explained that NASA would not press the White House for a waiver, because NASA did not intend to make foreign policy, acknowledging that the White House or the U.S. Department of State was responsible for seeking changes in the Iran Non-Proliferation Act, if appropriate.(Brian Berger, NASA Official: Agency Wont Seek Waiver to Iran Act, Space News, 20 February 2003.)
The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post; Stephen Clark, Proton Lifts Military Satellite, Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
Edward J. Weiler, NASAs Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space about Project Prometheus, a proposed nuclear technology program. The proposal called for NASA to spend US$3 billion between 2003 and 2008, developing more powerful radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) to convert energy from the decay of radioactive material into electricity and to explore the use of fission to power spacecraft and their instruments. A strong supporter of the program, NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, a former Secretary of the Navy, hoped to apply lessons learned from the nuclear submarine program to spacecraft. Weiler stated that nuclear fission was necessary for sending spacecraft to scrutinize the outer planets of the solar system, such as Jupiter, and could open the door to human spaceflight to Mars. NASA hoped to use the powerful RTGs developed in Project Prometheus for a robotic mission to Mars in 2009. NASA proposed to make a mission to Jupiters moons as its first use of fission technology in space exploration.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, Advice to NASA Supports Nuclear-Fueled Spaceflight, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 4 June 2003.)
NASA Chief of Staff and White House Liaison Courtney A. Stadd announced his resignation, effective 4 July 2003, to pursue opportunities in the private sector. NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced the appointment of John D. Schumacher to succeed Stadd as Chief of Staff. Stadd had led President George W. Bushs NASA transition team and had worked with two NASA administrators to help cast NASAs strategic direction. Schumacher brought invaluable experience and perspective to his new position. Since June 1995, he had served as NASAs Assistant Administrator for External Relations, with responsibility for NASAs interaction with Executive Branch offices and agencies, for international relations, and for administration of export and international technology-transfer control. In addition, he had served as a liaison with NASAs History Office, advisory councils, and commissions.
The Peoples Republic of China launched Shenzhou 5 on a Long March 2F rocket, becoming the third nation after Russia and the United States to send a human into orbit. Veteran fighter pilot Yang Liwei expected to orbit Earth 14 times before landing. The launch was the culmination of the decade-long effort of Chinas secretive, military-linked space program, undertaken with the hope of improving the communist nations image abroad, as well as among its own citizens. Chinese officials described the Shenzhou program as homegrown, but western analysts stated that Russia had provided China with important technology and training for its taikonaut (astronaut) corps. Western analysts described the Shenzhou craft as an improvement over the Russian Soyuz design, with new solar arrays enabling the front-end orbital module to remain in space after the taikonaut compartment had returned to Earth. In addition, the crafts improved collision-avoidance systems provided Shenzhou with enhanced capacity to avoid dangerous space debris.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; David Lynch, China Blasts Off into Space, USA Today, 15 October 2003; Christopher Bodeen for Associated Press, China Launches First Manned Space Mission, 15 October 2003.)
department that advises senior managers about shuttle safety. He explained that the links of engineering specialists with NASAs Space Shuttle Program had apparently been too close to permit independent review of the condition of the orbiters. In addition, he said that NASAs Safety Organization lacked sufficient personnel. Gehman testified that, although NASAs Safety Organization appeared perfect on paper, the procedures lacked substance in reality. NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, who appeared at Gehmans side at the hearing, assured the Senate panel that NASA would hold its officials accountable, and that NASA would correct all faults in management that the CAIB identified. However, OKeefe did not respond to Gehmans criticism of NASAs safety team.(Traci Watson, Probe Slams NASA Safety, USA Today, 15 May 2003; Nick Anderson, NASA Is Chided for Faults in Safety Teams, Los Angeles Times, 15 May 2003.)
NASA launched a nationwide campaign to recruit elementary, middle, and high school classroom teachers for its astronaut corps, building on the legacy of its Teacher in Space Project of 1985. NASA had selected Christa McAuliffe and Barbara R. Morgan from among 12,000 applicants for the first project, which had ended tragically when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launching on 28 January 1986 with McAuliffe on board. McAuliffes backup Barbara R. Morgan had rejoined NASA in 1998 to train and qualify as a mission specialist. In December 2002, NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe had announced Morgans assignment to a November assembly mission to the ISS. NASA planned for the new recruitment campaign to extend the legacy of McAuliffe and the work of Morgan, making future educator- astronauts as much a part of the astronaut corps as test pilots, engineers, physicians, astronomers, geologists, and scientists from other disciplines. To accomplish this goal, NASA planned to train teachers with proven technical skills, making them eligible for missions ranging from 12-day Shuttle flights to months-long residencies aboard the ISS. Because of their ability to communicate with students in the classroom more effectively than traditional NASA astronauts, the educator-astronauts would be a critical part of an educational initiative to make math and science as inspiring to youngsters as pop music and sports.(Mark Carreau, NASA Seeking a Few Good Teachers, Houston Chronicle, 22 January 2003.)
NASA announced the new charter and new members of its Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP). All members of the previous ASAP, which the U.S. Congress had initially chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire, had resigned in late September 2003 in the wake of the Columbia accident investigation. The original charter had intended the panel to act as an independent body to advise NASAs Administrator on safety issues, but over the years, additional administrative procedures had governed the panels work. In the new charter, NASA revoked those procedures to enable the panel to develop its agenda in accordance with CAIB findings. The ASAPs original 1967 charter formed the foundation of the new charter, with the following revisions: 1) the ASAP would make quarterly reports, instead of annual; 2) new members would have two-year terms, extendable to a maximum of six years; 3) members would have staggered terms to ensure fresh perspectives at regular intervals; and 4) the ASAP would focus on industrial and systems safety, risk management, trend analysis, and management of NASAs safety and quality systems. NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe named, as new members of the ASAP, Rear Admiral Walter H. Cantrell, Vice Admiral Joseph W. Dyer, Augustine O. Esogbue, Major General Francis C. Gideon Jr., Deborah L. Grubbe, Rosemary OLeary, John C. Marshall, Steven B. Wallace, Rick E. Williams, and ex officio member, Brigadier General Joseph A. Smith. The new members represented academic, military, and industrial sectors; no member was a current or former NASA employee or contractor.(NASA, NASA Names New Safety Advisory Panel, news release 03-370, 18 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03370_asap.html (accessed 5 February 2009); Patty Reinert, NASA Safety Panel Takes Flight Again with New Members, Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2003.)
CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. and NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe appeared before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation to discuss NASAs return-to-flight goals in light of the CAIBs findings. Committee members criticized the CAIB for its reluctance to assign individual blame within NASA for the Columbia disaster, but Gehman replied that the Board did not need to make judgments about individual accountability. OKeefe added that NASA would have held individuals accountable only if someone had acted maliciously in the sequence of events that led to the loss of Columbia. OKeefe also pointed out that all former members of the Shuttle team had either left their positions, or NASA had reassigned them. Gehman testified that the decisions and conditions that had led to the loss of the orbiter had begun years before, stating that Congress and the White House shared responsibility with NASA for creating the conditions responsible for the accident. Congress and the White House had reduced NASAs budget by 40 percent over the previous decade, affecting the operation of NASAs management system. When committee members asked whether NASA required additional funding for 2004, OKeefe responded that the current budget did not cover some of the CAIBs recommended activities, such as establishing an independent authority to oversee Space Shuttle technical requirements, recertifying the orbiters, and accelerating the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program. Committee members asked for OKeefes assurance that NASA would change its culture, implementing processes that would prevent future Shuttle accidents.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, Senators Rip NASA over Columbia Probe, 4 September 2003; Brian Berger, Lawmakers Press OKeefe for Cost Figures, Space News, 4 September 2003.)
Harold W. Gehman Jr. delivered the CAIBs final report to NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, presenting its findings and recommendations. The CAIB found that a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam insulation, traveling at more than 500 miles (804.6 kilometers) per hour, had damaged Columbias wing during launch, ultimately leading to its disintegration during reentry. The report stated that management decisions during Columbias flight reflected missed opportunities, ineffective communication channels, flawed analysis, and ineffective leadership. When cameras tracking Columbia provided two grainy images showing the foam striking the wing, engineers had immediately begun to discuss obtaining further images of the Shuttle or initiating a spacewalk to check for damages. However, mission managers had adjourned for a holiday weekend and did not discuss the foam strike. Upon returning to work on 21 January, the managers had assessed the strike as a postlanding maintenance problem, because smaller foam strikes had left harmless dents in Shuttles during all previous missions. The CAIBs Executive Director John L. Barry remarked that, among NASAs competing goals of maintaining costs and meeting schedules, safety had lost out. The Board directly criticized Administrator Sean OKeefe for increasing pressure to meet a February 2004 launch deadline, thereby creating a pattern similar to that which had led to the Challenger disaster in 1986. The CAIB recommended that NASA implement 15 actions before the next Shuttle flight, including creating an independent safety-and-engineering organization to help establish satisfactory safety margins. Upon receiving the Boards final report, OKeefe reiterated NASAs intention to comply fully with the recommendations.(NASA, NASA Administrator Accepts Columbia Accident Report, news release 03-276, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03276_AOK_Acpt_CAIB.html (accessed 29 December 2008); Mark Carreau, Columbia Accident Board Casts Wide Net of Blame, Houston Chronicle, 27 August 2003; Kathy Sawyer and Eric Pianin, Report Blames Flawed NASA Culture for Tragedy, Washington Post, 27 August 2003. 504 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Justin Ray, Resupply Ship Bound for the International Space Station, Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2003.)
After completing a 16-day orbital science mission that NASA judged a success, the crew of STS- 107 perished when Space Shuttle Columbia broke apart above Texas during reentry. NASAs Mission Control lost communication with Columbia at 9:00 a.m. (EST) and immediately switched to the contingency plan to preserve all flight-activity information. NASA had scheduled the landing for 9:16 a.m. (EST). NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe issued a statement describing all the steps NASA had taken after the loss of the Shuttle. NASA officials had spoken with President George W. Bush and Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge; met with family members of the crew; assembled an internal mishap investigation team; and appointed a mishap investigation board. The board comprised an external group of people independent from NASA, charged with examining all the information that Mission Control had locked down when it lost communication with Columbia.(NASA, NASA Statement on Loss of Communications with Columbia, news release 03-030, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-030.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); NASA, Statement by NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe, news release 03-032, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-032.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); Washington Post, The Columbia Catastrophe, 2 February 2003.)
The Peoples Republic of China and ESA launched Double Star 1 from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest China. Double Star 1 was the first of two spacecraft in the Double Star mission to study Earths magnetic fieldsthe first joint project between China and ESA. Known in China as Tan Ce 1, Double Star 1 carried eight instruments for investigating Earths magnetospherefive from ESA and three from the Chinese National Space Administration. ESA and China had designed the mission to study how magnetized and charged particles streaming off the Sun affect Earth. The space agencies had scheduled the second of the two craft to launch six months after the first.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 602, 1 January 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx602.html (accessed 26 March 2009); United Press International, China-EU Launch Space Project, 30 December 2003.)
NASA announced the Level 1 requirements for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) system, the next- generation system of space vehicles designed to transport crews to and from the ISS and to provide rescue missions. NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe had proposed the concept in November 2002 as a way to take some of the pressure off the aging space shuttle fleet. NASA had envisioned a simple craft, easier to launch and with greater maneuverability in orbit. However, NASA had not intended the OSP system as a substitute for the Shuttle, the only U.S. spacecraft able to haul heavy cargo into space. The OSP concept was to include in its first design an escape pod for the ISS, ready for use by 2010. Its second version, intended for completion by 2012 would be a craft capable of transporting people.(NASA, Initial Requirements Set for Orbital Space Plane System, news release 03-073, 18 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03073.html (accessed 16 July 2008); Gwyneth K. Shaw, NASA Views Space Plane as Helpmate to Shuttles, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 February 2003.)
NASA announced the replacement of its Mishap Response Team with the newly formed NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT), which would continue to support the CAIB. NASA had formed the Mishap Response Team within hours of the Columbia disaster on 1 February but had drawn criticism for the teams composition, which included staff that had directly overseen the Shuttles mission. Linda Ham had led the Mishap Response Team, even though, as a senior Shuttle program manager, she had assisted in making key decisions during the 16-day Columbia mission. NASA and the CAIB intended for the NAIT to support the CAIB, and they had organized the NAIT to mirror the CAIBs structure, with three subsections: materials, operations, and engineering. NASA had appointed Deputy Director of JSC Randy Stone to chair the NAIT.(NASA, NASA Columbia Accident Support Activities Reorganized, news release 03-113, 21 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03113.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Robyn Suriano, New Team Created To Help with Shuttle Probe, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 March 2003.)
In response to the anticipated recommendations of the CAIB, NASA announced its plans to create an independent NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) at NASAs LaRC, providing a central location to coordinate engineering and safety assessment for all of NASA. The NESC, expected to draw on the talents of 250 staff throughout NASA to conduct analysis and share technical information, would report to Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. Bryan D. OConnor, Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, would have responsibility for policy. NASA intended for the NESC to provide independent assessment and testing of engineering, in support of critical NASA projects and programs; to conduct reviews and evaluations of engineering and safety; to provide a central location for trend analysis; to provide a structure to support engineering collaboration for problem resolution; to provide central coordination of engineering and programmatic lessons learned, technical standardization, and development of technical discipline expertise; and to provide independent inspection and validation of activities to ensure the constant maintenance of NASA safety standards.(NASA, NASA Announces Independent Engineering and Safety Center, news release 03-239, 15 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03239_safety_center.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Warren E. Leary, In Response to Panel, NASA Plans Safety Center, New York Times, 16 July 2003.)
The CAIB released its first two official recommendations, suggesting that before resuming Shuttle missions, NASA should 1) improve its inspections of the leading edge of the orbiters wings, and 2) ensure that U.S. spy satellites would capture detailed images of the orbiters during each mission. Although the Board had not yet begun developing its final report, the CAIB released preliminary recommendations so that NASA could begin to implement them expeditiously. The CAIB made the first recommendation because it had found that inspection techniques in place did not enable engineers to assess the structural integrity of the orbiters heat shield, considered a criticality one item. The failure of the heat shieldcomprising the reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC) panels that protect the front of the orbiters wings during reentry, the RCC panels supporting structure, and the attaching hardwarewould lead to the loss of the vehicle and crew. The CAIB made the second recommendation because it had discovered that NASA officials had cancelled an informal request that the U.S. military capture images of Columbia to check for possible damage caused by launch debris. NASA already had a new memorandum of agreement with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) to provide NASA with images of orbiting Shuttles. Previously, NIMA had only made images available upon request, but the CAIB recommended that NASA and NIMA make imaging each Shuttle flight a standard requirement.(Jim Banke, Columbia Board Releases Two Recommendations to NASA, Space.com, 17 April 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030417.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
NASA announced the names of three additional members of the crew of the Space Shuttle Programs Return to Flight Mission STS-114. In 2001 NASA had named four astronauts to STS- 114Mission Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of JAXA. The four were already training for the flight, scheduled to launch no earlier than September 2004. Astronauts Andrew S. W. Thomas, Wendy B. Lawrence, and Charles J. Camarda rounded out the missions crew of seven. NASA had originally planned for STS-114 to have a seven-member crew, but in the wake of the Columbia accident, NASA had changed the mission objective to focus on testing and evaluating new procedures for flight safety, rather than on ISS logistics and crew rotation. Thomas and Lawrence were veteran astronautsThomas was the second-highest-ranking member of NASAs Astronaut Office, and Lawrence had flown on the Shuttle three times. Camarda was a rookie making his first orbital flight. NASA had assigned Robinson and Noguchi to conduct spacewalks on the flight.(NASA, NASA Names Crew Members for Shuttle Return to Flight Mission, 7 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03360_STS_114_crew.html (accessed 5 February 2003); Todd Halvorson, Astronaut Veterans, Rookie Fill Return-to-Flight Shuttle Crew, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 November 2003; Jim Banke, NASA Names Additional Crew for Return to Flight Mission, Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts114_ crew_)
The CAIB and members of the U.S. Congress reached an agreement giving selected members and staff of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology access to confidential interviews that CAIB had conducted with 225 witnesses, including NASA managers and others involved with Columbias mission. Because the most sensitive testimony about management decision making and engineering practices was contained in privileged statements, CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. had resisted unfettered congressional access, fearing the potential effect on witnesses in future investigations of accidents if the CAIB were to release privileged testimony. Gehman had argued that privacy was critical to the Boards ability to elicit full, frank, and timely information, citing U.S. Supreme Court decisions supporting privileged interviewing, which was a common practice in military aircraft accident investigations. The agreement had granted committee members and a select list of staff access to the statements at the CAIBs office andin limited circumstances and under the supervision of a CAIB representativeto those at congressional offices. The CAIB retained the right to refuse to make information from statements to the Board available to the public. In addition, the CAIB would keep a record of those who viewed the information.(Kathy Sawyer, Congress To Review Shuttle Interviews, Washington Post, 16 June 2003.)
Administrator Sean OKeefe announced an agreement between NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which provided for NIMA to capture detailed satellite images of Space Shuttles in orbit. NASA had sought this agreement with NIMA because of critics pointed questioning of NASAs decision not to capture satellite images that it could have used to check for damage to Columbias heat shields while the Shuttle was in orbit. The agreement would enable NASA to employ NIMA assets during targets of opportunity without requiring NASA to make a specific request for imaging. Before the disaster, NASA had turned down a NIMA offer to capture images of Columbia, and NASA officials had withdrawn an unofficial request for U.S. Air Force telescopes to capture images. OKeefe stated that the agreement did not represent any NASA decision about whether those images might have helped determine damage to Columbia.(Associated Press, Military To Capture Future Shuttle Flight Images, 29 March 2003. 123)
NASA announced the selection of Donald J. Campbell, Director of GRC at Lewis Field, as Special Assistant to the Deputy Administrator for Nuclear and Alternative Power Generation Systems, effective 1 October 2003. In his new position, Campbell would lead the development and integration of high-power generation systems for propulsion, considered fundamental building blocks for sustained robotic and human exploration in outer space and deep space. Campbell had directed GRC since January 1994. Local political and community leaders had criticized Campbell for his leadership style, which had not galvanized the GRC workforce or fully leveraged the Centers economic potential. NASA named Deputy Director of GRC Julian M. Earls to succeed Campbell as GRCs Director.(NASA, Glenn Research Centers Donald J. Campbell Selected as NASA Deputy Administrator Special Assistant, news release 03-260, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/ HQ_03260_Campbell.html (accessed 29 December 2008); NASA, Dr. Julian M. Earls Selected To Lead NASA Glenn Research Center, news release 03-261, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03261_Earls.html (accessed 29 December 2008); John Mangels and Michael OMalley, NASA Glenn Chief Leaves; Deputy Gets Job, Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 9 August 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of David A. King as the new Director of NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, effective 15 June. NASA would reassign Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson, in preparation for his planned January 2004 retirement from NASA. King had been MSFCs Deputy Director since November 2002, assisting Stephenson in managing a range of propulsion, space science, and materials research, as well as development work. NASA had also dispatched King to Lufkin, Texas, within hours of the Columbia disaster, to serve as the senior on-site NASA official in the search-and-recovery effort. In that capacity, he had created critical, initial work processes; established effective working relationships among federal and state government agencies; and set the foundation for the two subsequent NASA officials who would share responsibility for leading effective recovery efforts. Before serving as Deputy Director of MSFC, King had been Deputy Director of Shuttle Processing, Launch Director of six Shuttle missions, and Director of Shuttle Processing at NASAs KSC. As Director of Shuttle Processing at KSC, he had managed and coordinated all Space Shuttle processing, launch, and landing operations and had made the final determination to launch during the three-day countdown process.(NASA, David A. King Named Marshall Space Flight Center Director, news release 03-181, 23 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/03181_king_msfc_director.html (accessed 20 November 2008); Patty Reinert, Marshall Space Flight Center Chief Will Leave Post in January, Houston Chronicle, 21 May 2003.)
NASA announced the resignation of Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore. A 26-year veteran of NASA, Dittemore had supervised the Space Shuttle Program for more than four years. Dittemore had joined NASA in 1977 as a propulsion-systems engineer, working on orbital maneuvering and reaction-control systems for the Space Shuttle before his selection as a Space Shuttle Flight Director in 1985. In 1993 NASA had appointed him Deputy Manager for the Space Shuttle Program Integration and Operations Office in the Space Shuttle Program Office. He had also served as Manager of Space Shuttle Program Integration and as Chairperson of the Space Shuttle Mission Management Team before his selection in 1996 to manage the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office. He had become Space Shuttle Program Manager in 1999, assuming responsibility for the overall management, integration, and operation of the program. In announcing his departure, Dittemore remarked that, before the Columbia tragedy, he had been struggling over whether to leave NASA and had decided to resign in the spring of 2003. However, after the Columbia accident, he had immediately postponed his departure. Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program Michael C. Kostelnik and NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe credited Dittemore with keeping communications open between NASA and the public in the wake of the tragedy. Dittemore planned to remain in his position until the CAIB had finished its work and established a return-to-flight program, to enable NASA to make a smooth management transition.(NASA, Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post, news release 03-149, 23 April 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/apr/HP_news_03149.html (accessed 19 September 2008); Paul Recer for Associated Press, Shuttle Director Dittemore To Leave NASA, 23 April 2003.)
NASA released a flight-deck videotape, which the crew of STS-107 had recorded on 1 February between 8:35 and 8:48 a.m. (EST). NASA had recovered the videotape from the Shuttles crash site near Palestine, Texas. The video showed flight-deck activity as Columbia passed over the south central Pacific Ocean at an altitude of approximately 500,000 feet. Filmed with a small on- board camera, mounted to the right of Pilot William C. McCool and then passed to Mission Specialist Laurel B. Clark, the videotape showed Commander Rick D. Husband, Pilot McCool, Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, and Mission Specialist Clark on the flight deck during reentry. The astronauts were conversing among themselves as they worked through routine checklist activities with flight controllers at NASAs Mission Control.(NASA, NASA Releases Columbia Crew Cabin Video, news release N03-23, 28 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_n03023.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeings ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeings efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space stations design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASAs development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
Progress M-47 launched atop a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome one day after the loss of Space Shuttle Columbia threw future missions to the orbiting complex in doubt. The launch, scheduled long in advance, took place as stunned Russian space officials offered condolences to their American colleagues. Russian officials also expressed concern that the loss of Columbia and the ensuing suspension of Shuttle missions might place Russias cash-strapped space program under more pressure to deliver crews and supplies to the station. Sergei Gorbunov, a spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency, explained that Russia had no reserve of Soyuz spacecraft. He pointed out that if the U.S. space program intended to use Russian craft to transport crews to the ISS, NASA would need to buy Russian Soyuz TMAs, the type of craft designed to carry cosmonauts to the ISS. Russia had routinely built only two Soyuz spacecraft per year.(Associated Press, Russians Send Supply Ship on Way to Space Station, 2 February 2003.)
Cassini-Huygens became the first spacecraft to successfully navigate Saturns rings and to orbit the planet. A joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA, the mission comprised two spacecraft: the orbiter Cassini and the probe Huygens. The space agencies had planned for Cassini to conduct 76 orbits of Saturn during a four-year survey of the planet and its moons. They had designed the Huygens probe to analyze the atmosphere of Titan, Saturns largest moon. If the probe survived its descent to Titan, it would analyze the moons surface, as well.(ESA, Cassini-Huygens Enters Orbit Around the Ringed Planet, ESA news release 36-2004, 1 July 2004; Guy Gugliotta, Cassini First To Orbit Saturn, Washington Post, 1 July 2004.)
NASA officials announced that the crew members of the ISS were experiencing a food shortage and would have to eat less until a Russian supply capsule could bring additional food supplies. Russia had scheduled the resupply capsule to arrive at the ISS on 25 December 2004, but if it missed the delivery, crew members Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov would have to return to Earth aboard the Russian Soyuz capsule docked at the ISS. NASA also noted that, if the crew members had to evacuate the space station, Russia and the United States could continue to operate the ISS from Earth. Officials cited a number of reasons for the supply shortage on the ISS, including the postponement of regular supply missions after the Columbia accident and the necessary removal of some food supplies from an August 2004 resupply flight, to make room for equipment to monitor air quality in the ISS.(Mark Carreau, Space Station Crew Endures Food Shortage, Houston Chronicle, 10 December 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced the immediate appointment of James B. Garvin as NASAs new Chief Scientist. Garvin had previously served as Chief Scientist for NASAs lunar and Mars exploration programs. As Chief Scientist for all of NASA, Garvin would be responsible for ensuring the scientific merits of NASAs programs, including formulating the programs scientific requirements. Garvin replaced former astronaut John M. Grunsfeld, who had served in the post since September 2003. NASA had selected Grunsfeld to train as an astronaut for a future long-duration mission.(NASA, NASA Administrator Names New Chief Scientist, news release 04-349, 21 October 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe submitted his resignation in a handwritten letter to President George W. Bush. In his resignation, OKeefe stated that he would continue serving as Administrator until Bush had named a successor, but that he would prefer to leave by February 2005. OKeefe cited family commitments and his interest in pursuing better economic opportunities as the reasons for his resignation. Major media speculated about candidates to replace OKeefe, but the White House provided no details about its choice for a successor. Before becoming NASAs Administrator in December 2001, OKeefe had worked for the OMB.(Guy Gugliotta, NASA Chief Formally Steps Down, Washington Post, 14 December 2004; Warren E. Leary, NASA Leader Cites Finances and Submits His Resignation, New York Times, 14 December 2004.)
NASA re-extended the missions of its Mars rovers by an additional six months. The two mobile robotic geological laboratories, Spirit and Opportunity, had landed on Mars in January 2004. The robotic rovers had successfully completed their primary three-month mission in April 2004, and NASA had extended their mission by five months. Because the rovers remained operable and continued to provide important scientific data on Mars, NASA officials had decided to provide funding to cover an additional six months of rover operations.(NASA, Rovers Missions Renewed as Mars Emerges from Behind Sun, news release 04-307, 21 September 2004.)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the stations management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASAs other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISSs hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the stations operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the stations exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program, New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, Space Station Safety Problems Noted, Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
ESAs Science Programme Committee approved a proposal to extend the operation of the Ulysses spacecrafta joint project of ESA and NASAuntil March 2008. NASA had already approved continuing the spacecrafts operations. The two space agencies had designed the spacecraft to study the heliosphere, a region of space influenced by the Sun and its magnetic field. Scientists of the agencies hoped that the continued operations of Ulysses would help them better understand the Sun. Since the 1990 launch of Ulysses, ESA and NASA both had launched additional fleet of solar and heliospheric spacecraft: NASAs Cassini, ESAs four Cluster satellites, and another collaborative project between ESA and NASA, the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO).(ESA, Ulysses Mission Home: Ulysses Mission Extended, http://sci.esa.int/science- e/www/object/index.cfm?fobjectid=34647 (accessed 4 February 2009).)
ESAs Mars Express orbiter relayed information between ground-based NASA engineers and NASAs Mars Exploration Rover Spirit, the first in-orbit communication between ESA and NASA spacecraft and the first successful international communications network outside of Earth. As part of their general efforts to cooperate in space exploration, the two space agencies had planned the information relay to enable future cooperative use of their communications technologies during Mars missions. In this particular communication sequence, Spirits operation personnel at NASAs JPL transferred commands for the rover to ESAs Space Operations Centre in Germany, which then transmitted the instructions to the Mars Express. The Express successfully commanded Spirit and, subsequently, relayed telemetry information from the rover to JPL via the Space Operations Centre.(NASA, International Interplanetary Networking Succeeds, news release 04-060, 12 February 2004.)
Major media reported details of a NASA internal document, which stated that a proposed plan to use the ISS as a safe haven for Space Shuttle astronauts would likely have a high risk of failure. The NASA document was a response to a proposal that the ISS should temporarily house the Shuttle crew if a problem arose that prevented an orbiting Shuttle from returning its crew to Earth safely. In the internal document, NASA objected that the ISS had neither sufficient supplies nor support systems to keep both ISS and Shuttle crew members alive longer than a few months. NASA officials responded to the publication of the document, stating that the provisional contingency plan had been one of many ideas considered for improving Space Shuttle safety.(John Schwartz, NASA Rescue Plan Is Reported To Have High Risk of Failure, New York Times, 9 July 2004.)
NASAs Genesis space capsule returned to Earth but experienced a problematic landing, which NASA officials feared might have damaged the capsules scientific cargo. NASA had launched Genesis in August 2001 to collect particle samples from solar winds, samples that scientists hoped would provide information about the solar systems chemical composition during its formation stages. To return Genesis to Earth, NASA had designed the capsule to release a rectangular parachute, which helicopters would grab, gently lowering the spacecraft to Earth. However, the parachute failed to deploy, and Genesis crashed into a desert area of Utah at nearly 200 miles per hour (322 kilometers per hour). Although NASA officials were uncertain about the extent of damage to the spacecrafts cargo, their initial prognosis was that researchers could still use some of the samples in scientific analyses.(Guy Gugliotta, Spacecraft Crashes with Solar Data, Washington Post, 9 September 2004; NASA JPL, Genesis: Mission HistoryLaunch, 23 June 2008, http://genesismission.jpl.nasa.gov/gm2/mission/launch.htm (accessed 7 May 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, OKeefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive, http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe and families of the Space Shuttle Columbia crew unveiled a commemorative monument for the Columbia crew at Arlington National Cemetery. The crew had died when Columbia broke apart during reentry into Earths atmosphere on 1 February 2003. The marble monument was 66 inches (1.7 meters) tall, 48 inches (1.2 meters) wide, and bore two bronze plaques portraying the crew and the shoulder patch they had worn on the mission.(NASA, NASA Dedicates Space Shuttle Columbia Memorial, news release 04-049, 2 February 2004.)
NASAs MSFC and KSC provided law enforcement agencies with analysis of video and imagery relevant to their investigation of the abduction of an 11-year-old girl in Sarasota, Florida. When law enforcement officials asked the two centers to examine security camera footage showing the girls abduction by an unknown individual, MSFC provided assistance using its Video Image Stabilization and Registration System (VISAR), an image-stabilization software program developed for space program research. KSC examined the security camera footage using its Image Analysis Facility, which NASA had developed for visual analysis of Space Shuttle launches. Although this was not the first time that the two centers had assisted law enforcement in this manner, the case garnered major press coverage throughout the United States.(NASA, NASA Technology Helps Investigators in Florida Abduction Case, news release 04-055, 5 February 2004; Fred Barbash, Fla. Police Find Body of Abducted Girl, Washington Post, 7 February 2004.)
Representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United Statesthe nations participating in the ISS projectmet to discuss their cooperative activities for the station. At the meeting at ESAs Technical Centre in the Netherlands, ESA officials reviewed ISS operations and plans, unanimously endorsing a new technical configuration for the space station that would incorporate components from each of the ISS partner space agencies. Upon completion, the ISS would have improved research capabilities and would accommodate more crew members than the current maximum of three.(NASA, Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting, news release 04-237, 23 July 2004; Warren E. Leary, More Astronauts Approved for Space Station, New York Times, 24 July 2004.)
A prototype of the Phoenix reusable launch vehicle (RLV), a joint project of European public and private funders, successfully completed its first atmospheric test flight. According to major media sources, European space agencies hoped eventually to use the Phoenix to launch payloads. The vehicle prototype was approximately 23 feet (7 meters) long and weighed 2,640 pounds (1,200 kilograms). During the test flight, a helicopter released the vehicle prototype from an altitude of 8,000 feet (2,400 meters). The Phoenix landed 90 seconds later at an airport in Vidsel, Sweden. EADS Space Transportation, along with German aerospace company OHB-System AG, the German Aerospace Center, and the government of Bremen, Germany, had funded the Phoenix.(Frank Morring Jr., In Orbit, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 20 (17 May 2004): 17; Frank Morring Jr., In Orbit, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 11 (15 March 2004): 17; Mattias Karen for Associated Press, Europeans Test Space-Shuttle Prototype, 9 May 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe announced that, effective 1 August 2004, NASA would restructure its organization to render it better able to implement President George W. Bushs Vision for Space Exploration. Among many other announced changes, NASA planned to restructure its Earth Science, Space Science, and other Strategic Enterprises into four Mission DirectoratesAeronautics Research, Exploration Systems, Science, and Space Operationswith clearer organizational roles and responsibilities. In addition, to improve communication and clarify responsibilities, functional offices of NASA Headquarters and its field officesincluding the office of the Chief Financial Officerwould become mission support offices.(Warren E. Leary, New Look for NASA for the Next Space Age, New York Times, 25 June 2004; NASA, Administrator Unveils Next Steps of NASA Transformation, news release 04-205, 24 June 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bushs new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, First Woman Directs Launch, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe presented the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to the families of the crew members of Space Shuttle Challenger. OKeefe presented the honor in the name of the U.S. Congress and on behalf of President George W. Bush. The seven astronauts on board Challenger had died when the Shuttle exploded soon after launching on 28 January 1986.(NASA, Challenger Crew Honored with Congressional Space Medal of Honor, news release S04-238, 23 July 2004.)
.html (accessed 14 January 2009); Justyn R. Maund et al., The Massive Binary Companion Star to the Progenitor of Supernova 1993J, Nature 427, no. 6970 (8 January 2004): 129131. billion from existing space programs over the next years to fund the development of the technology to travel to the Moon and Mars. President Bush also extended an invitation to other countries to cooperate in attaining the objectives of the Vision. Major newspapers described the Vision for Space Exploration as a response to the Columbia disaster and a means of regaining public support for continued space exploration.(Patty Reinert, Bush Aims for Worlds Beyond Our Own, Houston Chronicle, 15 January 2004; David E. Sanger and Richard W. Stevenson, Bush Backs Goal of Flight to Moon To Establish Base, New York Times, 15 January 2004; NASA, The Vision for Space Exploration, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 55584main_vision_space_exploration-hi-res.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space concerning NASAs budget request for FY 2005. NASA had requested US$16.2 billion for FY 2005, an increase of 5.6 percent over its budget for FY 2004. Much of OKeefes testimony and the Senate subcommittee members questions were concerned with the likelihood of NASAs achieving the objectives that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration, announced in January 2004. Those objectives included human flights to the Moon and replacing the Space Shuttles with a new space-exploration vehicle.(NASA, Administrator OKeefes Senate Testimony, news release, 1 April 2004; Gwyneth K. Shaw, NASA Chief Faces Lawmakers Queries, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 April 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe provided testimony concerning NASAs FY 2005 budget request to the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies. In his testimony, OKeefe highlighted NASAs planned efforts to achieve the goals that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration. According to major media, although several House subcommittee members were supportive of NASAs goals, they also expressed doubts about whether Congress would give NASA its requested FY 2005 budget, which included an increase of 5.6 percent over its FY 2004 budget.(NASA, Administrator OKeefes House Testimony, 21 April 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/ speeches/okeefe_house_testimony_042104.html (accessed 23 march 2009); Patty Reinert, Lawmakers Warn NASA Fund Boost May Be Modest, Houston Chronicle, 22 April 2004.)
Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASAs JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSCs Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASAs JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director, Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy, news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
Shana L. Dale became Deputy Administrator of NASA, replacing Frederick D. Gregory, who had announced his resignation from NASA in September 2005. Before joining NASA, Dale had worked at the Office of Science and Technology Policy, serving as Chief of Staff, General Counsel, and, finally, as Deputy Director for Homeland and National Security. In addition, Dale had served as Staff Director for the House Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics from 1995 to 2000.(NASA, Dale Sworn In as NASA Deputy Administrator, media advisory M05-186, 29 November 2005; NASA, Griffin Applauds Confirmation of Dale as NASA Deputy Administrator, news release 05-386, 4 November 2005.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASAs detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) announced that it considered the Space Shuttle Discovery safe enough to fly again, even though NASA had not undertaken some steps recommended by the CAIB to ensure the Shuttles safe launch. NASA had planned to launch Discovery as the first Shuttle flight since the Columbia accident in 2003 and had established the Task Group to review NASAs compliance with the CAIBs critical recommendations. Task Group members stated that, although NASA had not complied with all of the CAIBs 15 critical recommendations, the Space Shuttle was ready to resume flight, and NASA was responsible for making the final decision to launch the Shuttle. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin was unclear about how the Task Groups findings would influence Shuttle launch plans.(Traci Watson, Safety Panel: NASA Failed To Fix Critical Issues with Shuttle, USA Today, 28 June 2009. 252)
NASA announced the establishment of the DART Mishap Investigation Board to determine why the DART spacecraft had failed to complete its mission on 15 April. Initially, NASA had believed that DART had come within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the target satellite before low fuel readings prompted it to abort its mission. However, NASA spokesperson Kimberly D. Newton later explained that new data had indicated that DART had bumped the satellite, boosting its orbit by as much as 5.75 miles (9.3 kilometers). However, DART had abandoned its target approximately halfway through its 24-hour mission. The Board consisted of seven voting members from NASAs MSFC, NASAs GSFC and ARC; the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; and the U.S. Air Force Space Command. NASA assigned eight federal employees to serve as advisors to the Boardsix from MSFC, and one each from NASAs JSC and NASA Headquarters. NASA selected Scott D. Croomes of MSFC to chair the Board and Kerry L. Remp of GRC to serve ex officio, to assure that board activity conformed to NASAs procedural requirements.(NASA, NASA Announces Dart Mishap Investigation Board Members, news release 05-105, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05105_DART_mishap_board.html (accessed 29 June 2009); NASA Engineering and Safety Center, NESC Review of Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) Mission Mishap Investigation Review Board (MIB) (NESC Request No. 05-020-E, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, December 2006), http://klabs.org/richcontent/Reports/Failure_Reports/dart/ 167813main_rp-06-119_05-020-e_dart_report_final_dec_27.pdf (accessed 18 November 2009); Chris Kridler, Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns, news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns, Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
William W. Parsons replaced Thomas Q. Donaldson as Director of NASAs SSC. Parsons had served as Director of SSC from August 2002 to May 2003 before leaving SSC to serve as Space Shuttle Program Manager from May 2003 to September 2005. Donaldson had left SSC to serve on a Federal Emergency Management Agency special assignment concerning recovery efforts for areas affected by Hurricane Katrina in August 2005.(NASA History Division, NASA Center Directors, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 9 July 2009); NASA, NASA Names New Stennis Center Director, news release 05-260, 13 September 2005.)
The NASA Advisory Council (NAC), responsible for providing counsel and policy advice to the NASA Administrator on important programs and issues, held its first meeting after its organizational restructuring. NASA had restructured the NAC to provide it with better support as NASA implemented the Vision for Space Exploration. Under the reorganization, the NAC had incorporated standing committees that it had previously chartered. The six committees composing the restructured Council were Aeronautics, Audit and Finance, Exploration, Human Capital, Science, and Space Operations. Each committee was responsible for examining particular subject areas and providing findings to the full Council, which would consider the findings and supply specific recommendations to the Administrator. Former U.S. Senator and Apollo program astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt chaired the 24-member NAC, which also included former Apollo program astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first person to walk on the Moon.(NASA, New NASA Advisory Council Holds Inaugural Meeting, news release 05-416, 29 November 2005; NASA, NASA Advisory Council (NAC), 19 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/offices/nac/home/ index.html (accessed 22 July 2009).)
France and the United States agreed to establish a Space Shuttle landing site in southern France. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and French Ambassador Jean-David Levitte signed the agreement, which covered NASAs Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the agreement, France would permit Shuttles encountering problems during launch to land at Istres Air Base 125, near Marseilles, and allow the U.S. government to conduct additional support activities for Space Shuttles on French soil, such as weather monitoring and search-and-rescue operations.(NASA, U.S. and France Agree To Establish NASA Shuttle Landing Site, news release 05-143, 7 June 2005. 803 Mark Carreau, Shuttle Safety Issues Unresolved, Houston Chronicle, 9 June 2005; Warren E. Leary, NASA Near to Meeting Safety Requirements for Launching in July, New York Times, 9 June 2005.)
NASA announced that scientists had finally agreed that Voyager 1, launched in 1977, had reached the solar systems final frontier, passed through the termination shock regionthe point at the edge of the solar system where the solar wind slows abruptly, and entered the heliosheatha frontier of unknown thickness defining the border with interstellar space. In November 2003, the Voyager team had announced unusual events in the missions history, signaling that Voyager 1 had reached the edge of the solar system. However, scientists disagreed as to whether the craft had actually encountered termination shock or was merely approaching the region at the edge of interstellar space. NASA explained that scientists had based the evidence that Voyager 1 had encountered termination shock on the crafts measurement of a sudden increase in the strength of the magnetic field carried by the solar wind, combined with an inferred decrease in speed, which happens when the solar wind slows down. Additionally, Voyager had observed an increase in the number of high-speed, electrically charged electrons and ions, as well as a burst of plasma-wave noise, which scientists had expected to occur when Voyager 1 passed the termination shock. Eric Christian, Discipline Scientist for the Sun-Solar System Connection Research Program at NASA Headquarters, remarked that Voyagers observations over the past few years had shown that termination shock is far more complicated than previously thought. When Voyager 1 entered the heliosheath, the craft was 8.7 billion miles (14 kilometers) away from Earth, the farthest any human-made object had traveled.(NASA, Voyager Spacecraft Enters Solar Systems Final Frontier, news release 05-131, 24 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05131_Voyager_agu.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Guy Gugliotta, Voyager at Edge of Solar System, Washington Post, 25 May 2005.)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) released its final report on NASAs efforts to meet the CAIBs recommendations for resuming piloted Shuttle flights. Former NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe had established the task group to provide an independent assessment of NASAs implementation of the CAIBs 15 critical recommendations. In the final report, the CAIB concluded that NASA had met or exceeded 12 of the 15 recommendations and had made substantive progress on the remaining three. The task group explained that the final three recommendations were of a type that would be nearly impossible to complete. However, major media highlighted an appendix of the document in which seven of the 28-member task group provided a highly critical assessment of NASAs management. These seven task force members claimed that some of the same organizational behaviors of NASA managers that had contributed to the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia had also jeopardized the July 2005 Space Shuttle Discovery mission. They stated further that NASA had failed to address the problem of Discoverys loss of foam insulation from its fuel tank and had failed to take steps to protect the Space Shuttles from the damage caused by such debris.(Return to Flight Task Group, Final Report of the Return to Flight Task Group (Washington, DC, July 2005); John Schwartz, Minority Report Faults NASA as Compromising Safety, New York Times, 18 August 2005.)
NASA announced that it had approved the extension of operations for the twin Mars Rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, for up to 18 months. The robotic craft had already surprised engineers and scientists, having completed 11 months of extended activity beyond their successful three- month primary missions. Opportunity had driven more than three miles since arriving at Mars, eight times the distance originally planned, and, in March 2005, had set a new record of 722 feet (220 meters) in a single days drive. Spirit had driven a shorter distance but was working in a much rougher terrain than Opportunity. Both rovers were exhibiting signs of wear and exposure, and scientists recognized that either mission could end suddenly because of a random part failure. James K. Erickson, Project Manager for the rovers at NASAs JPL, remarked that, despite the wear and the effects of exposure, both rovers remained in exceptional shape. Erickson said that NASA would work to get as much benefit as possible for as long as the craft were capable of producing worthwhile scientific results. Director of NASAs Mars Exploration Program J. Douglas McCuistion added that the rovers successes had strengthened NASAs commitment to achieving the ambitious goals of returning samples from Mars and eventually sending a human expedition to the planet.(NASA, Durable Mars Rovers Sent into Third Overtime Period, news release 05-091, 6 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05091_mer_extension.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASAs FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASAs long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the Presidents January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASAs priorities, changes that he described as almost staggering in terms of magnitude.(James Janega, House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget, Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, Lawmakers Question White House on NASA, Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had been in his new position for only one month, appeared as the sole witness before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, and Science, to testify regarding NASAs FY 2006 budget request. Key issues that the panel discussed with Griffin included several related to the Space Shuttle Program: the four-year gap between the planned decommissioning of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and the first scheduled flight of the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) in 2014; the United States obligation to complete the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle; and servicing the HST. In his responses, Griffin stated that, in mid-July, he would release a plan for the first flight of the new CEV. He suggested that, if the ISS partners postponed some scheduled on-board scientific research, they could complete the ISS before the Shuttles retirement, without cancelling any research programs. Regarding the HST, Griffin stated his opposition to a robotic servicing mission and said that he wished to assess the first two Shuttle flights before making a decision. The panel also discussed recommended cuts in Earth Science research. Griffin responded that NASA had listened to the concerns of the scientific community and was reexamining that area. Griffin clarified that NASA would not cut science programs to fund the spaceflight program.
The American Academy of Arts and Sciences released United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities, a research paper highly critical of the Vision for Space Exploration. In the paper, former Director of NASAs JSC George W. S. Abbey and former White House science advisor Neal F. Lane stated that the Vision for Space Exploration does not address major obstacles to the United States progress in space exploration and science. Those problems include predicted shortfalls in the U.S. engineering and science workforce and declining international cooperation on existing and planned space missions. Abbey and Lane also stated that the United States would be unlikely to realize the Visions objectives because of the diminishing U.S. commitment to the countrys commercial space industry and the declining role of basic science in the U.S. space program and in the national economy. NASA officials did not comment on the paper, stating that they had not yet seen it.(John Schwartz, Report Says Space Program Is Lacking Money and Focus, New York Times, 23 June 2005; George W. S. Abbey and Neal F. Lane, United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities (Occasional Paper, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA, 2005), 12.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASAs budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASAs space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASAs Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASAs aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASAs intentions regarding issues contained in the Presidents budget request, including NASAs plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIBs critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASAs own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bushs intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 35; Guy Gugliotta, NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13, Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core, news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bunei Sato et al., The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core, Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465473.)
During its 179th meeting, held at the European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt, Germany, the ESA Council elected Sigmar Wittig as its Chair, effective 1 July 2005. Wittig, head of the German delegation to ESA and the Chair of the Executive Board of the German Aerospace Center (Deutsche Zentrum fur Luft- und Raumfahrt), replaced Per Tegner of Sweden, whose term of office was ending on 30 June 2005. The ESA Council is ESAs governing body and provides policy guidelines for ESAs space programs.
NASA and the FAA brought a demonstration of the Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) to Foley Square in downtown New York City. SATS represented one aspect of a public- private partnership focused on developing technology that would enable more people to fly directly to their destinations at their own convenience. The ultimate goal of the SATS project was for people to be able to access air travel in much the same way that they hail a cab. NASAs SATS Project Manager Jerry N. Hefner described a scenario in which a person would board a plane in his or her neighborhood to fly to a destination 500 miles away, without changing planes and without going through a hub. Instead, SATS would fly into and out of underused rural and suburban airports, reducing congestion at larger airports and easing traffic on interstate highways across the country. SATS Project Manager for the FAA Peter C. McHugh commented that those involved in the project believed that, as the travel population using SATS aircraft grew, minimal interference or intersection with the larger airline system would occur.(Roger Clark for NY1 Cable TV, NASA Tries To Change the Way Americans Fly, 16 March 2005. 234)
In Bangalore, India, NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and G. Madhavan Nair, Chair of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), signed two Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs), agreeing to cooperate on Indias first uncrewed lunar missionChandrayaan 1 scheduled to launch in late 2007 or early 2008. The mission would fly two NASA scientific instrumentsthe Moon Mineralogy Mapper, to track the mineral and chemical composition of the Moon, and the mini synthetic-aperture radar (Mini-SAR) to map ice deposits in the Moons polar regions. Chandrayaan 1 would also carry three scientific instruments from European research centers. At the signing ceremony, Griffin said that he hoped that as we extend the reach of human civilization throughout our solar system, the United States and India will be partners on many more technically challenging and scientifically rewarding projects.(NASA, NASA Agrees To Cooperate with India on Lunar Mission, news release 06-219, 9 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06219_griffin_india.html (accessed 1 October 2009); Gavin Rabinowitz for Associated Press, Indian Mission To Carry NASA Devices, 10 May 2006; Paul Watson, U.S. To Piggyback on Indias Mission To Orbit the Moon, Los Angeles Times, 10 May 2006.)
Heads of the national space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at NASAs KSC in Florida to review plans for completing assembly of the ISS by the end of 2010. Since the grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet in 2003, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, the ISS had operated with two-member crews. However, the ISS partners planned to increase the crew to three members with the next Space Shuttle Discovery flight, scheduled for May 2006, and to increase the crew of the station to six members in 2009. Furthermore, NASA announced its plan to launch 16 Shuttle flights to allow completion of the ISS before the planned retirement of the Shuttles in 2010. To advance the assembly schedule, the Shuttles would transport ESAs Columbus laboratory module and JAXAs experiment module Kibo to the ISS during four missions in 2007 and 2008. The ISS partners issued a joint statement that affirmed their plans to use a combination of transportation systems provided by Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States in order to complete ISS assembly in a timeframe that meets the needs of the partners and ensures full utilization of the unique capabilities of the ISS throughout its lifetime.(NASA, Joint Statement by International Space Station Heads of Agency, news release 06-084, 2 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06084_HOA_statement.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Warren E. Leary, Schedule To Complete Space Station Is Advanced, New York Times, 3 March 2006; Irene Klotz for Reuters, NASA Has New Plan To Complete Space Station, 2 March 2006.)
The National Research Council (NRC) released a study of civil aeronautics research and technology priorities that NASA and other government agencies should pursue in the coming decade. The U.S. Congress and NASA had requested the NRC to produce a report identifying aeronautics technologies that would support and improve the U.S. air transportation system. In its report, the NRC stated that NASA and other agencies should pursue aeronautics research and technology that advances the U.S. air systems capacity, safety, reliability, efficiency, and performance, and reduces the systems energy consumption and environmental impact. The report also suggested that civil aeronautics R&T should support the U.S. space program and take advantage of synergies with defense. In addition, the NRC outlined five areas of high-priority aeronautics R&T, areas that researchers at NASA and other U.S. agencies should pursue to attain the identified strategic objectives. Those areas included 1) aerodynamics and aeroacoustics; 2) propulsion and power; 3) materials and structures; 4) dynamics, navigation and control, and avionics; and 5) intelligent and autonomous systems, operations and decision making, human integrated systems, and networking and communications.(National Research Council, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006).)
The first successful launch at a commercial spaceport in the United States took place when the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport launched a rocket called the Minotaur, carrying two satellites. The state governments of Virginia and Maryland had funded the spaceport to serve the commercial space launch market. Other institutions contributing to the venture included Old Dominion University and several aerospace companies. The facility was located on land leased from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) near Chincoteague, Virginia. Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, had built the rocket. One of the satellites it carried was a U.S. Air Force tactical surveillance satellite called TacSat-2. The other was a 10-kilogram (22-pound) NASA satellite called GeneSat 1, designed for experiments on E. coli bacteria.(Michael E. Ruane, At Va. Spaceport, Rocket Launches 1,000 Dreams, Washington Post, 17 December 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 638, 1 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx638.html (accessed 1 July 2010).)
To raise money for the Russian space program, ISS crew member Mikhail V. Tyurin drove a golf ball off the ISS during a spacewalk, an event that comprised a small, but highly publicized, part of the 5.5-hour spacewalk. Tyurin and American astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria spent most of the spacewalk conducting serious tasks, such as installing a proton detector to monitor solar eruptions. NASA beamed imagery of the event to Mission Control, showing Tyurin using a 6- iron to drive a lightweight replica of a golf ball off a special spring-loaded tee. Element 21 Golf Company of Toronto, Canada, had paid the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos an undisclosed fee for the golf outing, and NASA had approved it after determining that the ball posed no threat to the ISS. NASA expected the ball to enter Earths orbit and to incinerate in the upper atmosphere within a few days.(Mark Carreau, After Sending Golf Ball into Space, Its Down To Business, Houston Chronicle, 23 November 2006; Stefano S. Coledan, From Outer Space, a Cry of Fore! New York Times, 23 November 2006.)
Speaking at the 22nd National Space Symposium, in Colorado, Vice Administrator of China National Space Administration (CNSA) Luo Ge reviewed the landmark achievements of the Peoples Republic of China and outlined its ambitious future space exploration plans. Luo Ge recapped Chinas accomplishments to date46 consecutive successful launches since 1996, including 23 satellites and six Shenzhou spacecraft, the most recent of which were crewed missions. He stated that Chinas total annual investment in space programs was equivalent to US$500 million. China planned to achieve a lunar flyby in 2007, to develop a nonpolluting launch vehicle by 2010, to land a rover on the Moons surface by 2012, to establish an orbiting space laboratory by 2015, and to launch robotic lunar-sample-return missions by 2017. Furthermore, Luo Ge stated that China expected to launch approximately 100 Earth-orbiting satellites over the next five to eight years, ranging from oceanographic, navigation, and telecommunications satellite systems to constellations of Earth-observing and disaster-mitigation spacecraft. (Leonard David, China Unveils Ambitious Space Plans at National Space Symposium, Space.com, 5 April 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060405_nss_china.html (accessed 24 June 2010); Xinhua News Agency, China Reveals Space Exploration Plans, 6 April 2006.)
Bruce T. Lundin, who had joined the Lewis Research Center (LeRC) in Ohio in 1943, and had served as its Director from 1969 to 1977, died at the age of 86. At Lewis, Lundin had conducted research on aircraft enginecooling heat transfer; directed the development of turbojet engines, chemical rockets, and electric thrusters for spacecraft propulsion; and helped to develop electrical powergenerating systems for spacecraft, using chemical, solar, and nuclear energy sources. According to NASA officials, Lundins work during his tenure as the chief of the Engine Research Division had contributed to the increased performance and reliability of modern-day commercial transport and supersonic aircraft engines. Lundin had received NASAs Distinguished Service Medal twice.(Wally Guenther, Bruce Lundin, 86, Was Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 30 January 2006.)
NASA announced major personnel changes at three of its centers, Ames Research Center (ARC) in California, Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida, and Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. G. Scott Hubbard, Director of ARC, announced his resignation, stating that he had agreed to assume the Carl Sagan Chair for the Study of Life in the Universe at the SETI (Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California. Hubbard had worked at Ames since 1987, serving as Director since 2002, and had previously served on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board and as the first Director of the NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA appointed William W. Parsons Jr., Director of Stennis since 2005, as Deputy Director of KSC. Parsonss tenure at NASA had spanned 16 years. As Space Shuttle Program Manager after the Columbia accident, he had directed NASAs return-to-flight efforts, which had culminated, in the summer of 2005, in the successful flight of Discovery in STS-114. Parsons had also led NASAs recovery efforts after Hurricane Katrina. NASA appointed Richard J. Gilbrech, who had worked at Stennis since 1991, as Director of SSC. He had served as Deputy Director of LaRC in Virginia, as Deputy Director of NASAs Engineering Safety Center, and had worked at various NASA flight centers.(NASA, NASA Announces Senior Management Changes, news release 06-031, 23 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06031_personnel_changes.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Picayune Item (MS), NASA Announces Management Changes at Stennis Space Center, 25 January 2006.)
GAO released a report stating that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) needed to correct its unrealistic cost estimates for its major space acquisition programs. Analyzing six of the U.S. Air Forces ongoing space programs, GAO had found that the programs estimated costs had increased by US$12.2 billion, 44 percent over initial cost estimates. The report attributed this cost growth to the DODs practice of commencing programs before determining whether sufficient financial resources would be available to complete them. GAO suggested that this practice had developed because of pressures on the DOD to secure program funding. The report also stated that the DODs unrealistic cost estimates had exacerbated its problems with acquisitions for the Air Forces programs. For example, the DOD had frequently had to move funds between programs to cover the costs of poorly performing programs. This had led to inefficiencies in meeting programs costs and schedules. The DOD agreed with the reports findings and outlined specific steps it planned to take to make the Air Forces cost estimates more accurate.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Space Acquisitions: DOD Needs To Take More Action To Address Unrealistic Cost Estimates of Space Systems (report no. GAO-07-96, Washington, DC, 17 November 2006), 16, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0796.pdf (accessed 29 April 2010).)
At the National Space Societys International Space Development Conference, NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale announced NASAs sponsorship of the Lunar Lander Challenge competition, with prizes totaling US$2.5 million, to develop rockets capable of landing on the Moon. The X Prize Foundation would manage the competition and award the Lunar Lander Challenge prizes at the presentation of the X Prize Cup in October 2006. The challenge would have two levels of difficulty, with prizes awarded at each level. Level 1 would require a vehicle to take off from a designated launch area, rocket to an altitude of 150 feet (50 meters), hover for 90 seconds, and land on a pad 100 meters (320.08 feet) from the launch point. Level 2 would require the same launch altitude and the same distance between launch and landing pad, but the rocket would have to hover for 180 seconds and to land on a rocky site simulating the lunar surface. California entrepreneur Peter H. Diamandis, founder of the X Prize competition, stated that entrepreneurial companies can build the lunar space ships [necessary for achieving NASAs goal of returning people to the Moon in the next decade], and a Lunar Lander Challenge can stimulate the required technology in an efficient and rapid fashion.(Maggie McKee, Lunar Lander Is NASAs Biggest Challenge, New Scientist, 5 May 2006; X Prize Foundation, X Prize Foundation and NASA Offer $2.5 Million Lunar Lander Challenge Competition To Take Place at 06 X Prize Cup in Las Cruces, 4 May 2006, http://www.xprize.org/llc/press-release/x-prize-foundation-and-nasa-offer- 2-5-million-lunar-challenge-competition-t (accessed 23 March 2010).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin announced that NASA would conduct a fifth and final crewed servicing mission to the HST, an expedition that would help extend and improve the observatorys capabilities through 2013. Griffins announcement reversed previous NASA Administrator Sean OKeefes decision to cancel the servicing mission. The missions main objective was to install two new instruments, the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (COS) and Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3). The COS would survey the universes large-scale structure, known as the cosmic web. The gravity of dark matter and the spatial distribution of galaxies and intergalactic gas determine the structure known as the cosmic web. The WFC3 would observe objects in the solar system and in distant galaxies, providing scientists with information that would help them determine how those objects had formed. NASA announced that the missions crew members would be Commander Scott D. Altman, Pilot Gregory C. Johnson, and Mission Specialists Andrew J. Feustel, Michael T. Good, John M. Grunsfeld, Michael J. Massimino, and K. Megan McArthur. NASA had tentatively scheduled the mission for 2008. The mission was controversial because it posed risks to astronauts. However, OKeefes cancellation had also engendered controversy, because failing to service the HST would have meant the end of the HSTs mission by 2008.(NASA, NASA Approves Mission and Names Crew for Return to Hubble, news release 06-343, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06343_HST_announcement.html (accessed 5 April 2010); Mark Carreau, NASA to Repair Hubble Despite Potential Risks, Houston Chronicle, 1 November 2006.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space. Griffin outlined highlights of NASAs FY 2007 budget request and discussed the strategic direction for NASA in implementing the priorities of the President and Congress within the resources provided. Griffin stated that NASAs first priority must be to honor its March 2006 commitment to its international partners on the ISS. NASA had pledged to conduct an adequate number of Space Shuttle flights to complete the assembly of ISS by the end of the decade. Toward this end, NASA had reallocated funds budgeted for its scientific and exploration missions for fiscal years 20072011, transferring the projected funds to the budget for the Space Shuttle and the ISS. Griffin urged that NASAs second priority should be constructing the new CEV, which would transport humans to the ISS after NASA retired the Space Shuttles in 2010. Griffin said that the CEV must be operational not later than 2014 and possibly much sooner. According to Griffin, NASA would have to delay several new scientific missions because fulfilling NASAs commitment to the ISS and the CEV was a higher priority. Redirecting funds budgeted for Exploration Systems, in order to provide additional funds for aeronautics research or science
NASA and the U.S. Air Force signed an agreement to create an aeronautics research partnership. According to the MOU, which NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Secretary of the U.S. Air Force Michael W. Wynne signed, the two organizations would freely exchange research information, strive to reduce the duplication of research, and enhance their long-term research planning. The agreement covered several areas of aeronautics research, including advanced aircraft design, aviation safety, materials development, and propulsion management.(NASA, NASA, Air Force Agree To Aeronautics Cooperation, news release 06-289, 7 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06289_air_force.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
The National Research Council Space Studies Board released its study, An Assessment of Balance in NASAs Science Programs, concluding that NASA does not have the necessary resources to carry out the tasks of completing the ISS, returning humans to the Moon, maintaining vigorous space and Earth science and microgravity life and physical sciences programs, and sustaining capabilities in aeronautical research. Study chair Lennard A. Fisk, University of Michigan space scientist and former NASA Associate Administrator, stated that the study committee was particularly concerned that the shortfall in funding for science has fallen disproportionately on small missions and on funding for basic research and technology. These actions run the risk of disrupting the pipeline of human capital and technology that is essential for the future success of the space program. The conference report (H. Rep. No.108- 792), which accompanied H.R. 4818 (Pub. L. No.108-447), the bill appropriating FY 2005 funds for NASA, had mandated the study.(Guy Gugliotta,  NASA Underfunded, Panel Reports, Washington Post, 5 May 2006; National Academy of Sciences, Office of News and Public Information, NASA Lacks Resources To Sustain Vigorous Science Program, news release, 4 May 2006, http://www8.nationalacademies.org/ onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=11644 (accessed 16 March 2010); National Research Council, Space Studies Board, An Assessment of Balance in NASAs Science Programs (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), 29, http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php? record_id=11644 (accessed 16 March 2010).)
NASA announced that it had misplaced the original recordings of the first Moon landing, along with other tapes containing data from that same mission. NASA had initially transferred the tapes to the U.S. National Archives, later storing them at NASAs GSFC. NASA officials noted that NASA still had copies of all of the data on the tapes, including the footage of Neil A. Armstrongs historic first steps on the Moon. However, they also noted that the images on the copies were of lower quality than those on the original magnetic tapes, because NASA equipment had been incompatible with television technology when the first human mission to the Moon took place. NASA had displayed the original transmissions of the Moon landing on a monitor and pointing a television camera at the monitor to broadcast the images on television. NASA was continuing to look for the tapes.(Robert Colvile, One Giant Slip-Up for Mankind, NASA Has Mislaid the Original Footage of Neil Armstrongs Historic Moon Landing, Daily Telegraph (London), 14 August 2006; Washington Post, Tape of 1st Moon Landing Missing, 15 August 2006.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing to address the results of the statutorily mandated Nunn-McCurdy review of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS). NOAA, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) jointly managed NPOESS, which would provide data and imagery to help weather forecasters, climatologists, and the military map and monitor changes in weather, climate, the oceans, and the environment. The Nunn-McCurdy amendment to the Defense Authorization Act of 1983 (10 U.S.C. 2433) provided that Congress must review any DOD-funded program that was more than 25 percent over budget, to determine whether and in what manner it should continue. In January 2006, the Secretary of the Air Force had notified Congress that the NPOESS program would exceed the 25 percent Nunn-McCurdy threshold. The three NPOESS managing agencies had reviewed the program and determined that it should continue. However, NPOESS must reduce the number of its satellites from six to four and eliminate five sensors, including three for climate research. The agencies would postpone the first NPOESS satellite launch until 2013 and discontinue work on the key weather sensor known as Conically Scanning Microwave Image/Sounder (CMIS). The United States would temporarily rely on Europe for the data that CMIS would have collected, including ocean wind speeds. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified regarding NASAs compliance with the mandates of the Nunn-McCurdy recertified NPOESS program, emphasizing that NASA would continue to provide cost-effective technologies for two key components of this programthe NPOESS Preparatory Project (NPP) and the continuity of long-term climate measurements.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NPOESS: Results of the Nunn-McCurdy Review of NOAAs Weather Satellite Program, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 June 2006, 36, 2225, http://www.gpo.gov/ fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG- 109hhrg27970&packageId=CHRG-109hhrg27970&fromBrowse=true (accessed 20 December 2010); NOAA, Center for Satellite Applications and Research (STAR), STAR Acronyms, http://www.star.nesdis.noaa.gov/star/ acronyms.php (accessed 5 October 2010).)
CNSA launched the Sino Satellite Communications Companys (SinoSats) satellite on a Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center at 16:20 (UT). The communications satellite, SinoSat-2, represented a major technological advance for the Chinese space program. The domestically developed satellite, capable of providing both analog and digital television broadcasts, was Chinas first satellite based on the Direct-From-Home-4 system, or DFH-4 bus. The DFU-4 bus enables individual households to receive television signals using their own satellite-dish antennas. SinoSat hoped that the satellite would improve the capacity and reliability of Chinese television broadcasting and help China serve the international spaceflight market. In addition, CNSA officials stated that the satellites technology could prompt the Chinese government to eliminate regulations prohibiting Chinese citizens from installing their own satellite-dish antennas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636; Xinhua News Agency, 5th Ld-Writethru-China Exclusive: China Launches High- Power Communications, Broadcast Satellite, 29 October 2006.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing on NASAs FY 2007 budget proposal, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. Griffin reiterated NASAs budgetary priorities, which he had outlined on 6 February when President George W. Bush submitted the federal budget to Congress. NASA had proposed using money previously allocated for science, lunar exploration, and aeronautics programs to fund the programs that would now take precedence, according to the Vision for Space Exploration. Priorities would include supporting human spaceflight programs, completing the assembly of the ISS, and placing the CEV in operation by 2014. Committee chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) and ranking member Bart Gordon (D-TN) were equally critical of the proposed budget. Boehlert stated that the budget was bad for space science, worse for Earth science, perhaps worse still for aeronautics. It basically cuts or de-emphasizes every forward looking, truly futuristic program of the agency to fund operational and development programs to enable us to do what we are already doing or have done before. Although he expressed support for the Vision for Space Exploration, Boehlert said that he saw no need to accelerate the deadline for an operational CEV to a date earlier than 2014. Gordon criticized the Bush administration for sending Congress a budget request for funding that was inadequate to implement NASAs exploration initiative and other programs.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASAs Fiscal Year 2007 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 16 February 2006, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath= 109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG-109hhrg25937&packageId=CHRG- 109hhrg25937&fromBrowse=true (accessed 30 December 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASAs Stated Goals Dont Match Budgetary Realities, press release, 16 February 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1044 (accessed 12 July 2010); Brian Berger, Congress Criticizes NASA Budget Request, Space.com, 16 February 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060216_griffin_ nasa.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
06191_Crossfield_death.html (accessed 25 September 2009); David Stout, Scott Crossfield, Fabled Test Pilot, Dies at 85, New York Times, 21 April 2006. missions, would directly affect NASAs ability to effectively and efficiently transition the workforce and capabilities from the Space Shuttle to the new CEV system.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science and Space, NASA Issues and Challenges, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 25 April 2006, 24 (statement of NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin), http://commerce.senate.gov/pdf/griffin-042506.pdf (accessed 21 January 2010).)
NASA announced the crew for International Space Station (ISS) Expedition 13, scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in March 2006. Russian cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov would command the mission, and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams would serve as Flight Engineer and NASA Science Officer. Expedition 13 would also include the first Brazilian astronaut to fly in space, Marcos Cesar Pontes, who would engage in scientific experiments aboard the ISS for approximately one week. Williams had flown aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-101 as Mission Specialist in May 2000, performing a spacewalk that lasted almost 7 hours. As Flight Engineer for the 1997 mission to the Russian Mir space station, Vinogradov had completed five spacewalks. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 13: American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Fyodor N. Yurchikhin.(NASA, NASA Announces Next International Space Station Crew, news release 06-002, 5 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06002_Expedition_13_crew.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Tariq Malik, NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew, Space.com, 5 January 2006, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/060105_exp13_crew_announcement.html (accessed 28 June 2010).)
President George W. Bush submitted his US$2.77 trillion budget for FY 2007, which included US$16.8 billion to fund NASA, a 3.2 percent increase over FY 2006. According to NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, the priorities established by this budget reflected NASAs commitment to implement the Vision for Space Exploration, to complete the assembly of the ISS with the fewest possible spaceflights, and to deliver an operational Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) no later than 2014. The budget provided for a reduction in funding for the Shuttle program, from US$4.78 billion in FY 2006 to US$4.06 billion in FY 2007, and a 3 percent increase in funding for the ISS, to US$1.81 billion. NASA had requested funds of US$3.98 billion for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, a 30 percent increase from the previous fiscal year. The Directorate would develop the CEV, two new launchers, and the lunar landers needed to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA had estimated the cost of completing ISS assembly with the minimum number of Shuttle flights, while ensuring the safety of Shuttle flights, and had calculated a budget shortfall of US$35 billion. To make up this shortfall, the FY 2007 budget would cut funding for aeronautics research by 18 percent, to US$724.4 million. In addition, the budget would cap the increase for NASAs science budget, which funded deep- space probes and Earth-observation satellites, at 1.5 percent in FY 2007, and at 1 percent annually for the following four years.(NASA, NASA Administrators Statement About FY 2007 Budget, news release 06-056, 6 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06056_Budget_Statement.html (accessed 10 September 2010); Warren E. Leary, Unexpected Costs Force NASA Cuts, New York Times, 7 February 2006; Brian Berger, NASA Seeks 30-Percent Increase For Explorations Programs, Space News, 6 February 2006.)
Four years behind its original schedule, JAXA successfully launched Kaguya, also called the Selenological and Engineering Explorer (SELENE), aboard an H-2A solid-fuel rocket from Tanegashima Island at 1:31 (UT). The 2.9-tonne (2,900-kilogram or 3.2-ton) lunar orbiter carried various instruments that would enable it to obtain detailed data about the lunar topography and surface-mineral composition. JAXA had promoted the mission as the most significant lunar expedition since Americas Apollo program of the 1960s and early 1970s, in terms of its scope and ambition. JAXA claimed that the mission would outpace the former Soviet Unions Luna program, NASAs Clementine mission of 1994, and NASAs Lunar Prospector mission of 1998 1999. Kaguyas launch occurred at a critical time for the Japanese space agency, which was facing accusations that it lacked a vision capable of challenging the ambition of the Peoples Republic of China to lead East Asia in space exploration. At the time of the launch, JAXA also lacked popular and political support. Japans citizens had such poor regard for the civilian space program that JAXA had to negotiate with the local fishermen of Tanegashima for acceptable launch times. Because September was one of two launch windows that Tanegashima fishermens unions had offered JAXA, Kaguyas launch took place during typhoon season. Kazuto Suzuki, a specialist in global space issues at Tsukuba University in Tokyo, explained that JAXA was only beginning to realize that, to enhance the political importance of Japans space initiatives, it would need to market Japans space program to appeal to the Japanese public.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647, 1 October 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx647.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Bruce Wallace, After Long Delay, Japan Launches Lunar Orbiter, Los Angeles Times, 14 September 2007; Associated Press, Japans Space Agency Launches Lunar Probe, 14 September 2007.)
Associate Administrator for NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missionsSTS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASAs efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitzs resignation, praising the former astronauts tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASAs decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttles reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA, news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, Scott J. Doc Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former), http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, NASAs Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family, Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
The heads of space agencies from Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at the ESA headquarters in Paris to review International Space Station (ISS) cooperation. The ISS partners discussed the significant accomplishments and milestones in implementing the ISSs configuration and assembly sequence, as endorsed at the previous meeting of the partners in March 2006. Milestones for the ISS included reestablishing a three-person crew, reinitiating station-assembly activities, and completing three extremely challenging Space Shuttle missions, which included the extravehicular accomplishments of American, Canadian, European, and Russian astronauts.(NASA, Heads of Agency International Space Station Joint Statement, news release 07-013, 23 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_07013_HOA_Joint_Statement.html (accessed 14 October 2009). 11 Edward Cody, China Confirms Firing Missile To Destroy Satellite, Washington Post, 24 January 2007; Jason Dean, China Verifies Antisatellite-Missile Test, Wall Street Journal, 24 January 2007.)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing on NASAs fiscal year (FY) 2008 budget request, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. On 5 February, President George W. Bush had presented to Congress NASAs proposed US$17.3 billion budget for FY 2008, as a component of the federal budget, including US$4 billion for five Space Shuttle flights and US$2.24 billion for ISS activities. Administrator Griffin urged Congress to fund NASAs FY 2008 Exploration Systems request fully, enabling NASA to develop the Orion and the Ares-1 crew vehicles. He cautioned that NASA was unlikely to succeed in bringing new exploration capabilities online by 2014 because of several factors, including the cost of retiring the Space Shuttle and making the transition to the new vehicle, the cost of supporting the ISS, and the impact of the overall reduction in funding for NASA mandated by the FY 2007 Continuing Resolution. However, Griffin stated that NASA would continue to transition the workforce, infrastructure, and equipment from the Space Shuttle to new Exploration systems. Committee Chair Bart Gordon (D-TN) criticized the Bush administrations failure to recommend the funding levels necessary to support the exploration initiative, the ISS, the termination of the Space Shuttle program, and the upgrade of the aging Deep Space Network.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, NASAs Fiscal Year 2008 Budget Request, 110th Cong., 1st Sess., 15 March, 2007, 28, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg33803/ pdf/CHRG-110hrg33803.pdf (accessed 20 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, NASAs Lean Budgetary Outlook Will Have Wide-Ranging Impact on Agency Programs, press release, 15 March 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1724 (accessed 28 September 2010).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Roskosmos head Anatoly N. Perminov signed agreements in Moscow allowing two Russian scientific instruments to fly aboard NASA spacecraft. According to the agreement, the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) would fly aboard NASAs LRO, which was scheduled to begin a yearlong mission in October 2008. In addition, the Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN) instrument would travel to Mars aboard NASAs Mars Science Laboratory (MSL), a robotic rover scheduled to launch in 2009. Designed to search for evidence of water ice, LEND would map concentrations of hydrogen at the lunar surface, or just below it. The DAN instrument would conduct similar investigations on Mars measuring hydrogen to analyze the interaction of neutrons with the Martian surface.(NASA, NASA Spacecraft To Carry Russian Science Instruments, news release 07-219, 3 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07219_combined_Russian_MOU.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
Four teams competed at NASAs Regolith Excavation Challenge to dig a minimum of 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of simulated lunar soilregolithwithin 0.5 hours, using no more than 30 watts of power. However, none of the teams succeeded in winning the US$125,000 first prize. The top performer was the entry from Technology Ranch of Pixmo Beach, California, the only machine to run for a full 30 minutes in its first attempt and to scoop up 75 kilograms (165 pounds) of regolith. The Regolith Excavation Challenge was the seventh centennial challenge NASA had held since 2005. However, the only person who had won any of the competitions was Peter K. Homer, who had won US$200,000 for his entry in the Astronaut Glove Challenge on 3 May. Kenneth Davidian, Program Manager of NASAs Centennial Challenges Program, stated that NASA would add the unawarded prize money to the winnings for the 2008 Regolith Excavation Challenge, increasing the value of the prize for that competition to US$375,000. Davidian said that he expected the number of teams competing in the challenge would double and that many more NASA engineers would observe the competition in the future.(Dana Mackenzie, No One Scoops the Prize at Moon Digger Contest, New Scientist, 14 May 2007.)
likely broken into pieces too small to detect. Thomas C. Duxbury, EPOXI Project Manager,
The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) published a final rule, effective 5 June 2007, governing experimental permits for launching reusable suborbital rockets for space tourism. Under the rules, which the U.S. Congress had mandated in the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492), a single experimental permit would cover multiple vehicles of a particular design and allow an unlimited number of launches. The FAA would identify the type of design changes that it would permit the licensed launch company to make without invalidating the permit; renew the one-year permit after conducting a review; prohibit companies conducting test flights covered by an experimental permit to carry passengers for compensation or hire; establish criteria for the physical area in which a company could operate a vehicle with an experimental permit; and require a vehicle developer applying for a 47 permit to provide a program description, flight-test plan, and operational-safety documentation.
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin named Richard J. Gilbrech as Associate Administrator for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, succeeding Scott J. Horowitz, who had announced in July his intention to leave NASA by 1 October. The Directorate was responsible
NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale and Canadian Space Agency (CSA) President and Chief Executive Officer Laurier J. Boisvert signed the official agreement defining the terms of cooperation on the JWST, an international cooperative effort among NASA, CSA, and ESA. As the successor to NASAs HST, the JWST would investigate the origin and evolution of galaxies, stars, and planetary systems. Under the agreement, NASA would build the spacecraft, the telescope, and the platform hosting the instruments. NASA would also be responsible for the overall management and operations of the mission. CSA would provide the fine-guidance-sensor instrument, which would give the JWST the stability needed for capturing sharp images.(NASA, NASA and Canada Sign Agreement for Future Cooperation, news release 07-155, 16 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07155_jwst_csa_mou.html (accessed 9 June 2010).)
Aeronautical engineer Jerome B. Hammack, who was one of the seven inventors of NASAs Mercury capsule and had been instrumental in creating the recovery team to retrieve Mercury astronauts from the ocean, died of cancer at the age of 85. After playing a key role in the Mercury program, NASAs first human space program, Hammack had carried out similar duties in the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, and Shuttle projects. In 1958 Hammack had joined National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASAs predecessor organization, and, in the early 1960s, he had been one of the 35-member group that came to Houston to establish the institution that became NASAs JSC.(Lynwood Abram, Hammack, Helped [Design] Vehicles for Space Program, Houston Chronicle, 24 August 2007.)
NASA announced the names of the committee members tasked with conducting a comprehensive review of the health care systems and medical policies that NASA provided for the benefit of astronauts, as well as the standards and certification NASA required of astronauts. The review included an examination of behavioral health care services available to astronauts. To chair the group of external experts, NASA named Richard E. Bachmann Jr. of the U.S. Air Force, an expert in aerospace medicine with experience providing medical support to people conducting operations in extreme environments. NASA appointed James M. Duncan, NASA Chief of Space Medicine, and Wayne R. Frazier, an executive from the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, to serve on the committee in an ex officio capacity. The arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February had prompted the review.(NASA, NASA Announces Medical Review Team Members, news release 07-75, 26 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07075_Medical_Review_Members.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Jeanna Bryner, NASA Sets Team To Review Astronaut Mental Healthcare, Space.com, 26 March 2007, http://www.space. com/news/070326_nasa_healthcare.html (accessed 27 January 2010).)
The Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee held a hearing to discuss planned budget cuts to weather and environmental satellite programs, reductions that could significantly affect scientists ability to study Earths climate. Antonio J. Busalacchi, Director of the Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center of the University of Maryland, spoke extensively about the causes of the delays and cost overruns in the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS), a joint project of DOD, NASA, and NOAA. The partner agencies, intending for NPOESS to replace NASAs QuikSCAT satellite, which had launched in 1999 with a three- to five-year life expectancy, had originally scheduled NPOESS satellites to begin launches to replace aging satellites in 2008. However, at the time of the hearing, the partners had postponed the launches, now scheduled to occur during 20132026. Busalacchi characterized the status of the program as one giant leap backward for mankind, and Commerce Committee Chair Clarence William Bill Nelson (D-FL) called the implementation of the NPOESS program a disaster. David A. Powner of the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) testified that, although the initial cost estimate for the program had been US$6.5 billion for six satellites, the projected cost had since reached US$12.5 billion, with two satellites and some instruments dropped from the program. The report also found that the agencies had not coordinated effectively and had not filled critical NPOESS jobs. Mary Ellen Kicza, Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services at NOAA, testified to the committee that the agencies had already addressed many of the problems that GAO had identified.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, U.S. Weather and Environmental Satellites: Ready for the 21st Century? 110th Cong., 1st sess., 11 July 2007; see also statements of Ellen Kicza, David A. Powner, and Antonio J. Busalacchi, http://commerce.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?p=Hearings (accessed 29 October 2010) ; Wes Allison, Politics Aging Satellite Wont Cripple Storm Trackers, St. Petersburg Times (FL), 12 July 2007; Jessica Gresko for the Associated Press, Senate Committee Hears Recommendations on Weather Satellites, 11 July 2007.)
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASAs SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSCs A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, NASAs Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration, news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
Progress M-62, a Russian cargo spacecraft, docked with the ISS to bring the Expedition 16 crew supplies1.26 tonnes (1,260 kilograms or 1.4 tons) of food and water, fuel, and other cargo, such as research equipment and Christmas and birthday presents. The crew had detached Progress M-61 from the ISS on 22 December to make room for M-62s arrival. Instead of sending M-61 directly back to burn up in Earths atmosphere, Russian space program officials had decided to use it first as a platform for technical experiments. Roskosmos had also used Progress M-60 for research after undocking the craft from the ISS.(RIA Novosti, Russian Cargo Spacecraft Docks with ISS, 26 December 2007.)
STS-118 Mission Specialist Richard A. Mastracchio and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson undertook the third EVA of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours and 28 minutes, the pair relocated the S-band antenna subassembly from the P6 truss to the P1 truss, installed a new transponder on P1, and retrieved the P6 transponder. The spacewalk ended early when Mastracchios spacesuit was damaged. The suit had a cut in the left thumb of the glove. Mission Control instructed Mastracchio to return to the ISS airlock as a precaution against further damage that could potentially allow air to rush out of the suit. Anderson quickly finished the task he had been working on and followed Mastracchio to the airlock.
Alvin Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. Dave Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffes backup during NASAs teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavours payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavours 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavours time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavours heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, NASAs Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station, news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, STS-118: Endeavour, NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter, NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off, New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
NASA to present a credible plan and accompanying timetable for implementing the NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review Committees recommendations, including the most controversial one, related to the allegations that some astronauts had drunk alcohol shortly before flight. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had compared the alcohol allegations to urban legends, testified that NASA was already in the process of addressing the committees concerns. At the time of the hearing, NASA was preparing an anonymous survey to assist in identifying its employees continuing concerns about safety issues and about other review committee findings.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Subcommittee Questions NASA on Health Care of Astronaut Corps, news release, 6 September 2007, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science+ and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&packageId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASAs Astronaut Health Care SystemResults of an Independent Review, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2007; Eun Kyung Kim, Fear May Be NASA Problem, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 September 2007.)
Florida police released on bail Lisa M. Nowak, a NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy captain. The police had arrested Nowak the day before, after she threatened Colleen M. Shipman, a captain in the U.S. Air Force. Nowak had perceived Shipman as a romantic rival. NASA placed Nowak on 30-day leave and removed her from her mission duties. Nowak had flown her only mission as a crew member on STS-121 in July 2006, aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. NASA spokesperson Nicole Cloutier-Lemasters explained that, according to its past policy, NASA had screened crew members assigned to the ISS, before, during, and after missions, but had not screened Shuttle crews flying for two-week stints. Although Cloutier-Lemasters said that NASA did not plan to conduct an investigation of Nowak, NASAs Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that NASA had begun a review of its screening policy. NASA hoped to determine whether it had overlooked indications for concern in Nowaks case. Dale explained that NASA intended the review process to reveal whether or not astronauts were receiving adequate psychological and medical care and attention.(Mike Schneider and Erin McClam, Astronaut Charged with Attempted Murder, Associated Press, 7 February 2007; John Schwartz, Astronauts Arrest Spurs Review of NASA Testing, New York Times, 8 February 2007.)
NASA announced that, for the fifth time, it would extend the missions of the Mars Exploration Rovers Spirit and Opportunity. The twin rovers had landed on Mars in January 2004, embarking on missions originally planned to last 90 days. John L. Callas, Mars Rover Project Manager at NASAs JPL in Pasadena, California, remarked that, although Spirit and Opportunity were showing some signs of aging, they remained in good health and capable of continuing to collect scientific data. At the time of the announcement of the missions extension, Spirit had driven 4.5 miles (7.3 kilometers) and had returned more than 102,000 images. Opportunity had driven 7.2 miles (11.6 kilometers) and had returned more than 94,000 images.(NASA, NASA Extends Operations for Its Long-Lived Mars Rovers, news release 07-208, 15 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_072088_Mars_Rovers_Funding_Ext.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from KSC in Florida at 11:38 a.m. (EDT) on STS-120, a 14- day mission to continue ISS construction. The STS-120 crew consisted of Commander Pamela A. Melroy; Pilot George D. Zamka; and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, Stephanie D. Wilson, Daniel M. Tani, and ESA astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli. Mission Specialist Tani would join Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Yuri I. Malenchenko, replacing Clayton C. Anderson, who had lived aboard the ISS for five months. Mission goals included installing the Harmony connecting module (Node 2) and moving the P6 segment of the ISS truss, with its solar arrays, to a permanent position at the end of the
Boeing completed a developmental heat shield for NASAs Orion CEV. In 2006 NASAs ARC had awarded Boeing Advanced Systems a contract to develop a demonstration Thermal Protection System (TPS) Manufacturing Demonstration Unit (MDU) for the Orion capsule. Thomas Andrews, Boeing TPS Program Manager, stated that the TPS MDU had met NASAs risk-reduction objectives to move the Orion heat shield program toward full-scale development in preparation for CEV missions. Boeing had fabricated the TPS MDU from Phenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) material. With PICAs proven performance on NASAs Stardust spacecraft heat shield, NASA was considering the material for Orions heat shield. Boeings integrated concept for the TPS MDU used multiple PICA components, with each piece sized significantly larger than the typical Space Shuttle tiles, greatly reducing the number of the shields parts, as well as its complexity.(Boeing Company, Boeing Completes Prototype Heat Shield for NASA Orion Spacecraft, news release, 13 November 2007, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2007/q4/071113a_nr.html (accessed 12 November 2010). 169 William Harwood, Harmony Module Detached in Critical Relocation Operation, CBS Space Place, 14 November 2007; Patrick Peterson, Live in Orbit: 16 Bolts Driven, Mating Permanent, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 November 2007.)
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) released a study conducted over two years, examining the United States Earth-observing satellite missions. The study, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond, was the first 10-year plan to recommend a path forward that would restore U.S. leadership in Earth science and prevent the collapse of the U.S. system of Earth- science satellites. The report recommended that, to accomplish this goal and to rebuild the aging network of environmental spacecraft, the U.S. government should fund 17 Earth-observing-satellite missions between 2010 and 2020. To fund these missions, NASA would need to resume spending US$2 billion per year on Earth science, and the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) would need to maintain funding levels at US$1 billion each year. According to the report, NASAs budget for Earth science had decreased 30 percent since 2000, while NOAA had experienced major cost overruns and schedule delays in its primary mission to study weather and climate. Without reinvestment, the number of NASAs satellites monitoring the Earths climate could decrease by 2017 from 25 to 7, leaving the United States without scientific information to analyze severe storms and to determine changes in the Earths climate.(Brian Berger, Report Urges Reinvestment in U.S. Earth Science Satellites, Space.com, 16 January 2007, http://www.space.com/aol/businessmonday_070122.html (accessed 4 March 2010); Marc Kaufman, Cutbacks Impede Climate Studies, Washington Post, 16 January 2007; National Research Council, Space Studies Board and Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007), http://www.nap.edu/catalog. php?record_id=11820#toc (accessed 5 November 2009).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely at NASAs KSC after the 13-day STS-118 assembly mission to the ISS. Although the Shuttle had sustained damage during launch, including a small gouge in the protective tile on the orbiters underside, inspections during orbit had revealed no critical damage to the craft, and NASA managers had declared Endeavours thermal protection system safe for reentry. Endeavour had landed a day early because of NASAs concern about Hurricane Dean. The hurricane had ultimately followed a track that did not threaten Houston, the home of NASAs Mission Control. During the mission, Canadian astronaut Dafydd R. Dave Williams had undertaken three of the four spacewalks of STS-118, setting a new spacewalking record for Canada. Williams had surpassed the record held by Canadian Chris A. Hadfield, who had performed two EVAs during a single mission in 2001.(NASA, Shuttle Endeavour Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission, news release 07-177, 21 August 2007; Andy Blatchford, Canadians Record Spacewalk, Toronto Star, 19 August 2007; Traci Watson, Shuttle Coming Home Early as Dean Nears, USA Today, 20 August 2007.)
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolevs name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmoss announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russias space scientists, reminding them, the launch of the Earths first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age. The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.(Agence France-Presse, Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary, 5 October 2007.)
Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the second EVA of STS-120, disconnecting cables from the P6 truss, to remove the P6 truss from the Z1 truss. Tani and Parazynski made progress outfitting the new Harmony module, mating the power and data grapple fixture, and reconfiguring connectors on the S1 truss, in preparation for the later deployment of the radiator on S1. Tani also inspected the SARJ, collecting fine metal shavings on part of a wheel with solar panels attached to it. The discovery of the metal shavings enabled engineers to identify the source of friction that had caused the wheel to begin slowing down in September. Engineers had designed the wheel to spin freely so that the solar panels pointed toward the Sun; the panels generated electricity to operate the ISSs computers, oxygen- producing machine, and other systems. Tani reported that, in addition to collecting the metal shavings, he had observed that parts of the wheels surface appeared discolored, a possible sign of corrosion. To prevent further damage to the wheel, engineers stopped it from spinning, thereby reducing the amount of electricity that the panels generated. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 33 minutes.(NASA, NASAfacts; STS-120; Traci Watson, Damaged Component Could Thwart Space Station Plans, USA Today, 29 October 2007; John Schwartz, Astronauts Discover Damage to Space Station, 29 October 2007.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASAs KSC on an 11-day mission, designated STS-117, to continue construction of the ISS. The crew consisted of Commander Frederick W. Sturckow; Pilot Lee J. Archambault; Mission Specialists James F. Reilly II, Patrick G. Forrester, Steven R. Swanson, and John D. Olivas; and Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson, who would replace Sunita L. Williams on board the ISS as a member of ISS Expeditions 15 and 16. The launch was nearly flawless. Only one potential problem occurred several minutes into the flight, when on- board cameras captured an image that appeared to show foam flaking off the Shuttles external fuel tank, just after the solid rocket boosters (SRBs) had separated from the orbiter. According to Shuttle Program Manager N. Wayne Hale Jr., NASAs preliminary analysis of the incident indicated that the foam had not struck the craft. NASA planned further analysis.(NASA, NASAs Shuttle Atlantis Begins Mission to the Space Station, news release 07-136, 8 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07136_Atlantis_launch.html (accessed 13 April 2010); NASA, STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight), NASAfacts, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/177714main_STS-117.pdf (accessed 21 May 2010), John Johnson Jr., Flawless Launch, At Last, For Atlantis, Los Angeles Times, 9 June 2007.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin selected Christopher J. Scolese to succeed Associate Administrator Rex D. Geveden, who would leave NASA at the end of July to accept the position of President of Teledyne Brown Engineering in Huntsville, Alabama. Geveden had joined NASA in 1990 and had served as Associate Administrator, the number three position in NASA, since August 2005. Before Gevedens appointment, the position had been vacant for several decades, but Griffin had reestablished it, to provide programmatic integration between NASAs mission directorates and field centers. At the time of his appointment to succeed Geveden, Scolese was serving as NASAs Chief Engineer. Scolese had joined NASA in 1987 and had served as Deputy Director of NASAs GSFC and Deputy Associate Administrator in NASAs Office of Space Science. In the Office of Space Science, he had directed NASAs Space Science Flight Program, mission studies, technology development, and the overall contract management of NASAs JPL in Pasadena, California.
NASA announced the official appointment of William W. Parsons Jr. as Director of NASAs Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Parsons became KSCs ninth director, succeeding James W. Kennedy, who was retiring from NASA. Parsons had served as KSCs Deputy Director since February 2006. After the Columbia tragedy in 2003, Parsons had led NASAs Return to Flight effort as Space Shuttle Program Manager at KSC and had contributed to the success of STS-114 in 2005. Parsons had also served as Director of NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi and as Deputy Director of NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin remarked that Parsons experience as a program manager and center director, in addition to his knowledge of NASAs human spaceflight community, made him the right person to take Kennedy Space Center through the end of the Shuttle era and into the era of lunar exploration.(NASA, Parsons Assumes Role as NASAs Kennedy Space Center Director, news release 07-01, 4 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_0701_Parsons_KSC.html#at (accessed 14 October 2009); Aero- News Network, Upgraded: Parsons Tapped as Kennedy Space Center Director, 8 January 2007.)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Kenneth J. Krieg had signed the National Partnership for Aeronautical Testing (NPAT) Agreement. NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) would use the integrated national strategy NPAT to manage their respective aeronautical test facilities, including wind tunnels, propulsion-test facilities, simulation facilities, and open-air ranges. The agreement fulfilled one element of the two agencies response to the National Aeronautics Research and Development Policy, which President George W. Bush had signed in December 2006. In addition to expanding the dialogue beyond the test-and-evaluation communities, to include industry, academia, and the science and technology programs of NASA and DOD, the agreement established a council responsible for developing projects to streamline and economize management of aeronautical test facilities. Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator of NASAs Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, and John B. Foulkes of DODs Test Resource Management Center would cochair the council.(NASA, NASA and Department of Defense Partner for Aeronautical Testing, news release 07-52, 26 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07052_DoD_MoU_aero.html (accessed 14 October 2009); United Press International, NASA Signs Defense Department Agreement, 28 February 2007.)
NASA announced that it had signed a MOU with the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), entering into an agreement that would enable American scientists to access the ISS to pursue research about human health and disease. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and NIH Director Elias A. Zerhouni stated that the partnership could pave the way for research advances in cancer, Alzheimers disease, osteoporosis, and other medical conditions. The MOU marked the first time that NASA had formed a partnership with another agency to use the U.S. segment of the ISS as a national laboratory.(NASA, NASA and NIH Partner for Health Research in Space, news release 07-190, 12 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07190_NASA_NIH_MOU.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Michelle Mittelstadt, NIH, NASA Finish Deal for Research Lab in Space, Houston Chronicle, 13 September 2007. 135 X Prize Foundation, Google Sponsors Lunar X Prize To Create a Space Race for a New Generation, news release, 13 September 2007, http://www.googlelunarxprize.org/lunar/press-release/google-sponsors-lunar-x-prize- to-create-a-space-race-for-a-new-generation (accessed 9 August 2010); John Schwartz, $25 Million in Prizes Is Offered for Trip to Moon, New York Times, 14 September 2007.)
STS-118 Mission Specialist Dafydd R. Dave Williams and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson made the fourth and final spacewalk of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours, the pair installed the antenna of the External Wireless Instrumentation System, attached a stand for the extension boom of the Shuttles robotic arm, and retrieved two materials experiment containers for return to Earth aboard Endeavour. Mission Control had cancelled approximately 2 hours worth of tasks from the EVA to enable the crew to close the hatch between the ISS and the Shuttle in preparation for an early departure. NASA managers had rescheduled the return flight to enable Endeavour to land a day early, in case Hurricane Dean headed toward Houston. The hurricane could have forced an emergency relocation of flight controllers from Houston to a makeshift control center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. A temporary control center would have been neither as organized nor as large as the Houston operation.(NASA KSC, STS-118; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Astronauts Hurriedly Complete Spacewalk, 19 August 2007.)
Harrison Jack H. Schmitt, a scientist, former astronaut, and former U.S. Senator, announced that he was resigning as Chair of the NASA Advisory Council. The NASA Advisory Council, a panel of experts in various fields, advised the NASA Administrator on major policy. Since becoming Chair in November 2005, Schmitt had led the Advisory Council in submitting over 100 recommendations to the NASA Administrator. He had been the primary advocate behind a February 2007 workshop that produced 35 scientific recommendations related to NASAs return to the Moon and had led the Advisory Councils efforts to build relationships fostering the use of the ISS as a national laboratory. NASA named Kenneth M. Ford as the new Advisory Council Chair. Ford had served on the Exploration Committee of the Advisory Council since June 2007. He was the founder and Director of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition. Ford had developed and directed NASAs Center of Excellence in Information Technology at NASAs ARC. He had also served as both Director and Associate Director of NASAs ARC. A recipient of NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal and the Robert S. Englemore Memorial Award, Ford had served on the U.S. Air Force Science Advisory Board and the National Science Board. He was also a fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.(NASA, Schmitt Completes NASA Advisory Council service; Ford Named Chairman, news release 08-262, 16 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-261_Scmitt_Leaves_NAC.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Leaders from the partner agencies that work on the ISS met at ESA headquarters in Paris to discuss the configuration, development, and operation of their activities. Those present for the discussion included representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States. They noted the achievements aboard the ISS since their last meeting, in January 2007, including the delivery of two new laboratories, a node, and a large robot, as well as the launching of ESAs ATV and the formation of a global ground-operation control center. In addition, the agency heads discussed the ISSs improved capacity for engineering testing, on- orbit research, and technological development. They also examined future plans for the ISS, including the effects of the planned change to a six-person crew in 2009, the enhanced reliance on the Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles for transportation to the ISS, and the long-term use of the station beyond 2015.(NASA, Heads of Agency International Space Station Joint Statement, news release 08-178, 17 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08178_HOA_Joint_Statement.html (accessed 18 May 2011). 87 NASA, NASAs Ames, JPL Win NASA Software of Year Award, news release 08-182, 22 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08182_Software_of_the_Year.html (accessed 18 July 2011). 88 NASA, NASA, USDA Sign Space Station Research Agreement, news release 08-184, 23 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08184_USDA_mou.html (accessed 18 May 2011).)
George David Low, a former NASA astronaut who had flown on three Space Shuttle missions, died at the age of 52 from colon cancer. Low, who was the son of former NASA Director George M. Low, had worked at NASAs JPL from 1980 to 1984 before NASA selected him to train as an astronaut. During his 12 years as an astronaut, Low had spent more than 714 hours in space and had circled Earth more than 540 times. After retiring as an astronaut, Low had continued to serve NASA on the Russian Integration Team and in the Legislative Affairs Office. In 1996 he had joined Orbital Sciences Corporation, and in 2006 he had become the Senior Vice President and Program Manager for Orbitals Commercial Orbital Transportation Service program.(Joe Holley, G. David Low, 52; Cerebral Astronaut Flew on 3 Shuttles, Washington Post, 20 March 2008.)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held its first hearing to review NASAs proposed fiscal year (FY) 2009 budget request and FY 2008 Operating Plan. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony in support of NASAs US$17.6 billion request, which would allocate US$5.78 billion for Space Shuttle and ISS programs, US$4.44 billion for science, US$3.5 billion for development of new crewed spacecraft, and US$447 million for aeronautics research. Griffin devoted much of his oral testimony to NASAs request for an extension of a statutory waiver, which permits funding for payments to Russia for crew transport to the ISS. The current waiver had been a provision of the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Non Proliferation Act (Pub. L. No. 106-178, as amended). Griffin stated that NASA needed legislative authorization for the funding in 2008, because Russia required 36 months to fabricate new transport vehicles; therefore, NASA needed to finalize contractual agreements by late 2008, so that Russia could complete the vehicles by 2012.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Committee Examines FY09 NASA Budget, press release, 13 February 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/ PRArticle.aspx?NewsID= 2088 (accessed 4 January 2010); United Press International, NASA Proposes $17.6 Billion Budget, 4 February 2008; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, NASAs Fiscal Year 2009 Budget Request, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 13 February 2008, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG- 110hhrg40598/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg40598.pdf (accessed 4 January 2011).)
At a ceremony during the opening of the Spirit of Innovation exhibition at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, NASA recognized the first winners of the Pete Conrad Spirit of Innovation Award, a national competition that challenges high school students to create concepts that advance the personal spaceflight industry. NASAs Innovative Partnership Program sponsored the US$10,000 prize for the Conrad Award. The Spirit of Innovation exhibition would travel nationwide to highlight the students achievements. The X Prize Foundation announced that, in addition, a scroll inscribed with the winners names would travel to the ISS. Michael Hakimi and Talia Nour-Omid had won the Conrad award in October 2007 for the innovation of a device that could effectively monitor all of an astronauts vital signs.(Aero-News Network, NASA, X Prize Foundation Recognize 2007 Pete Conrad Award Winners, 22 January 2008, http://www.aero-news.net/index.cfm?ContentBlockID=c8a0d40b-5081-43b6-afcd-f2b876e7408b (accessed 16 December 2010); NASA, NASA and X Prize Foundation To Recognize Conrad Award Winners, news release M08-010, 16 January 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jan/HQ_M08010_Xprize_HQ_M08010_ Xprize_HQ_M08010_Xprize_Conrad_Award.html (accessed 16 December 2008).)
Robert C. Seamans Jr., who had served as NASA Deputy Administrator during the Apollo era, died of heart failure at age 89. Seamans had begun his career as a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the 1940s. In 1960 he had accepted a position with NASA as Associate Administrator, and, from 1965 to 1968, he had served as Deputy Administrator. During his tenure, NASA had worked to achieve President John F. Kennedys goal of landing a man on the Moon, and Seamans had been instrumental to the success of that mission. In 1968 Seamans had left his position at NASA to return to MIT, although he remained a consultant to NASAs Administrator. Later that year, he had assisted in making the controversial decision to send Apollo 8 to orbit the Moon, a move that had laid the groundwork for the lunar landing. Seamans had served as Secretary of the U.S. Air Force from 1969 to 1973. In 1974 he had been appointed Administrator of the Energy, Research and Development Administration, a predecessor agency to the Department of Energy. In 1977 Seamans had accepted a position as Dean of the School of Engineering at MIT, where he had continued to teach aeronautics classes even after his formal retirement in 1984.(Peter Schworm, Robert Seamans; Helped Lead NASA During Apollo Missions, Boston Globe, 30 June 2008. 79 NASA, Astronaut James Reilly Leaves NASA, news release 08-162, 30 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08163_Seamans_statement.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale announced that she would resign her position, effective 17 January 2009. Dales career had included service for the University of Texas; the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology; the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation; the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy; and for various law firms. Since November 2005, she had served as NASAs Deputy Administrator. Dale stated that she planned to use her time off to evaluate the options for her next career phase and to spend time with her family.(NASA, NASA Deputy Administrator Dale To Resign on January 17, news release 08-317, 3 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-317_Dale_resigns.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
NASA marked the 10-year anniversary of the ISS, which the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States had established with the 20 November 1998 launch of the Russian-built Zarya module. The Unity connector module had joined the ISS in December 1998.
After three failed attempts, SpaceX successfully launched a Falcon-1 rocket for the first time. Falcon 1 was the first privately developed and funded rocket to achieve orbit. Liftoff occurred at 23:15 (UT) from the U.S. Armys Ronald Reagan Ballistic Defense Test Site on the Kwajalein Atoll. SpaceX had designed the 70-foot (21.34-meter), two-stage, liquid-fueled rocket to provide cost-effective access to space. The company hoped that Falcon 1 would provide an affordable research option for universities and small aerospace companies and would serve as the first installment in a family of rockets that NASA would eventually use to resupply the ISS. SpaceX officials stated that each flight of Falcon 1 cost approximately US$8 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 659, 1 October 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx659.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Mike Swift, Silicon Valley Businessman Launches Rocket into Orbit, San Jose Mercury News (San Jose, CA), 29 September 2008; Tariq Malik, SpaceX Successfully Launches Falcon 1 Rocket into Orbit, Space.com, 28 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5905-spacex-successfully-launches-falcon-1-rocket- orbit.html (accessed 27 July 2011).)
The Russian Soyuz TMA-11 landed in Kazakhstan at 04:30 (EDT), after a ballistic reentry that deposited the spacecraft approximately 295 miles (474.76 kilometers) from its intended landing location. NASA officials explained that, in a ballistic reentry, a spacecraft reenters Earths atmosphere at an angle steeper than normal, subjecting the astronauts to higher gravitational forces. Russian officials pledged to investigate the cause of the rough landing. The crew members on boardPeggy A. Whitson, Yuri I. Malenchenko, and So-yeon Yidid not report any injuries from the incident. The three crew members were returning to Earth after completing Expedition 16 to the ISS. Yi, South Koreas first astronaut, had been aboard the ISS for 10 days, conducting experiments. Whitson, an American astronaut, had served as the first female commander of the ISS. During this mission, she had set the record for the most cumulative time an American had spent in space. Malenchenko, a Russian cosmonaut, had been Flight Engineer for Expedition 16. During the busy mission, lasting six months, crew members had conducted a wide variety of scientific experiments. During seven spacewalks, they had attached new modules to the ISS, repaired damages to the station, and received three visits from the Shuttle and one visit from ESAs unpiloted cargo ship Jules Verne.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654; Tariq Malik, Space Station Astronauts Land Off-Target, But Safely, Space.com, 19 April 2008, http://www.space.com/5262-space-station-astronauts-land-target-safely.html (accessed 3 March 2011); NASA, Expedition 16 Soyuz Lands Safely in Kazakhstan, news release 08-105, 19 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/apr/HQ_08105_Exp_16_lands.html (accessed 17 February 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASAs KSC at 21:02 (UT), commencing Mission STS- 124 to the ISS. During liftoff, observers noticed pieces of insulating foam falling from Discoverys external fuel tank; however, NASA officials stated that they were not worried about the foam, since it had fallen after the time when it could have damaged the spacecraft. Seven crew members were aboard the Space Shuttle, including American astronauts, Commander Mark E. Kelly, Pilot Kenneth T. Ham, Gregory E. Chamitoff, Michael E. Fossum, Ronald J. Garan Jr., and Karen L. Nyberg, and Japanese astronaut Akihiko Hoshide. During the mission, the astronauts planned to repair a broken toilet on the ISS and to install on the Japanese Kibo laboratory a new, 16-tonne (16,000-kilogram or 35,273-pound) room, known as the Japanese Pressurized Module (JPM). The astronauts planned three spacewalks. In addition to installing the JPM, they intended to clean a damaged power-supply rotary joint and to perform routine maintenance. NASA planned for the mission to last for 14 days. Garrett E. Reisman, who had been aboard the ISS since March 2008, would return to Earth with the STS-124 crew, and Chamitoff would remain aboard the ISS in his place.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 655; NASA, NASAs Shuttle Discovery Launches with Japanese Laboratory, news release 08-136, 31 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08136_STS-124_launch_release. html (accessed 16 March 2011); John Schwartz, Shuttle Discovery Heads Toward the Space Station, New York Times, 1 June 2008.)
NASA announced the resignation of Robert P. Hopkins as NASAs Chief of Strategic Communications. Hopkins had held positions at NASA as Senior Advisor to Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale and as Assistant Administrator of the Office of Communications Planning. Over the course of his career, he had managed the development of a strategic communications plan that had served as the basis for NASA activities, such as planning NASAs fiftieth anniversary in 2008. Additionally, Hopkins had enacted initiatives, such as a communications portal and a toolkit for implementing the Communications Coordinating Committee, helping to facilitate communication across NASA. He had advanced NASAs outreach through development programs, such as the NASA Future Forums and the NASA Lecture Series. Upon leaving NASA, Hopkins planned to take a position in the private sector. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin named Christopher M. Shank as Acting Chief of Strategic Communications. Shank had joined NASA in 2005, after holding positions in the U.S. Air Force, in the NRO, and, as a staff member on the U.S. House Science and Technology
NASA announced the resignation of S. Alan Stern as Associate Administrator for NASAs SMD. During his career with NASA, Stern had served as Principal Investigator for the New Horizons Mission to Pluto and as a member of the NASA Advisory Council. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin announced that Edward J. Weiler would replace Stern as interim Associate Administrator for NASAs SMD. Before accepting this position, Weiler had served as Director of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC).(NASA, NASA Administrator Announces Science Mission Directorate Leadership Changes, news release 08- 088, 26 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08088_ SMD_AA_change.html (accessed 13 January 2001).)
The Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies received testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin regarding the FY 2009 budget request. Griffin supplied the Subcommittee with a detailed explanation of the request, which would provide NASA with US$17.6 billion in funding. Griffin stated that he believed that this budget would maintain an adequate fiscal balance between NASAs aeronautics research missions, Earth and space science missions, and space exploration missions. However, Senator Barbara A. Mikulski (D-MD) expressed disappointment over the funding request. Calling the budget stagnant, she expressed her concerns regarding requested cuts in funding for aeronautics research; the lack of funding to reimburse NASA for the cost of returning the Space Shuttle to operation after the Columbia disaster; and the inadequate funding for the period between the 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle and the expected 2015 launch of the Orion and Ares vehicles.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies, Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations for Fiscal Year 2009, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 3 April 2008, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=110_senate_hearings&docid= f:41242.pdf (accessed 15 March 2011).)
The Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Space, Aeronautics, and Related Sciences held a field hearing in Florida to assess the impact on NASAs KSC workforce of the transition from the Space Shuttle Program (SSP) to the Constellation Program. Early in 2008, NASA had estimated that ending the SSP would force the elimination of 6,400 workers. However, at the hearing, NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified that new hiring for the Constellation Program would offset some of those job losses. Altogether, he estimated that NASAs KSC would only lose 3,0004,000 workers. As it shifted its workforce duties from other space centers to NASAs KSC, NASA would also create some new jobs. For instance, although the sustaining engineering for the SSP had mostly taken place at NASAs JSC and NASAs MSFC, the sustaining engineering work for the Constellation Program would occur in Florida. Additionally, NASA intended to perform final assembly and integration of the Altair landers, Ares-5 rockets, and Orion capsules at NASAs KSC. At the time of the hearing, NASAs KSC had a workforce of 14,500 people.(Todd Halvorson, KSC Tries To Salvage Some Jobs, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 June 2008.)
NASAs Lunar Science Institute, along with nine other international space agencies, signed a statement of intent to consider participating in the International Lunar Network (ILN), a cooperative effort to install mobile science stations on the Moon. The stations would replace the technology that NASA astronauts had placed on the lunar surface during the Apollo program. The signing of the statement took place in the course of a four-day NASA Lunar Science Conference at NASAs ARC. The conference had gathered approximately 500 scientists, from Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States, to discuss the future of lunar exploration. Although scientists from the participating agencies planned to refine the ILN concept, the agencies expected to make initial decisions regarding communications standards and potential landing sites, and to select a set of scientifically equivalent core instruments to perform specific measurements.(NASA, NASA Hosts International Meeting for Lunar Science Discussions, new release 08-190, 29 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08190_NASA_hosts_ILN.html (accessed 18 May 2011); David Perlman, Scientists Swap Moon, Mars Exploration Plans, San Francisco Chronicle, 22 July 2008.)
NASA announced that Assistant Administrator for External Relations Michael F. OBrien had signed a joint statement of intent with Munki Lee, the Republic of Koreas (South Koreas) Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology (MEST) Director-General for Big Science. The statement of intent, signed in Seoul, was an agreement between NASA and MEST to conduct dialogues that would identify new cooperative endeavors related to aeronautics research, Earth science, human spaceflight, planetary science, and space exploration. The agencies expected that they might discuss topics for possible collaborative endeavors, such as planning exploration architecture, exchanging research analysis and data, and contributing hardware and scientific instruments to future missions. They might also consider involvement in the Global Exploration Strategy, a discussion between 14 space agencies to increase cooperation in space exploration; the International Lunar Network, an initiative to establish a robotic network on the Moon; and the International Space Exploration Coordination Group, an international effort to coordinate space exploration activities. NASA and MEST expected to prepare a report after 8 months of dialogue. (NASA, NASA and Korea Sign Statement of Intent for Future Cooperation, news release 08-277, 30 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08277_Korea_Agreement.html (accessed 8 August 2011). 139 NASA, NASA Awards Contract for Mission, Crew Operations Support, news release C08-064, 31 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-064_Mission_Ops.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science and Related Agencies regarding NASAs FY 2009 budget. During the hearing, several members of Congress expressed concern that the presidents budget request of US$17.6 billion was insufficient to fund NASAs programs adequately. Griffin defended the request, stating that NASA had expected lower funding levels and that the presidents budget was sufficient. Discussing the future of NASA, Griffin stated, in the wake of the very wrenching transitions we have had over the past several years and in view of the transition yet to come, what we need is stability and a sense of purpose.(Mark Matthews, Griffin Defends His Budget on the Hill, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 6 March 2008; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies, Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations for 2009, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 5 March 2008, http://democrats.appropriations.house.gov/images/stories/ pdf/cjs/Hearing_Volumes/CJS- FY09-Pt7.pdf#page=45 (accessed 10 February 2011).)
NASA announced that it had successfully completed the preliminary design review for the Ares- I rocket, thereby clearing the components of the rocket to enter the detailed design phase. The review had examined Ares to determine whether it met NASAs standards and whether all of the rockets disparate elements would work together. More than 1,100 reviewers from seven NASA field centers and from NASAs industry partners had contributed to the design review. Conducted at NASAs MSFC, it was the first preliminary design review of a crewed rocket that NASA had conducted since 1973. NASA officials stated that 10 percent of the issues raised during the design review lacked resolutions, including questions pertaining to the stage separation, booster noise, and the type of weather protection that the rocket would need during ascent. NASA had scheduled a final integrated review of the whole rocket for March 2011.(NASA, NASAs Ares I Rocket Passes Review To Reach Critical Milestone, news release 08-228, 10 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08228_Ares_PDR.html (accessed 26 July 2011); Tariq Malik, NASAs New Rocket Passes Early Design Review, Space.com, 10 September 2011, http://www. space.com/5831-nasa-rocket-passes-early-design-review.html (accessed 27 July 2011).)
NASA announced the appointment of Thomas B. Irvine as the new Deputy Associate Administrator of the Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, to assist Associate Administrator Jaiwon Shin in developing, managing, and planning NASAs aeronautics research. Irvine had previously held positions as Deputy Director of the Aeronautics Test Program at NASA Headquarters; Chief of the Facility Management and Planning Office at NASAs GRC; and Director of the Mission Support Office for the Directorate at NASA Headquarters. Irvine had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal for sustained contributions to NASAs aeronautics and spaceflight missions.(NASA, NASA Names Irvine Deputy Associate Administrator for Aernautics, news release 08-197, 4 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08197_Aero_Deputy.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
NASA announced the appointment of Michael R. Luther as NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in the Science Mission. Luther had begun his career with NASA in 1981 at NASAs LaRC. In 1987 he had moved to NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, where he had served as Program Manager of the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and as Earth Science Flight Program Director. Luther had received NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal in 2005. As Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs, Luther would supervise the administration, including formulation and development, of the 36 missions of NASAs SMD. Additionally, he would manage the implementation of 54 operation missions. NASAs SMD was responsible for conducting research and for operating scientific programs to explore the solar system and universe, to observe the Earth, and to study space weather.(NASA, NASA Earth Scientist To Head Programs Office in Science Directorate, news release 08-096, 10 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/apr/HQ_08096_Luther_Named_SMD_DAA.html (accessed 17 February 2001).)
Ernst Stuhlinger, one of the original members of Werner von Brauns rocket team, died at his home in Huntsville, Alabama, at the age of 94. The U.S. government had brought the team to the United States after World War II. Stuhlinger, Associate Director of Science on von Brauns team, was an expert in spacecraft guidance and navigation instruments. Stuhlinger had also made important contributions in the field of propulsion. He had developed an innovative second-stage firing device for Explorer 1 in his garage, becoming renowned for having pressed the button that triggered that device at exactly the right moment during the satellites 1958 launch. Before his retirement in 1975, Stuhlinger had served as Director of Science at NASAs MSFC. He was author of the 1964 book, Ion Propulsion for Space Flight and co-author of the 1993 biography Werner von Braun: Crusader for Space.(John Noble Wilford, Ernst Stuhlinger, Rocket Scientist Crucial in Space Race, Is Dead at 94, New York Times, 28 May 2008; Martin Weil, Ernst Stuhlinger, 94; Space Program Pioneer, Washington Post, 27 May 2008.)
After the SST entered standby mode at 3:11 p.m. (PDT), NASA announced the end of its primary mission and the start of its warm mission. NASA had designed SST to conduct a two- and-a-half-year mission to detect infrared light from cool cosmic objects, a mission that required maintaining the telescopes three instruments at -456F (-271C), the coldest temperature theoretically attainable. SSTs liquid helium, used as cryogen, had lasted twice as long as projectedmore than five-and-a-half yearsbut Spitzers supply of the coolant had finally depleted. The telescope would remain cold, at -404F (-242C), but that temperature would be too warm to allow Spitzers infrared spectrograph and its longer wavelength, multiband imaging photometer to detect cool objects in space. SST Project Manager Robert K. Wilson at NASAs JPL remarked that, with its coolant depleted, Spitzer would be reborn, with a mission to tackle new scientific pursuits. During its so-called warm mission, Spitzer would continue to see through the dust that permeates our galaxy, blocking visible-light views, and two channels of one of its instruments would continue to operate at full capacity. Spitzers two infrared-array camera detectors with short wavelengths would continue to function as designed, picking up the glow from a range of objects, such as asteroids, dusty stars, planet-forming discs, gas-giant planets, and distant galaxies. Spitzers new projects would include refining estimates of Hubbles constant; searching for galaxies at the edge of the universe; assessing how often potentially hazardous asteroids might impact Earth; and characterizing the atmospheres of gas-giant planets that astronomers expected NASAs Kepler mission would discover.(NASA, NASAs Spitzer Telescope Warms Up to New Career, news release 09-099, 6 May 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-099_Spitzer_Warms_Up.html (accessed 20 June 2011); NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Spitzer Space Telescope Mission Status, JPL news release 15 May 2009, http://www.jpl. nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-086 (accessed 30 June 2011).)
NASA announced the restructure of its Advisory Council (NAC). During the NACs 29 October 2009 meeting at NASAs ARC, NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. had added four new committees to the council: the Commercial Space, the Education and Public Outreach, the Information Technology Infrastructure, and the Technology Innovation. Bolden stated that these four new committees reflected NASAs evolving mission under the Barack H. Obama administration. Bolden appointed Bretton Alexander, Executive Director of the Commercial Spaceflight Federation, to lead the Commercial Space committee, which would help NASA gain greater insight into the entrepreneurial marketplace. He appointed Albert J. Edmonds, former Director of the Defense Information Systems Agency, to lead the Information Technology Infrastructure committee and to advise NASA on cybersecurity issues. Bolden appointed Miles OBrien, former CNN anchor and space correspondent, to chair the Public Outreach committee and Esther Dyson, a space travel enthusiast and investor in major commercial space firms, to lead the Technology Innovation panel.(NASA, NASA Announces Advisory Council Chairs and Committee Structure, news release 09-256, 2 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-256_NAC.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Debra Werner, Bolden Adds New Voices to NASA Advisory Council, Space News, 30 October 2009.)
JAXAs HTV 1 arrived safely at the ISS. NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott used the ISSs robotic arm to capture the 18-ton (16.33-tonne, or 16,329-kilogram) cargo craft as it hovered at a distance of 30 feet (9.14 meters), marking the first time that the ISS had captured a robotic craft from orbit. Russian and European supply craft used a docking method to arrive at the space station, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk berthed the craft at NASAs Harmony module. The space agencies had scheduled HTV 1 to remain berthed at NASAs Harmony module until November, when the ISS would release it to burn up in Earths atmosphere.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Space Station Crew Grabs New Cargo Ship From Orbit, 18 September 2009; ISS Crew Snares Robot Ship, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 September 2009.)
NASA announced that it had designated 2009 as the International Year of Astronomy, to commemorate the anniversary of the beginning of modern astronomy in 1609, when Galileo first used a telescope to view the heavens. As part of the yearlong celebration, NASA planned to release images from its Great ObservatoriesHubble Space Telescope (HST), Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), and Chandra X-ray Observatoryto museums, nature centers, planetariums, and schools across the country. NASA would make the images public between 14 and 28 February 2009, in conjunction with Galileos 15 February birthday. Selected sites would also unveil a large 9-square-foot (2.7-square-meter) print of the spiral galaxy Messier 101. NASA had created the print by combining images of Messier 101HSTs optical view, SSTs infrared view, and Chandras x-ray view. Describing the image created from the three views, Hashima Hasan, Lead Scientist for the International Year of Astronomy at NASA Headquarters, said that one might see such an image if one could use ones eyes, night-vision goggles, and x-ray vision simultaneously. The selected sites would also display individual images from each observatory. HSTs visible-light view of Messier 101, known as the Pinwheel Galaxy, revealed the swirls of bright stars and glowing gas that had earned the galaxy its nickname. Spitzers infrared-light image peered into those spiral arms, showing where dense clouds collapse to form stars. Chandras x-ray image uncovered high-energy features of Messier 101, such as remnants of exploded stars or matter moving around black holes.(NASA, NASAs Great Observatories Celebrate International Year of Astronomy, news release 09-026, 10 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-026_IYOA.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and JAXA President Keiji Tachikawa had signed an agreement defining the terms of the two space agencies cooperation on the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) mission. NASA intended the GPM mission to build on the success of the NASA-JAXA TRMM. GPM would begin to measure global precipitation, a key factor in climate. NASA described GPM as a cornerstone of the multinational Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Precipitation Constellation. The GPM missions spaceborne core observatory would provide the reference standard, unifying the measurements of a constellation of multinational research and operational satellites carrying microwave sensors. Using a Dual-Frequency Precipitation Radar (DPR), operating at Ku- and Ka-band frequencies, and a multichannel Global Precipitation Measurement Microwave Imager (GMI), operating at from 10 to 183 GHz, the GPM mission would provide uniformly calibrated precipitation measurements globally, every 2 to 4 hours, contributing to scientific research and societal applications. Additionally, for the first time, the observatorys sensor measurements would make detailed observations of precipitation-particle-size distribution. The agreement made NASA responsible for the GPM core-observatory spacecraft bus, the GMI that it would carry, and a second GMI. A Low-Inclination Observatory provided by a partner agency would carry the second GMI. JAXA would supply the DPR for the core observatory, an H-2A rocket for the core observatorys launch, and data from a conical-scanning microwave imager that would deploy on the upcoming Global Change Observation Mission satellite.(NASA, NASA and Jaxa Sign Agreement for Future Earth Science Cooperation, news release 09-177, 30 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_177_NASA_JAXA_Agreement.html (accessed 10 August 2011).)
Richard E. Halpern, a senior NASA official who had served as Science Manager on Spacelab, the ISS, and other human spaceflight and robotic NASA projects, died of heart ailments at the age of 78. Halpern had served in the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s and had held a fellowship at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University in 1968 and 1969. Before joining NASA in 1963, he had worked at the Naval Ordnance Laboratory. After joining NASA, Halpern had become Director of its High Energy Astrophysics Program during the early planning stages for the ISS. In the late 1970s, he had served as Program Manager for three launches of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory. He had served as Director of the ISS utilities and operations division from 1986 until his retirement in 1989. NASA had awarded Halpern its Exceptional Service Medal in 1978 and its highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, in 1980.(Matt Schudel, Obituaries: Richard E. Halpern NASA Official, Washington Post, 7 December 2009.)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the systems artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Divisions Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASAs Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
At NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the field of space transportation. The agreement would allow the two space agencies to exchange technical information and personnel, providing NASA with assistance in several key areas. These key areas included composite material technology, development of payload shrouds, and management of propellants in spacecraft propulsion systems used for transit to and from lunar orbit. Bolden reflected on NASAs long history of participating with ESA in human spaceflight activities, remarking that the agreement underscored NASAs intention to continue building that relationship. Dordain added that the exchange of technical information enabled under the terms of the agreement would benefit both agencies, facilitating work toward future launch systems, human spaceflight, and exploration missions.(NASA, U.S. and Europe Agree on Civil Space Transportation Cooperation, news release 09-208, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-208_NASA_ESA_MOU.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
GAO published a report finding that NASA had continued to experience cost overruns and delays in implementing large-scale projects or those budgeted at US$250 million or more. GAO had audited 18 NASA projects, with a combined life-cycle cost of more than US$50 billion. Of those 18 projects, 13 had entered the implementation phase. Ten of the 13 had experienced significant cost growth or schedule growth or both. Development costs had increased by an average of 13 percent from baseline cost estimates, and projects had an average launch delay of 11 months. GAO reported that many projects had faced challenges in developing new technologies or retrofitting older technologies, as well as difficulty managing contractors. However, GAO found that, despite these problems, NASA had improved its ability to manage and to estimate the cost of major projects. Nevertheless, GAO suggested that NASA needed to make additional improvements. The report noted that, although NASAs budget represented less than 2 percent of the federal governments discretionary budget, NASA was increasingly receiving requests to expand its portfolio to support important scientific missions, such as the study of climate change. GAO found that, to meet these increased demands, NASA would need to work even harder to manage its resources as effectively and efficiently as possible.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASA: Assessments of Selected Large-Scale Projects (report no. GAO-09-306SP, Washington, DC, 2 March 2009), http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-306SP (accessed 11 May 2011); Mark Matthews, GAO: NASAs Big Projects Take Too Long, Cost Too Much, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 March 2009.)
NASA announced that the Ares I-X booster rocket tested on 28 October 2009 had sustained damage when it fell into the Atlantic Ocean. A deflated parachute had caused a poor landing, resulting in the damage. NASA officials stated that the test launch itself had succeeded, but one of the three parachutes had failed. All three parachutes had opened, but only one had fully opened. One had deflated for unknown reasons, wrapping around a partially opened parachute, which had caused the booster to land in the ocean with extra force. The recovery crew had captured photographs showing what appeared to be a large crack in the casing on the first stage, in an area called the forward segment, as well as a fractured actuator bracket on the side of the rocket.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASA: Booster Rocket Damaged in Test Flight, 30 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, Live at KSC: Ares I-X Parachutes Fail During Flight, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 October 2009.)
NASA honored four veteran aerospace journalists and a public affairs officer at a ceremony at KSC for their work chronicling the nations space program. NASA unveiled five new gold plates with the names of the late Milt Salamon, who had worked as a local columnist at Florida Today and its predecessor paper for three decades; Sue Butler of the Daytona Beach News Journal and the Associated Press; the late Jerry B. Hannifin of Time magazine; the late Rudy P. Abramson of the Los Angeles Times; and the late Frank J. Colella, the first Manager of Public Affairs at NASAs JPL in Pasadena, California. The new plates joined 57 others that comprised the Roll of Honor, called the Chroniclers Wall, at the NASA News Center at the Launch Complex 39 Press Site. The Chroniclers Wall recognized career achievements of writers, journalists, broadcasters, and communicators who had covered NASA at KSC for at least 10 years. In an additional ceremony, NASA recognized Milt Salamon for his role in writing about the ordinary people who worked at KSC and lived on the Space Coast. Salamon, who had died in January 2002 at the age of 75, had worked as an engineer for Lockheed Martin in California and at Cape Canaveral before starting his writing career. He had worked at the National Enquirer before starting at Florida Today in 1974.(Todd Halvorson, KSC Honors Columnist, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 2009. 23)
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASAs MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttles main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicles Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSCs propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASAs MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFCs Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, Lightfoot Named Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center, news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
After the SST entered standby mode at 3:11 p.m. (PDT), NASA announced the end of its primary mission and the start of its warm mission. NASA had designed SST to conduct a two- and-a-half-year mission to detect infrared light from cool cosmic objects, a mission that required maintaining the telescopes three instruments at -456F (-271C), the coldest temperature theoretically attainable. SSTs liquid helium, used as cryogen, had lasted twice as long as projectedmore than five-and-a-half yearsbut Spitzers supply of the coolant had finally depleted. The telescope would remain cold, at -404F (-242C), but that temperature would be too warm to allow Spitzers infrared spectrograph and its longer wavelength, multiband imaging photometer to detect cool objects in space. SST Project Manager Robert K. Wilson at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that, with its coolant depleted, Spitzer would be reborn, with a mission to tackle new scientific pursuits. During its so-called warm mission, Spitzer would continue to see through the dust that permeates our galaxy, blocking visible-light views, and two channels of one of its instruments would continue to operate at full capacity. Spitzers two infrared-array camera detectors with short wavelengths would continue to function as designed, picking up the glow from a range of objects, such as asteroids, dusty stars, planet- forming discs, gas-giant planets, and distant galaxies. Spitzers new projects would include refining estimates of Hubbles constant; searching for galaxies at the edge of the universe; assessing how often potentially hazardous asteroids might impact Earth; and characterizing the atmospheres of gas-giant planets that astronomers expected NASAs Kepler mission would discover.(NASA, NASAs Spitzer Telescope Warms Up to New Career, news release 09-099, 6 May 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-099_Spitzer_Warms_Up.html (accessed 20 June 2011); NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Spitzer Space Telescope Mission Status, JPL news release 15 May 2009, http://www.jpl. nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-086 (accessed 30 June 2011).)
The U.S. Department of Transportations Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced the finalization of amended certification standards requiring makers of transport category aircraft to have automatically activating icing-protection systems or to provide a method of alerting pilots to turn on the aircrafts icing-protection system. FAA Administrator J. Randolph Randy Babbitt explained that the new rule added another level of safety to prevent the occurrence of a situation in which the pilots of an airplane were unaware of ice accumulation on the craft or did not think ice accumulation on the aircraft was significant enough to warrant activation of ice- protection equipment. The fatal crash of an American Eagle ATR 72 near Roselawn, Indiana, in 1994, had initiated a decade of research by the FAA, NASA, and other entities, leading to the new rule. Ice build-up on the American Eagles wings had caused the crash.(U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, FAA Mandates Timely Activation of Ice Protection Systems for New Designs, FAA news release, 3 August 2009, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 10679 (accessed 12 September 2011); John Croft, FAA Toughens Icing Protection Standards, Air Transport Intelligence, 4 August 2009.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed retired U.S. Marine Corps general and former astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. as NASAs twelfth Administrator, marking the first appointment of an African American as NASAs Administrator. During his 34-year career with the Marine Corps, Bolden had spent 14 years as a member of NASAs Astronaut Office, which he had joined in 1980. As an astronaut, he had traveled to orbit four times aboard the Space Shuttle, between 1986 and 1994. On two of those trips he had served as Commander of the Shuttle. His missions had included the deployment of the HST and the first joint U.S.-Russian Shuttle mission. While he was an astronaut, Bolden had fulfilled many technical assignments, serving as Astronaut Office Safety Officer; Technical Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations; Special Assistant to the Director of JSC; Lead Astronaut for vehicle test and checkout at KSC; Chief of the Safety Division at JSC, where he oversaw safety efforts for the return to flight after the 1986 Challenger accident; and Assistant Deputy Administrator at NASA Headquarters. In May 2006, NASA had inducted Bolden into the Astronaut Hall of Fame. The Senate also confirmed Lori B. Garver as NASAs new Deputy Administrator. Like Bolden, Garver was returning to NASA for a second period of service. Between 1996 and 2001, she had served as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and Senior Policy Analyst for the Office of Policy and Plans, before becoming Associate Administrator of that office.(NASA, Bolden and Garver Confirmed by U.S. Senate, news release 09-165, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-165_Bolden_and_Garver.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Bolden Confirmed as NASA Administrator, 16 July 2009.)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion projects preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicles capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martinled industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, NASAs Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones, news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, NASAs New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty, Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
