Dr. Joseph A. Conner, Jr., of nasa, said in aaas paper that there will be an arbitrary retirement age for astronauts, not in terms of years but in exposure to penetrating radiation in space.
M. Scott Carpenter Day in Denver as an estimated 300,000 persons witnessed the Memorial Day parade honoring the Mercury Astronaut from Colorado.
telstar relayed two 20-minute live TV shows, the first formal exchange of programs across the Atlantic. The first U.S. program to the Eurovision network of stations in 18 nations included sequences on the Statue of Liberty, a major league baseball game in Chicago, President Kennedy’s news conference, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra from Cape Canaveral, and the Mormon Tabernacle Choir from Mt. Rushmore. Three hours later on another orbit, the Eurovision program was beamed to the U.S. where it was carried by all three networks. It included scenes of Big Ben in London, the Colosseum in Rome, the Champs Elys6cs in Paris, reindeer in the Arctic Circle region of Sweden, Sicilian fishermen tending their nets, and a scene in the Sistine Chapel of Vatican.
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of Aerospace Medical Operations Office, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, reported that preliminary readings of a dosimeter indicated Astronaut Schirra had received much smaller radiation dosage than expected. Dr. Berry said post-flight examination of the astronaut determined that he was “in excellent condition and detected no physiological effects from the space flight.”
First full-scale research model of an inflatable space station was displayed at nasa Lewis Research Center. Developed by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for nasa, the doughnut-shaped, three-story-high structure was made of rubberized fabric and equipped to accommodate three to ten astronauts.
aurora 7 with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) as pilot, launched on MA-7 orbital mission by Atlas booster from Cape Canaveral, the second U.S. manned orbital flight and the fourth U.S. manned space flight. Almost faultless countdown, launch was delayed only briefly by ground fog, and Mercury spacecraft was placed into orbit at 17,532 mph (apogee: 167.4 miles; perigee: 99 miles; period: 88.3 minutes). Astronaut Carpenter performed series of space science and technical development experiments including visual and photographic observations of star fields and “white particles,” consumption of solid foods, release of tethered multi-colored balloon to test sighting, and observation of separated Atlas booster. 81,200-mile flight featured attitude stabllization and control pilotage for completion of three orbits, and monitoring of control-systems fuel for proper retrofire attitude. Re-entry caused landing impact point over 200 miles beyond intended area and beyond radio range of recovery forces. After landing, Carpenter egressed through top of capsule and climbed on inflated raft awaiting rescue, to be joined by two usaf paramedics, Airman John T. Heitsch and S/Sgt. Ray E. McClure, who inflated Stulken collar to prevent capsule from sinking. After three hours on water, Astronaut Carpenter was picked up by a helicopter from U.S.S. Intrepid, and his capsule was retrieved by the destroyer Pierce. Astronaut Carpenter was reported in good physical condition, and flown to Grank Turk Island in the Bahamas for 48-hour debriefings and medical examinations.
nasa announced that nine new astronauts for Projects Gemini and Apollo would be named at Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, on September 17.
afsc announced it was testing electrocardiogram package in free-fall parachute jumps for possible applications in future manned space flight. Worn inside the astronaut’s pressure suit, the small, 14-oz. package could monitor heartbeat (and other physical reactions): Conditioning unit in package converts heartbeat to FM radio signal which is sent by transmitter in package to amplifier in cockpit, and then to ground receivers, where it is converted to electrocardiogram. Use of package would provide astronaut freedom of movement by eliminating need for connections from pilot to spacecraft. Developed by Hughes Aircraft Co., the package was being considered for use in X-15 program.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., made 6)(-hr. simulated flight in Sigma 7 spacecraft for Project Mercury flight MA-8. Worldwide tracking network of 21 ground stations and ships also participated in exercise, in which Cdr. Schirra and the tracking stations practiced solving emergency situations that could arise in actual orbital flight.
sigma 7 spacecraft with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., as pilot was launched into orbit by Mercury-Atlas vehicle at Cape Canaveral. Orbital data: apogee, 176 mi.; perigee, 100 mi.; period, 88.5 min. Schirra traveled 160,000 mi., nearly six orbits, returning to earth at predetermined point in Pacific Ocean about 9 hrs., 14 min. after blastoff. Within 40 min. after landing he and his spacecraft were safely aboard aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge. Highly successful MA-8 flight proved the feasibility of (1) prolonged weightless flight in space and (2) drifting in orbit without consumption of hydrogen-peroxide attitude control fuel and without physically endangering the astronaut. Schirra, who spent a total of hrs. in drifting flight, reported there were no unusual attitude control problems during drifting. Various other scientific experiments during MA-8 flight included astronaut’s sighting of luminous particles in space, also reported by Astronauts John H. Glenn and M. Scott Carpenter; and photographing cloud formations with a special hand camera. sigma 7 was sighted by observers on Indian Ocean tracking ship for five min. as the spacecraft made its third orbit more than 100 mi. high. The observers said sigma 7 appeared almost as bright as Venus. This was the first reported visual sighting of a manned spacecraft during orbital flight. Only technical difficulty of the entire operation was attaining proper adjustment of Schirra’s spacesuit coolant supply and failure of body temperature measurements in first orbit. However, desired suit temperatures were achieved early in second orbit.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter returned to work at Langley afb facilities of the Manned Spacecraft Center after a four-day trip to Colorado. All seven Mercury astronauts were scheduled to receive Peninsula Distinguished Service Awards, a tribute from several civic groups on Virginia’s lower peninsula, on June 1.
nasa announced that LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn) would be the pilot on the next Mercury orbital space flight (MA-7). Major Donald K. Slayton (usaf), the astronaut originally scheduled for the flight, was disqualified because of an “erratic heart rate,” after the medical findings had been reviewed by an Air Force medical board and a board of civilian cardiologists. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was named as Carpenter’s backup pilot.
Official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug announced that U.S. Astronauts John Glenn and Alan Shepard would join U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin, Gherman Titov, Andrian Nikolayev, and Pavel Popovich at International Astronautical Congress in Bulgaria, September 23 to 29.
aec-dod-nasa announced that results of joint study of artificial radiation belt indicated Project Mercury flight MA-8 could be made with no change of plans and with no fear of harm to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn). Study showed that radiation on outside of capsule during Cdr. Schirra’s 6-orbit flight would be about 500 roentgen (R). Shielding, vehicle structures, and flight suit would cut this to 8 R on the astronaut’s skin. “This exposure is well below the mission limit previously established by nasa for the manned flight program,” the report said. Other results of the investigation: Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich (vostok iii and iv orbital flights in August) received very small radiation doses on their double-mission flight; radio interference caused by new radiation belt constituted “a significant problem to radio astronomy”; radiation doses caused rapid deterioration of solar cells aboard ariel, traac, transit iv-b satellites as previously reported, but telstar solar cells were apparently unaffected; future space missions were being reviewed “in light of the present information concerning the new belt.” It appeared likely that “a substantial number” of future space experiments would be changed to avoid possible damage from radiation.
Astronaut Donald K. Slayton underwent physical examination by heart specialist Dr. Paul Dudley White in Boston.
ucla scientists reported that they had developed training devices to allow men to contract individual muscles, which during the stresses of liftoff or re-entry in space flight would permit trained astronauts to operate controls by twitching single muscles.
Estimated that over 60 million Americans witnessed the launch of friendship 7 on live TV. Voice of America carried live overseas radio coverage. The U.S. Senate recessed at 2:30 PM est just before the landing of Mercury spacecraft. The U.S. Post Office placed Project Mercury postage stamp on sale minutes after Astronaut Glenn stepped on the deck of Noa.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and his family were welcomed by President Kennedy in brief visit at the White House. Also in Washington, Cdr. Schirra appeared before nasa Headquarters employees, later at the Pentagon receiving usn astronaut wings from Secretary of the Navy Fred Korth.
Announced that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would study Eerful light sources in Australia and South Africa, during his -8 orbital flight, nasa said experiment was to determine how well a space traveler could see light sources of known density on earth. Three high-intensity flares would burn at Woomera, Australia, and electric lamps at Durban, So. Africa. Schirra would try to determine effects of atmosphere on light observed from orbital altitude and to establish which light source was more readily visible. Other scientific experiments of the MA-8 flight would be studies of cosmic radiation, search for rare particles in space, and effects of re-entry heating on new materials.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., returned to his hometown, Oradell, N.J., for triumphal welcoming ceremonies in honor of his successful MA-8 six-orbit space flight for nasa Project Mercury, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Cdr. Schirra with the nasa Distinguished Service Medal.
Astronaut John Glenn and Cosmonaut Gherman Titov appeared on abc-TV program, “The Nation’s Future.” Col. Glenn pressed Major Titov on possible Soviet space mishaps, but no new information was forthcoming.
Program testing astronaut tolerance to space flight conditions was initiated with order of motion-simulator platform from Textron Electronics, Inc., MB Electronics Div. The platform, to be installed at Wright-Patterson afb, will move in six directions— pitch, roll, yaw, up-and-down, side-to-side, and back-to-forward.
Donald F. Conaway, national executive secretary of American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, announced he had requested a conference with European counterparts to discuss minimum pay scales for performers appearing on future Telstar satellite relays. He added: “Telstar is a great challenge. We cannot realistically set an international rate for performers until many problems are settled with the countries.” During July: Outfitted in pressure suits in a simulated space environment, five nasa scientists of msfc and msc completed study determining how an astronaut could work on J-2 rocket engine during actual space flight, at Rocketdyne. Maintenance, repair, replacement, and adjustment of components of the hydrogen-fueled J-2 were performed along with research on the design of special tools and pressure suits.
Mercury officials debriefing Astronaut John Glenn at Giand Turk Island announced that he was in “excellent physical condition.” Dr. Robert B. Voas, psychologist and training officer, said that it was “quite significant” that Glenn had been unable to detect any ill effects during almost five hours of weightlessness. Voas pointed out that longer flights such as the 17 orbits of Cosmonaut Titov are required to document the physical effects of prolonged weightlessness.
Wash. Evening Star reported that nasa’s Director’ofjMaimed Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, had announed in Cleveland that nasa X-15 pilot Neil A. Armstrong would become the first civilian astronaut as a part of the new selection of astronauts for Projects Gemini and Apollo.
Mercury capsule for orbital space flight MA-8 was named “Sigma 7” by Astronaut Walter M. Schirra. Sigma, the eighteenth letter of the Greek alphabet and an engineering symbol for “many,” symbolized the teamwork involved in the manned space flight; “7” referred to the seven-man Project Mercury astronaut team.
nasa would later select additional astronauts for Project Apollo, Dr. Robert Voas of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center told Virginia Psychological Association in Richmond. Dr. Voas said the nine new astronauts recently selected would participate in Project Gemini two-man, orbital rendezvous missions and Project Apollo, culminating in manned landing on the moon.
nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, announced that Mercury-Atlas 8 manned flight would be programed for as many as six orbits late this summer. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (Cdr. usn) was announced as prime pilot, with Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (Major usaf) as backup pilot. Capsule No. 16 was scheduled as the mission spacecraft. Holmes said: “We believe that another three-orbit mission wlli increase considerably our growing knowledge of space flight. Anything more than three orbits should be considered a bonus.” A four-orbit mission would bring the spacecraft down about 200 miles east of Midway Island in the Pacific, while a five or six orbit flight would cause it to land 300 miles northeast of Midway.
The seven Mercury astronauts were presented with Distinguished Service Awards from the Lower Virginia Peninsula in ceremonies at the Manned Spacecraft Center Hq. at Langley afb, Va. June 2; usaf announced that oscar ii satellite had been launched piggyback on an unidentified satellite on June 1, on behalf of the American Radio Relay League. With a 92-minute period, the 10-lb. satellite broadcasts “Hi” in Morse code on 144.993 megacycles for use by amateur radio operators. Unlike oscar i launched on December 10, 1961, advance notice was not given the Project Oscar Association on the launching of oscar ii.
Mercury Astronaut Virgil I. (Gus) Grissom was presented the General Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, at the National Geographical Society in Washington. In his presentation remarks, Secretary Zuckert said: “. . . The National Aeronautics and Space Administration carries responsibility for the development of space technology and, in company 97317—63---8 with like-minded peoples of the world, the utilization of space for the benefit of men. Captain Grissom and the other astronauts are playing a vital role in the national space effort, nasa’s program is of vital importance to the Air Force. We must build the nation’s defense capability in space on the foundation which nasa lays . . . “The feat for which he [Capt. Grissom] is recognized,” said Secretary Zuckert, “is one step, a very, very early step, toward mastery of space for constructive purposes. The American people have launched a tremendous program to acquire the capability to master the aerospace just as we have mastered the seas and the air, and kept them free . . .”
usmc gold medal was presented to Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc) at usmc 187th anniversary dinner, Washington. Medal commemorated Astronaut Glenn’s Project Mercury orbital space flight Feb. 20, 1962 (MA-6).
Space Technology Center of General Electric Co. said it was designing an escape system for astronauts to use if orbiting capsule malfunctioned and could not return safely to earth. Called “Moose” (Man Out Of Space Easiest), the system involved use of a “prepackaged spacecraft” consisting of plastic sack, folding heat shield, retrorocket pack, containers of foaming plastic, and a standard parachute. Astronaut, zipped into sack, would step out of faulty spacecraft, aim himself with special scope, and fire the retrorocket. Then his heat shield would unfold and sack would fill with rapid-hardening plastic foam, protecting him from re-entry heat. At 30,000-ft. altitude, he would open parachute and descend slowly to earth.
Scientists of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, at Boulder, Colo., after intensive interviews with Astronaut Scott Carpenter, concluded that the layer of “haze” reported on the horizon by both Carpenter and Glenn was in reality the phenomenon known as airglow—the emission of light of various colors and wavelengths, caused by chemical reactions in gas molecules in the upper atmosphere.
President Kennedy personally congratulated Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter by telephone shortly after the aurora 7 pilot arrived by helicopter aboard the carrier Intrepid, saying: “. . . I wanted to tell you we are relieved and very proud of your trip. I am glad that you got picked up in good shape and we want to tell you that we are all for you and send you the very best of luck to you and your wife.” Carpenter said: “My apologies for not having aimed a little bit better on re-entry.” President Kennedy: “Oh, fine and good. We want to congratulate you and I look forward to seeing you in Washington sometime soon . . . .”
Astronaut John H. Glenn was awarded the Hubbard Medal of the National Geographic Society “for extraordinary contributions to scientific knowledge of the world and beyond as a pioneer in exploring the ocean of space.” Awarded only 20 times since it was struck in 1906, the Hubbard Medal honorees have included Adm. Robert E. Peary, Charles A. Lindbergh, Roald Amundsen, and Adm. Richard E. Byrd.
Announced that 140-million-candlepower lights would burn near Durban, So. Africa, for three minutes during fifth and sixth orbital passes of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra's Mercury space flight (MA-8).
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, announced construction of $12.3-mlliion space radiation effects laboratory wollid begin in March and wollid be completed in about two years. Facility, to be operated by nasa and three -Virginia colleges, wollid be used to study effects of radiation on space vehicle materials and components; it wollid simulate radiation hazards astronauts and spacecraft wollid encounter in space. Facility wollid be used also in graduate studies program in conjunction with the three colleges—Univ. of Virginia, College of William and Mary, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
nasa scientists concluded that the layer of haze reported by Astronauts Glenn and Carpenter was the little-understood phenomenon called “airglow.” Using a photometer and other instruments, Carpenter was able to measure the layer as being 2-degrees wide. Airglow accounts for much of the light of the night sky.
Dr. Sheldon J. Korchin of National Institutes of Health and Dr. George Ruff of Univ. of Pennsylvania reported at aaas conference that American astronauts are typically Protestants, natives of small towns, members of middle or upper-middle class families, and have average IQ of 135. Summing up results of testing astronauts, two psychiatrists concluded astronauts have normal anxieties but above normal ability to control them. Average astronaut prefers outdoor sports to indoor; is oriented to action rather than thought; prefers facts to speculation; has abiding belief in his own competence and wlliingness to strive for perfection.
In a Pentagon ceremony, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., was awarded the Navy’s astronaut wings and a new Marine Corps device—a winged rocket superimposed on a globe—that would also be given to all future Marines who orbited the earth in a space capsule.
Faulty valve in MA-8 spacecraft was replaced by technicians, a repair which required removal of Mercury capsule from the Atlas booster. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s orbital space flight was planned for October 3.
President John F. Kennedy, in message to U.S.S.R. Premier Nikita Khrushchev, said: “I send to you and to the Soviet people the heartiest congratulations of the people and the Government of the United States on the outstanding joint flights of Maj. Nikolayev and Col. Popovich. This new accomplishment is an important forward step in the great human adventure of the peaceful exploitation of space. America’s astronauts join with me in sending our salute to Maj. Nikolayev and Col. Popovich.”
nasa Administrator Webb introduced Robert R. Gilruth and Astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn to nasa Headquarters’ personnel assembled in fob No. 6, Washington.
nasa postponed MA-7 flight attempt until at least May 22, 1962, because of modification of altitude-sensing instrumentation in the parachute deployment system. Project Mercury Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter was pronounced in “excellent condition” for his orbital flight after a 5-hour physical examination.
Reported that usaf had offered to train nasa’s “second generation” astronauts at its Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, California.
Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, headed by Rep. Victor Anfuso, opened hearings on the role of women in the space program. Jane B. Hart and Jerrie Cobb, representing the 13 women who completed unofficial space qualification tests at the Lovelace Foundation, testified that women had a real contribution to make and were qualified as astronauts. Jacqueline Cochran, well-known flier, said that “there is no doubt in the world that women will go into space.”
Astronauts John Glenn and Scott Carpenter, and George M. Low, nasa Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, testified before House Subcommittee on qualifications for astronauts. Low testified that qualifications would be raised rather than lowered for Project Apollo, that the sex of pilots had never been a requirement, but that if any resources were diverted for a woman in space effort “we would have to slow down on our national goal of landing a man on the moon in this decade.” Astronaut Glenn said on women astronauts: “I couldn’t care less who’s over there [in the next seat] as long as it’s the most qualified person. . . . I wouldn’t oppose a women’s astronaut training program; I just see no requirement for it.” nasa had not found one woman to date who met all astronaut requirements: American citizenship; excellent physical condition; degree in physical or biological sciences or engineering; and experimental jet flight-test experience.
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc) was awarded the Alfred A. Cunningham Trophy for being selected as the Marine Aviator of the Year. Mercury Astronaut Glenn orbited the earth three times in first U.S. manned orbital flight MA-6, February 20, 1962.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center released sketch of Project Apollo suit to be worn by astronauts making four-hour expeditions on lunar surface. Suit contains portable life support system to supply oxygen and pressurization, control temperature and humidity, and protect against solar radiation.
Reported that nasa was conducting a study to determine what effect Soviet nuclear test series might have on forthcoming orbital flight (MA-8) of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Final evaluation was expected within a week.
nasa graduated first group of Project Mercury tracking personnel completing new course at Wallops Station, the seven graduates representing personnel from nas a and dod contractors. Directed by gsfc, the Mercury Network Training Program consists of specialized courses to support the man in space mission, one requiring that the subsystems at all 18 sites in a global network are continuously monitored and provide precise data concerning the spacecraft’s location, altitude, and operational status as well as the astronaut’s condition. Real-time data must flow between the sites, the Computer Center at gsfc, and the Mercury Control Center at Cape Canaveral.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and his family were received by President Kennedy at the White House, then flew to New York for the city’s reception and to receive New York City’s highest award, the Gold Medal. The reception committee included, in addition to Mayor Wagner, former Presidents Herbert C. Hoover and Harry S. Truman.
Reported that Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had received less than half the heavy primary cosmic radiation dosage expected during his 4.5-hr. orbital flight MA-6. According to Dr. Hermann J. Schaefer of usn Biophysics Branch, Pensacola, the MA-6 spacecraft walls and capsule instrumentation probably absorbed many of the rays and kept the total dosage lower than expected.
Army launched Nike-Zeus missile in what was described as a successful intercept of a simulated icbm nose cone. Apriif!: nasa sponsored a day-long technical symposium in Washington on results of the MA-6 three-orbit space flight. Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and officials of Project Mercury reviewed the findings of the Feb. 20 flight and stressed the conclusion that the presence of the astronaut had been indispensable to successful completion of the three-orbit mission. On the Glenn effect—the firefly-like particles Glenn reported seeing outside Ms capsule during each of the three sunrises—Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief, Theoretical Division, Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that study had shown them to be flakes of paint from the spacecraft.
In ceremony at Cape Canaveral, President Kennedy thanked the Project Mercury team for the successful flight of friendship 7: “. . . it’s my great pleasure to speak on behalf of all our fellow Americans in expressing pride and satisfaction to those intimately involved in this effort. All of us remember a few dates in this century and those of us who were very young remember Col. Lindbergh’s flight, Pearl Harbor, and the end of the war, and remember the flight of Alan Shepard, Major Grissom and we remember the flight of Col. Glenn ...”	_ President Kennedy then awarded the nasa Distinguished Service Medal to Robert R. Gilruth and read the citation, “for his distinguished leadership of the team of scientists and engineers that carried Project Mercury, the U.S. initial manned space flight program, from its inception to the successful accomplishment of man’s flight in orbit about the earth ...” Lt. Col. John H. Glenn also was awarded the nasa Distinguished Service Medal by the President, the citation to which said:“ . . . made an outstanding contribution to the advancement of human knowledge of space technology and a demonstration of man’s capabilities in space flight. His performance was marked by his great professional skill, his skill as a test pilot, his unflinching courage. . . .” In his remarks, Astronaut Glenn thanked fellow astronauts and the entire Mercury organization: “we all acted literally and figuratively as a team. ... It goes across the board . . . sort of a crosscut of Americana, of industry, and military and civil service. . . . It was headed up by nasa, of course, but thousands and thousands of people have contributed as certainly much or more than I have to the project. . . .”
Reported that at nasa meeting of lunar scientists the view presented by astronomers, a geologist, and geophysicists that scientists can learn to become astronauts as well as an astronaut can make scientific observations. Which scientific discipline should be represented as a member of the 3-man Appollo crew did not receive a unanimous endorsement.
Hibernation of space crewmen was proposed for long-term space travel, by usaf surgeons Capt. T. K. Cockett and Capt. Cecil C. Beehler of sam, Brooks afb, Texas. Under their plan, one astronaut would work while the other would ride in state of suspended animation, with life processes slowed to the minimum. During simulated hibernation the body withstands stresses that would be harmful under normal body conditions, the surgeons said.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov visited the White House and toured the Mall in Washington, D.C. At joint press conference at the National Academy of Sciences, Glenn and Titov both spoke about possible international cooperation in manned space flight, Titov suggesting that the diplomats would first have to reach agreement on disarmament. Titov said that the Soviet press conference on August 14, 1961, held at Ludnicki, at which the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Matislav Keldysh discussed the rocket boosters of vostok ii, contained all useful information available on the Soviet rockets. Titov also said that the released photograph of vostok ii was of a mockup.
In Pentagon ceremony, usaf Chief of Staff LeMay pinned astronaut wings on Major Robert M. White, the first man to fly a winged aircraft, the X-15, into space.
In an impromptu speech at opening of an Italian industrial exhibition in Moscow, Soviet Premier Khrushchev acknowledged that the U.S. had achieved “notable successes” in space and saluted the courage of Mercury astronauts Glenn and Carpenter. Commenting on M. Scott Carpenter’s MA-7 flight in aurora 7, Khrushchev declared: “I congratulate him especially because he gave proof of great courage in a situation in which he collid have been burned in his ship or drowned in the sea. All the scientists collid do from the earth was to advise him to drink water and to land. But he had the presence of mind and the courage to continue his flight.”
Maj. Gherman Titov in San Francisco press conference continued to chide U.S. space program. He said that if he was asked to join a U.S. astronaut in a cooperative space mission: “I would be a bit afraid because there have been quite a lot of failures in your program.” And, he remarked, the MR-3 capsule was “not even good enough for flying in orbit.”
usaf revealed that three “plastinauts,” plastic dummies of human astronauts, were undergoing tests at Kirtland afb preparatory to being sent into space. Plastinauts in space would be used to determine radiation hazards to astronauts. During early October: J-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine successfully completed its first full-duration static firing (more than four minutes) at Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. J-2 engines will be clustered to power S-II stage of Advanced Saturn vehicle.
Virgil I. (Gus) Grissom Day in Mitchell, Indiana, the hometown of the second Mercury astronaut into space.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Mercury Astronaut Donald K. Slayton had been named “Coordinator of Astronaut Activities.” Slayton wollid be responsible for assignment of training and engineering duties of all the astronauts.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and Mercury team went through complete simulated MA-7 mission exercise.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was selected as the National Father of the Year. Earlier this month, Ms mother had been selected as World Mother of the Year.
British Broadcasting Corp. announced that 30% of Britain’s population—15,000,000 people—listened to its radio coverage of Astronaut Glenn’s three-orbit space flight on Feb. 20, comparable to the size of the audiences that listened to Sir Winston Churchill’s wartime broadcasts.
Reported that, if Astronaut Schirra’s six-orbit flight (MA-8) is fully successful, nasa would conclude Project Mercury with one 18-orbit, 24-hour flight. Present plans called for four 24-hour flights with the one-man Mercury capsule; new plan under consideration would cancel three of these and assign their mission to two-man Gemini capsule.
In press interview in Houston, Astronauts Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn) said television pictures of Maj. Cooper would be transmitted to ground stations during MA-9 flight by means of miniature transmitter inside the Mercury spacecraft. Pictures could not be viewed live on commercial TV because transmissions would be on different scan speed. Astronaut Cooper also said that a rendezvous maneuver had been considered for MA-9 flight, but decision had been made not to attempt the maneuver. MA-9 is considered to be the last Project Mercury flight, to be followed by Project Gemini. November 23-December 2: Space Science Fair, held in Cleveland and cosponsored by nasa and Cleveland Plain Dealer, included extensive exhibit covering “virtually all topics of space technology” as well as series of lectures for junior and senior high school students by aerospace scientists and engineers Honorary co-chairmen of the fair were nasa Administrator James E. Webb and former nasa Administrator T. Keith Glennan, President of Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland.
nasa announced Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, Jr. (usaf), had been selected for 18-orbit Project Mercury flight MA-9. The day-long space flight would be made no earlier than April 1963. Astronaut Cooper, youngest of original seven astronauts, was back-up pilot and technical adviser for Astronaut Walter M. Schirra in flight MA-8. Back-up pilot for MA-9 would be Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., who made first U.S. manned space flight (suborbital flight, MR-3) on May 5, 1961.
Walter M. Schirra, aboard the recovery vessel U.S.S. Kearsarge, reportedly suggested to Project Mercury engineers that the ground communications stations should give the orbiting astronaut “more quiet time” in space. Extraneous conversation could interrupt the astronaut’s concentration on technical duties.
50 AM, Astronaut Glenn said: “I guess it was to be expected. We all knew the weather was marginal.”
nasa’s nine new astronauts were named in Houston by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center (msc). Chosen from 253 applicants, the former test pilots who would join original seven Mercury astronauts in training for Projects Gemini and Apollo were: Neil A. Armstrong, nasa civilian test pilot; Maj. Frank Borman (usaf); Lt. Charles Conrad, Jr. (usn); LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn); Capt. James A. McDivitt (usaf); Elliot M. See, Jr., civilian test pilot for General Electric Co.; Capt. Thomas P. Stafford (usaf); Capt. Edward H. White, II (usaf) ; and LCdr. John W. Young (usn). Dr. Gilruth stressed that they wollid not all necessarily make actual space flights. “Assignment to flight crews will depend upon the continuing physical and technical status of the individuals concerned and upon the future flight schedllie requirements.”
Tropical storm developed 420 mi. east of Puerto Rico, traveling on path that would cross impact area for Astronaut Schirra’s third orbit, nasa flight officials were closely watching the storm to determine whether it would necessitate postponing Schirra’s MA-8 flight scheduled for Oct. 3. During September: Conclusion that wheel-shaped space station was technically feasible and identification of problems that still exist were revealed in nasa Technical Note D-1504, compilation of 11 papers by nasa Langley Research Center staff. Selection of this 150-ft.-diameter, 171,000-lb. structure was result of studies by Langley for more than 2 years and detailed analyses by North American Aviation, Inc., for past 6 months. The report indicated the space station primarily would provide a means of learning to live in space, where zero-gravity and variable-gravity experiments could be performed, closed life-support systems could be qualified, and rendezvous techniques and systems developed. Chosen model could support up to 38-man crew.
afsc announced development of “self-maneuvering unit” (smu), a 160-lb. pack which converts a pressure-suited spaceman into a one-man space vehicle. Designed to position and stabilize an astronaut or crewman outside a spacecraft and to give him mobility in an orbiting assembly area, smu contains its own stabilization, control, propulsion, and power systems.
Astronaut Scott Carpenter flew simulated MA-7 mission in “Aurora 7” capsule mated to Atlas booster.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before a subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Appropriations, said that 32 candidates for astronaut positions had been selected from the 200 applicants, and that by September 1 nasa would select 10 of these men to enter astronaut training.
The Television Academy announced annual Emmy Award nominations. The orbital flight of Astronaut Glenn and Mrs. John F. Kennedy’s tour of the White House—regarded as top TV events—were not considered because they had been cooperatively covered by the three major networks.
Astronaut Scott Carpenter received a B.S. degree in aeronautical engineering from the University of Colorado, a degree he missed in 1949 by not taking the final examination in a course in heat transfer. He also received the school’s Norlin Award, given annually to an alumnus for outstanding achievement.
Maj. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) was first astronaut to pilot paraglider in test at Edwards, Calif., in development tests for Gemini manned spacecraft landings. Kite-like paraglider was towed aloft by biplane and released to glide downward. Maj. Grissom landed the paraglider upright, although the craft’s nose wheel crumpled upon hitting the ground.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would photograph cloud formations during his forthcoming orbital flight MA-8, it was announced. Cdr. Schirra’s special 2’(-lb. hand camera would be used to test techniques for the advanced Nimbus weather satellite.
Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (usn), the first U.S. astronaut, and Lt. Col. R. G. Robinson (usmc) were awarded the fai DeLaVaulx Medal—Shepard for achieving 615,300-ft. altitude in his suborbital Mercury flight (MR-3) and Robinson for setting closed-course speed mark of 1,606.5 mph in McDonnell F4C aircraft.
Mercury astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn appeared before both the House Science and Astronautics Committee and the Senate Aeronautics and Space Committee, answering a variety of questions on future manned space flight. Dr. Robert Seamans, nasa Associate Administrator, summarized specific nasa program, manpower, and money requirements before the House Committee.
First African showing of friendship 7, Astronaut John Glenn’s space capsule, drew record crowds, usia reported that over 40,000	persons had viewed the capsule in Accra, Ghana, in three days, more than at previous showings in London, Paris, Madrid, and Belgrade.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., after arriving in Houston after trip from Pacific landing of six-orbit MA-8 flight, held press conference at Rice University auditorium: “My intention was to use so little [attitude control] fuel that no one could argue that we [had not] had enough fuel aboard sigma 7 for eighteen orbits, if we wanted it. I think I proved that point.” He said MA-8 was a “textbook flight” and that ho was sorry to see it end. On the issue of space sickness, Astronaut Schirra stated that despite the prolonged weightlessness of this longest U.S. manned space flight, “there was no problem at all. There was no break-off phenomena, there was no uneasiness, there was no queasiness. I felt great. “The suit temperature problem . . . is a problem which we have solved. I have been much hotter in the tent at Cape Canaveral than I ever, ever thought of being in sigma 7.” He reported sighting the “fireflies” and believing they emanated from the spacecraft.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc), was chosen as Marine Aviator of the Year for 1962-63. This was the first annual award of the Alfred A. Cunningham Trophy.
Reported that two radio hams of Ann Arbor, Mich., J. Schmidt and E. Nuttle, recorded the voice transmissions of Astronaut Glenn during the three-orbit flight of friendship 7.
William L. Gill, Chief of Crew Systems Div. Radiation Branch, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said walls of Apollo spacecraft would provide most of radiation shielding required for crew. Astronauts would have special shielding devices only for their eyes.
X-15 No. 3 flown to record altitude of 58.7 miles (314,750 feet) by Major Robert White (usaf). Flight was programed for only 282,000 feet but maximum speed of 3,784 mph was 284 mph faster than planned. White’s flight made him eligible for astronaut wings, reserved for those who have flown over 50 miles high, previously held only by four Mercury astronauts. Flight was also the first to achieve the original design altitude of the X-15 of 50 miles.
Astronaut Gus Grissom was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Space Science degree by the Brevard Engineering College, Melbourne, Florida.
Deadline for applications for nasa’s new astronaut positions; nasa began screening the more-than-250 applications received. The armed services supplied 53 of the applications while more than 200 civilians submitted applications. Once selected, the new astronauts would undergo intensive training at Manned Spacecraft Center for Projects Gemini and Apollo.
Reported that Hughes Aircraft Co. had developed special devices to determine radiation dosage an astronaut may absorb in space flight. Called “tissue-equivalent ionization chambers” and developed under usaf contract, the instruments would be installed in three usaf “plastinauts,” man-sized dummies of astronauts made of plastic simulating human tissue. The plastinauts were designed “to fly in any space vehicle capable of carrying a man.”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on $3.7-blliion nasa authorization request. Administrator Webb, Robert R. Gilruth (Director msc), and Astronauts Glenn, Grissom, and Shepard appeared as witnesses. Mr. Webb outlined nasa’s projected program to be covered in detail in subsequent testimony: (1) total ten year program ahead may cost over $35 blliion; (2) new astronaut training program to include scientists wlli be announced shortly; (3) future manned spacecraft wlli be capable of landing on land or water; (4) nasa is opposed to using astronauts as goodwlli ambassadors, as they are needed on the current program; (5) 92% of nasa’s budget wlli be spent through industry and universities. Astronaut Glenn pointed out that the Nation “must be prepared” for failures in future manned space flights. “We don’t envision every flight,” he said, “coming back as successfully as the three we have had so far ... I hope we wlli always have the confidence in the program that we now have despite the fact there wlli be times when we are not riding a crest of happiness and enthusiasm as we now are.”
Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Captain, usaf) promoted to Major,
John Glenn Day in New York City. An estimated four mlliion people lined the streets to cheer the Mercury astronauts. Mayor Robert Wagner presented the city’s highest award, the Medal of Honor, to Col. Glenn and Robert R. Gilruth.
Bell Aerosystems engineers, John N. Cord and Leonard M. Seale, recommended in paper to the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences meeting in Los Angeles that a U.S. astronaut be landed upon the moon with the means of survival, perhaps for as long as three years, until an Apollo vehicle could be sent to return him to earth. The astronaut could do valuable scientific work and would be on “a very hazardous mission but it would be cheaper, faster, and perhaps the only way to beat Russia.”
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., on board aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge, began debriefing and medical check. Schirra would arrive in Honolulu Oct. 6 and then fly to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston.
M. Scott Carpenter Day in Bollider, Colo. Presented with an engineering degree from the University of Colorado, Astronaut Carpenter said that he hoped the degree, which he missed in 1949 because he failed a course in heat transfer, collid be justified by the “unique” education in the subject received during his re-entry in aurora 7. At a news conference, Carpenter said: “All mankind stands to gain more as a resllit of these flights— and mark my words, man wlli be going to the moon and neighboring planets in the near future—than in any previous exploration in the history of the world.”
Announced at the Manned Spacecraft Center that a large “innertube” or “flotation collar” may be used to keep Mercury capsule afloat after a water landing. Collar would be installed by Navy frogmen. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard took part in proving tests conducted on Chesapeake Bay.
Walter C. Williams, associate director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, defended orbital flights by astronauts that apparently are duplicates of previous flights, saying that the only way the U.S. can have a space program in depth is to repeat some of the operations. He stated that new data were gathered from each flight, replying to critics of the second manned 3-orbit spaceflight mission (MA-7).	_
nasa announced it would begin taking applications for additional astronauts now and continue until June 1, 1962. In July persons meeting the requirements would be interviewed, selected applicants given thorough physicals, and final selection of some 5 to 10 astronauts would be made in the fall. Qualifications were also announced; these were slightly less demanding in terms of test-pilot time, but more demanding in that they lowered the age limit to under 35 and required a college degree in science or engineering.
At sam symposium on aerospace medicine, Lt. Col. Burt Rowen (usaf), Chief of Bioastronautics at afftc, presented heartbeat and breathing records of Maj. Robert White during X-15 record speed flight of November 9, 1961. “When the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee first became aware of the high heart and respiration rates [of pilots in high-performance aircraft] they became concerned with the question of success of the Mercury program. . . . But now this has come to be regarded as normal.” Dr. Charles Sandhous of the University of California warned that an astronaut caught in space during a solar flare might age three years or more as a result of the radiation received.
In later nasa press conference at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut John Glenn described his three-orbit flight. He related his observation, his pilotage during almost two orbits, and his concern when burning fragments of the retrorocket package during re-entry appeared to indicate to him that the heat shield was breaking up. He referred to “weightlessness” as a “very pleasant” sensation to which he is becoming “addicted.” Administrator Webb and Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, Robert Gilruth, spoke briefly. This conference, like all events associated with the MA-6 flight, was fully covered in all detail by the entire American press, radio, and TV.
nasa announced that Mercury Astronaut Donald K. Slayton (Major usaf) would assume new operational and planning responsibilities. Extensive medical observation and examination of Slayton’s irregular heart action (atrial fibrillation) by msc medical staff, by groups of Air Force specialists, and Dr. Paul Dudley White agreed that he should not be considered for solo space flights.
In prepared press statement, Astronaut John H. Glenn commented on September 13 televised remarks by Astronaut Walter Schirra, and said: “I will continue to support his flight [Astronaut Schirra’s orbital flight MA-8] just as well as I possibly can. . . . I don’t want to add any more statements to a situation that has all the aspects of a tempest in a teapot. Scheduling of my time for maximum benefit from a technical and national space program standpoint has been continually reviewed by both Dr. Gilruth and the management of nasa.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, stated there was no real controversy over Col. Glenn’s position in the space program or on other questions raised by Cdr. Schirra.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, urged in speech before aaas that scientists be among the next group of astronauts selected for training. “I have a complete and utter conviction that we should take a scientist and make a flyer out of him rather than the other way around.” In interview, Dr. Newell outlined tentative nasa plans for 1963 launchings: 6-8 communications satellites, three weather satellites; 8 scientific satellites; at least one manned orbital flight; initial unmanned flight-test of Gemini capsule; three lunar impacts; Apollo capsule boilerplate tests of emergency flight conditions; three Saturn launch vehicle flight-tests; two electrical rocket-engine flight-tests; three re-entry heating tests.
National Aeronautic Association announced that U.S. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard wollid receive fai medal on September 28 for his suborbital space-flight records May 5, 1961. Also to receive medals: U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Gherman S. Titov, for their record-setting orbital flights in 1961. Another American, Lt. Col. R. G. Robinson (usmc), would receive award for closed-course, aircraft speed record of 1,606.5 mph in F4H over Edwards afb, Calif., November 22, 1961.
At American Rocket Society Honors Night Banquet in Los Angeles, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award, highest aes honor, for “general eminence in the field of rocket engineering and space flight.” Other 1962 ars awards: Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., nasa astronaut, received the aes Astronautics Award; Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Special Projects Office, received the James H. Wyld Memorial Award; Samuel K. Hoffman, president of naa Rocketdyne Div., received aes Propulsion Award; Dr. Howard S. Seifert, of Stanford Univ. and United Technology Corp., received the G. Edward Pendray Award; Theodore Forrester, director of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., Ion Physics Dept., received the aes Research Award; and John R. Winckler, prof, of physics at Univ. of Minnesota, received the first ars Space Science Award.
Mercury spacecraft (Capsule 13), friendship 7, was launched into orbit by Atlas booster (109D), Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., (usmc), as astronaut. After three orbits (apogee: 162.5 mi.; perigee: 98.9 mi.), friendship 7 re-entered and parachuted into Atlantic some 166 miles east of Grand Turk Island in the Bahamas. Picked up by the destroyer Noa, Glenn remained inside capsule until on deck. Beyond being the first U.S. manned orbital space flight, MA-6 flight of friendship 7 provided aerospace medical data during 285 minutes of weightlessness, including consumption of solid and liquid food and disorientation exercises. Astronaut Glenn was forced to “fly by wire” (i.e., pilot the spacecraft) during 2nd and 3rd orbits due to troubles with the automatic pilot. Glenn was pronounced “hale and hearty” after his 81,000-mile flight of 4 hrs. 56 min.
nasa announced new policy under which astronauts would be permitted to negotiate individually for the sale of their stories, the policy being “aimed at assuring equal access by all news media to the Astronauts’ stories of their flight missions.” Notable provisions of new policy were: (1) requirement for a second postflight news conference in which representatives of news media could question the astronaut “in depth” about his flight; and (2) prohibiting of any publication’s advertising “exclusive” stories purchased from astronauts, with requirement that the contracting publication provide a method to avoid this inference and with all such agreements subject to approval of the nasa Administrator. Inherent in the policy was that “all information reported by the Astronauts in the course of their official duties, which is not classified to protect the national security, wlli be promptly made available to the public.” New guidelines applied to all nasa astronauts, civilian and military.
Reported in the press that a 3-ft. by 2-ft. metal fragment found on a farm in South Africa on February 21 was identified by numbers stamped on it as a part of the Atlas booster that placed Astronaut John Glenn into orbit on February 20. Local reports of an explosion about 1 AM on February 21 indicated that the fragment came to earth after about 8 hours in orbit. Fragment was reported as 4 ft. by 2-ft. “stainless steel” in Capetown telegram to nasa Feb. 26, 1962.
Decision to sell Cape Colony Inn, partially owned by the seven Project Mercury astronauts, was announced by attorney C. Leo DeOrsey of Washington. He said the astronauts’ investment in the motel near Cape Canaveral “had become the subject of controversy in some quarters of the press and might become embarrassing to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. I believe it is in the best interests of all concerned to sell the motel.”
John Glenn Day in Washington, D.C. An estimated 250.000	persons lined the rain-drenched parade route from the White House to Capitol Hill. In 20-minute address to the joint session of the Congress, Astronaut Glenn paid tribute to the Project Mercury team and pointed to the unbounded future of space exploration: “. . . I feel that we are on the brink of an area of expansion of knowledge about ourselves and our surroundings that is beyond description or comprehension at this time. “Our efforts today and what we’ve done so far are but small building blocks on a very high pyramid to come . . . “We’re just probing the surface of the greatest advancement in man’s knowledge of his surroundings that has ever been made . . . There are benefits to science across the board. Any major effort such as this results in research by so many different specialties that it’s hard to even envision the benefits that will accrue in many fields. “Knowledge begets knowledge. The more I see, the more impressed I am not with how much we know but with how tremendous the areas are that are yet unexplored . . .”
nasa Project Mercury officials postponed for three days the 6-orbit space flight of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (MA-8), now scheduled for September 28. Delay was to permit further time for flight preparation.
nasa reported it had received more than 700 requests for personal appearances by the Mercury astronauts for the July 4th holiday, but there was little likelihood that any would be accepted. Astronaut John Glenn had received more than 8,000 requests for appearances since his orbital flight on Feb. 20, 1962.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was welcomed in his home town of New Concord, Ohio, by a crowd estimated at 50,000 people (normal population of New Concord, 2,127).
In speech on the floor of the House of Representatives, Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, paid tribute to Astronaut Scott Carpenter, stating in part: “Science is the beneficiary of his operation. . . . Commander Carpenter’s success is a compliment to the program; it is a tribute to American ingenuity and American ability to solve the mysteries of outer space. . . “To Scott Carpenter, to Alan Shepard, to Gus Grissom, and to John Glenn, this House and the American people owe a great debt of gratitude. From a scientific standpoint, I am happy to announce to you today the great success of this orbital flight.”
At opening session of the Legal Subcommittee of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, U.S. delegate, Leonard Meeker, proposed that all members of the U.N. undertake to aid space vehicles or astronauts in distress, and to return to the launching countries any that are forced to land elsewhere.
Position of Special Assistant for Astronaut Affairs created by nasa under the Director, Manned Spacecraft Center. Temporarily filled by Ford Eastman, the position provides central coordination of commitments to extra-program activities of the astronauts.
Project Mercury flight officials studied tropical storm “Daisy,” which continued moving westnorthwest about 300 mi. east of Puerto Rico, the general landing area for third orbit of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s six-orbit MA-8 flight planned Oct. 3. Mercury Operations Director Walter C. Williams, indicating continuing surveillance of “Daisy,” ordered preparations for the launch attempt to continue.
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, addressed the Southern Governors’ Conference, Hollywood-by-the-Sea, Fla., on the role of the South in the Space Age, and remarked: “. . . our space activities are in no sense stunts— spectaculars, if you will—nor will the landing of U.S. astronauts on the moon be our ultimate objective. Rather, the national effort is broadly organized to accomplish rapid advances in science and technology that will make it possible for us to perform any space assignment—military or civilian—that the national interest might require. Furthermore, from lunar exploration, we will go on to wider exploration of the solar system, ventures whose end no man can foresee. ...”
nasa announced that friendship 7, the Mercury capsule in which Astronaut John Glenn orbited the earth three times, would be lent to usia for a world tour, with some 20 stops on the itinerary and touching all continents. In mid-August the capsule would be displayed at the Century 21 Exhibition in Seattle, Washington, before being presented to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., for permanent exhibition.
Hughes Research Laboratories announced development of highpower amplifier tube that could eliminate spacecraft radio blackouts such as those experienced by astronauts during atmospheric re-entry. Tubes produce about 10 times the continuous power output of any previous tubes and could pierce heat-induced ion shields to transmit messages.
nasa Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was greeted by cheering crowds in Honollliu, transferring from aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge to usaf jet at Hickam afb, for trip back to Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Texas.
Civil Service Commission ruled that nasa was authorized to hire an “aerospace engineer and pilot,” one whom nasa would designate an astronaut, at maximum salaries for Government service grades GS 13, 14, and 15.
Cosmonaut Titov wrote in Pravda on his arrival in Moscow: “I returned home, heaved in a breathful of clear spring air, and told the comrades welcoming me: Despite all the comforts of America, there is no land on earth better than our dear, wonderful Soviet homeland.” He indicated that American astronauts Alan Shepard and John Glenn have been invited to visit the Soviet Union.
At nasa news conference at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter gave a detailed chronological account of his three-orbit flight in aurora 7. He quoted Mercury training psychologist Dr. Robert B. Voas, who had told Carpenter that data-collection is the “heart and soul of science.” Carpenter said: “And that’s true. Isolated data points mean nothing. We now have two data points on nearly everything. His [John Glenn’s] flight confirms jmine [and [mine confirms his . . . .” Carpenter said of weightlessness that “there was the sensation of floating . . . Every function is easier when you are weightless. It’s the only time I’ve ever spent in that [space] suit that was comfortable.” He reported briefly on his launch into orbit, his scientific observation, re-entry, and recovery, full scientific reports of which would be forthcoming in future weeks.
Dr. Clarence P. Oliver of the University of Texas zoology department suggested to the House Space Committee that astronauts traveling through space “for any extended period” should refuse to have any more children. Radiation exposure exceeding normal dosage on earth would pose a “genetic risk,” he testified.
nasa was studying the problem of falling fragments from orbital objects and the possibility of injury or damage to persons or property on earth. Four fragments from the Atlas booster that put Astronaut John Glenn into orbit were recovered on earth, the first pieces known to have re-entered from an orbiting object without burning up. Statistically the chances of injury to anyone on earth would be extremely small, especially since the orbits are over water about 80% of the time, nasa pointed out that some 100 meteorites weighing two pounds or more struck the U.S. every year, yet there had never been a report of anyone being struck by one.
In answer to question on Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter’s history of motion sickness, John Powers, Mercury information officer, said that Carpenter had no such history. He noted that Cosmonaut Titov had reported that he had only 350 hours of pilot flight time before his space flight, which compares to at least 1,000 hours for each of the seven Mercury astronauts. “Titov never saw his space capsule until 60 days before he flew it,” Powers said, “whereas the astronauts have become familiar with their capsules over a period of three years.”
Soviet cosmonauts held news conference in Moscow, revealing they had parachuted to earth from their space capsllies, landing about 124 mi. apart. Maj. Nikolayev reported that he and Col. Popovich had unstrapped themselves and floated weightless in their cabins for an hour, maintaining communications with each other at the same time. He also stated that the flight program had not called for rendezvous of vostok iii and iv, and that the closest the two capsules had come to each other was 5 kilometers (a little over 3 mi.). Col. Popovich reported they both had observed the glowing particles seen by Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov and by U.S. Astronaut John Glenn. Popovich said they believed the particles had been “merely the exhaust of the rocket motors.” It was stated that the results of the cosmonauts’ flights would be published after the collected data had been processed.
nasa selected Chance-Vought Corp. as contractor to study rendezvous of space vehicles. A primary part of the contract would be a flight simlliation study exploring the capability of an astronaut to control an Apollo-type spacecraft.
Editorial in the New York Times said: “Since the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is a civilian agency, it might be wiser to make all the astronauts civilians so that no questions of inequality or discrimination arise among them and also so that they might receive more adequate pay than is provided by the low military pay scales. . . . “In permitting the astronauts to cash in on their exploits, the Kennedy Administration is following an unwise precedent set by the Eisenhower Administration. “While the practice of profiting from memoirs of Government service is an old one, such memoirs are normally written by persons who have already left Federal employment. . . . “The government would be far wiser if it paid its astronauts a sufficiently generous salary so that it could in good conscience ask them to observe the same practices of discretion and modesty which have hitherto been considered normal for all other Government employees.”
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, said that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., probably wollid make his orbital flight (MA-8) the middle or end of September. Speaking at the Lunar Exploration Conference in Blacksburg, Va., Mr. Holmes made it clear that the success of recent Soviet prolonged manned space flights would not change the six-orbit mission of Commander Schirra.
Piloting a nasa F-106 supersonic jet airplane from Pope afb, N.C., Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom notified Jacksonville, Fla., air route traffic control center that Ms Tacan radio navigation aid had gone out. Flying above clouds and around thunderstorms, Grissom began operating an emergency radio beacon signal and was directed to a safe landing under a thunderstorm at Patrick afb by Miami air traffic control center.
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded the Aero Club’s Godfrey L. Cabot Award in Boston, as America's first man in space.
Mercury astronauts visited the United Nations, and John Glenn, during an informal reception given by Acting Secretary-General U Thant, said: “To be here at the United Nations this morning and have all these tributes to our project and all the people that are working on it from people of this calibre, is indeed overwhelming all over again after yesterday. . . . “As space science and space technology grows stlli further and our projects become more and more ambitious, we will be relying more and more on international teamwork. “And the natural center for this teamwork is the United Nations . . . .” Colonel Glenn also expressed the gratitude of Project Mercury to those countries who had cooperated in the flight operations.
U.S. submitted to the U.N. a supplemental list of U.S. space launchings, covering the period of Feb. 15 to March 15, 1962, updating the coverage of the first U.S. list submitted on March 5, 1962. This second official list did not include Astronaut John Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, since the U.S. contended that the U.N. roster was supposed to contain only those space objects still in orbit, not those that had already re-entered. U.S.S.R. listed all its space flights in its report to the U.N. on March 26. Although MA-6 flight was not registered, the U.S. submitted information on the Glenn flight to the U.N. on April 3.
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded an honorary Master of Arts degree by Dartmouth College.
Letter from President Kennedy defending Administration policy of permitting astronauts to sell their personal stories for profit was made public by M. B. Schnapper, editor of Public Affairs Press, in Washington, D.C. Replying to Mr. Schnapper’s criticism of the policy, the President said the “policy decision was reached only after most careful review of all the facts and lengthy consultation both within and without the Government. Efforts were directed toward removing specific controversial aspects of the original astronaut agreement, and we feel that this goal has been reasonably achieved.”
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center conference on Project Mercury flight MA-7, stated that his May 24 orbital space flight demonstrated there was no problem associated with prolonged drifting flight, a procedure necessary in future long-duration space flights. Reporting on re-entry and landing, he said that his preoccupation with floating particles in space consumed time available for stowing loose gear, so that his attention to last-minute stowing and to difficulties in horizon pitch scanner circuit, coupled with shift to manual control of retrofire, resllited in 3-sec. delay of retrofire and 250-mi. overshoot of target landing point.
Ten Air Force pilots emerged from simulated space cabin in which they had spent the last month, participating m psychological test to determine how long a team of astronauts could work efficiently on a prolonged mission in space. Project director Earl Alluisi said the experiment had “far exceeded our expectations.”
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, and the nasa astronauts were honored at Explorers Club’s Night of Exploration dinner in New York. Addressing the club on nasa programs and goals, Mr. Webb said: “Curiosity—the driving human thirst for knowledge—is only one reason, of course, for undertaking space exploration on the scale and at the pace which our country has established. . . . “First, we seek for mankind the benefits inherent in the scientific and technological knowledge and dexterity that will emerge from this dynamic effort to conquer the most hostile environment that man has ever entered—and to use that knowledge and technical skill as an important new resource for human progress. “Second, we seek to maintain our position as leader of the Free World, through continued superiority in science and technology. “And, finally, we seek space power as a deterrent to any potential adversary who might attempt to exploit space as an avenue of aggression against us . . . .”
In special ceremony at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and Walter Williams, Director of Operations for Project Mercury, were both awarded nasa Distinguished Service Medals by nasa Administrator Webb at the direction of President Kennedy.
usaf announced special instruments on unidentified military test satellites had confirmed artificial radiation belt densities calculated from earlier injun and telstah data. Radiation of new belt, created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July, was composed primarily of electrons. Radiation sharply increases above 400-mi. altitude at the geomagnetic equator and reaches peak intensities of 100 to 1,000 times normal levels at altitude above 1,000 mi. Lt. Col. Albert C. Trakowski (usaf) stated in press conference that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., could have been killed if his MA-8 space flight had taken him above 400-mi. altitude. Answering questions about usaf report on the artificial radiation belt, Col. Trakowski said the lifetime of the belt “cannot be forecast at present—it wlli be long.”
nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center was presented an Award of Honor by the National Safety Council for having logged nearly 4 million working hours without a disabling injury or fatality. During February: Astronaut John Glenn’s orbital space flight produced a great propaganda dividend for the United States, Mr. Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information Agency, said. “The contrast was immediately drawn around the world between the openness, the complete coverage of the flight, compared to the Russian efforts in this area . . . More newspapers normally hostile to the United States had to admit not only the scientific achievement but the fact that we were prepared to let our own people and the rest of the world see the entire operation from beginning to end.”
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., told newsmen he hoped Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper would be selected for Project Mercury flight MA-9. Astronaut selection had not yet been made for the 18-orbit 24-hour flight.
