Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said in nationwide TV interview that U.S. could and would land a man on the moon: “We need no big, new scientific breakthroughs to complete this, we feel. We do not need the discovery of something as large as atomic power or anything like this in order to make the moon flight. Most of the technical details are known. It is now a lot of veiy hard and long engineering spade work and test procedure to prove out all these details and put them all together on the lunar mission.” (“Meet the Press,” nbc-TV, 4/21/63; AP, Wash. Post, 4/22/63)
nasa announced that it would recruit 10 to 15 new astronaut trainees this summer. ( msc Space News Roundup, 1 /8/64,2)
nasa Ames Research Center announced seven nasa astronauts were conducting simulated manned spacecraft missions at Ames centrifuge facility. Tests involved subjecting astronauts to space flight stresses they might encounter during future manned space flights. (Ames Release 63-29)
Activities at Kitty Hawk, N.C., commemorating 60th anniversary of powered flight (Dec. 17,1903) : Youth Seminar on Flight, with 200 state delegates, observers, and representatives of youth attending, was moderated by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc) . Panel members were Max Conrad, pilot of stock-model business aircraft; Capt. Harold Blackburn, twa jet pilot; James Nields, business pilot; Jacqueline Cochran, record-holding aviatrix; and Maj. Robert Rush worth (usaf) , X-15 pilot. Full-scale replica of the Wright Flyer, built by volunteers from National Capitol Section of aiaa, was installed in museum at Wright Brothers National Memorial. Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges was featured speaker at annual banquet of Kill Devil Hills Memorial Society at Nags Head, N.C. Soaring Society of America presented to Wright Memorial Museum and Visitor’s Center a plaque commemorating Wright Brother’s glider flights. Presentation was made by Floyd Sweet of nasa Hq., past president of the Society. (60th Anniv. Committee Release; Wash. Post, 12/15/63; Soaring Society of America^ Inc. Release, 12/16/63)
Astronaut John H. Glenn said in speech before annual luncheon meeting of Associated Press: “As a result of the space program, tremendous and vast new areas of information appear on the horizon and are increasing daily. Consequently, this space program will undoubtedly serve as a catalyst toward an expansion of information that will dwarf anything we have known heretofore .... “What we need is a national repository for information, organized not along traditional library-type lines, but designed to utilize all the techniques at our disposal for sorting, cataloguing, analyzing, storing and making readily accessible, new information as it becomes available .... “In short, I propose that we lose no time in establishing a National Information Center. Control of such an institution could be by government, private interests, or a combination of appropriate interests . . . .” (Text)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter disclosed seeing twin tails on one side of sun’s corona during solar eclipse July 20. The twin-tailed corona did not appear in photographs Carpenter made of the eclipse while flying in DC-8 jetliner with other scientific observers. (O’Leary, Houston Post, 9/14/63)
Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., a vice president of Grumman Aircraft, replying to question during testimony before Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said first U.S. astronauts returning from the moon would bring back about 100-(earth)-pound sample of lunar terrain. {L.A. Times, 3/20/63)
nasa announced it would negotiate with Lear-Siegler, Inc., of Anaheim, Calif., for an extension of the company’s present $3,753,059 contract for design, manufacture, and installation of equipment for testing subsystems of the Saturn V launch vehicle at msfc. The additional work would include design, manufacture, and installation of instrumentation for a dual liquid-hydrogen test position and an acoustical-model test position at msfc. (nasa Release 63-222) World Conference on Space Communications opened in Geneva with delegates from 70 countries present. U.N. Secretary General U Thant was to have addressed the delegates via Telstar communications satellite, but a technical problem prevented the broadcast. Principal purpose of the conference was to reallocate radio frequencies to provide growth room for future satellite communications needs. (NYT, 10/8/63, 16) Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, received Harry E. Salzberg Memorial Medal for his “distinguished contribution to the field of transportation” and became the 1963 Salzberg Lecturer at Syracuse Univ. (Ltr. of Invitation, 4/18/63) Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., would decide during the week whether he would seek the Senate seat now occupied by Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio), according to George Clifford of the Washington Daily News after an interview with C. Leo DeOrsey, adviser to the astronauts. (Clifford, Wash. Daily News, 10/7/63) nana reported Lufthansa sources in Germany claim that U.S.S.R. is farther along on supersonic transport development than either Britain-France or the U.S. Being designed and built by the famous Ilyushin and Tupolev teams, the Russian entry is reported to be in the same speed class as the British-French Concorde— mach 2.2 (1,500 mph)—and carry about the same passenger load of 100, and to land at quite low speeds, probably through the use of variable-sweep wings. First version of the supersonic transport would be a freight carrier, not only because it can be introduced with a lower safety factor than a passenger version but because the increased friction between Soviet Russia and Communist China dictates a fast priority freight system to eastern Russia, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63) Atlas D icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., but exploded shortly after launch, (upi, NYT, 10/8/63, 28) Lewis awarded study contracts totaling $576,000 to General Dynamics/Astronautics and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation to investigate the possibilities of using “flox”—a mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen—as the oxidizer in the Atlas space launch vehicle. Preliminary studies indicate the combination could result in an 88 per cent increase in payloads for 100-mile high orbits, (lrc Release 63-78, Lewis Chronology, 9) Early October: faa Deputy Administrator Gordon M. Bain said that nasa’s studies of a supersonic commercial air transport (scat) were not in accord with faa thinking—that they derived too much from the B-70 work of some years ago and that they recommended the technical desirability of a mach 3 aircraft, while faa leaned toward a mach 2.5 aircraft as the one economically feasible for airline operation. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,38)
In an article in Missile and Rockets, nasa Administrator James E. Webb emphasized the importance of the engineer in the space program: “During this period of intensive research and development, it becomes doubly important for industry, the press, and nasa to tell the workshop and test site story as well as the launch site story. The role of the space engineer must be brought out as clearly as the achievements of space scientists and the astronauts . . . . ”	(M&R, 11/25/63)
Unnamed nasa spokesman quoted as saying nasa had tried and failed to employ Col. Charles E. Yeager (usaf) and Maj. Robert M. White (usaf) as directors of astronaut training for Projects Gemini and Apollo at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Colonel Yeager is commandant of usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, and Major White is usaf pilot of X-15 aircraft, also at Edwards afb. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/63)
According to three Ling-Temco-Vought aerospace scientists, astronauts operating outside their japsules in outer space would have considerable difficulty estimating distances to other objects, even of known size. Results of experiments suggest that observers cannot make accurate distance estimates without the aid of some kind of artificial ranging device. The accuracy of visual observation will affect the complexity of the guidance system and the total thrust requirement for close-in maneuvering. For this reason, man’s visual performance capability must be defined as accurately as are other design data for successful space missions. (Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc.; Space Information Digest, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1/28/63) During January: Dr. Douglas McKie, Univ. of London, writing in Jan. 1963 Endeavour, traced the history of the metric system, a subject of renewed interest in the U.K. since Parliament was considering; the adoption of the metric system of weights and measures. Dr. McKie pointed out that the recent adoption of the wavelength of a line in the spectrum of krypton-86 as the basis for an international unit of length was the realization of an old French dream at the time of the adoption of the metric system—the use of an invariable natural standard. At the time of the French Revolution, Dr. McKie asserted, France had become weary of the chaos of variable systems of weights and measures and the government and the National Academy urged the States-General to adopt a national system. The States-General authorized the Academy to formulate a system of weights and measures based on measurement of an arc of the meridian as the universal standard and decimals as the notation system. This was done by 1793, but Revolutionary politics intervened, having done away with the States-General and even replaced the Academy. Not until Dec. 10, 1799, did the new standards become legal, and by then it had been discovered that the earth was not a perfect sphere and therefore that the arc of the meridian was not the invariable standard the Academy had thought. (SIN, Mar. 1963,11-13)
16-in. cannon shot a 475-lb. instrumented capsule 15 mi. into the upper atmosphere from Barbados, first launching of an altitude probe by gun and first such project undertaken by a nongovernmental agency—McGill Univ. of Canada, with support of U.S. Army. Instruments in steel-encased capsule relayed data on conditions in upper atmosphere to ground tracking stations; capsule remained aloft about three min., fell into sea nine mi. southeast of Barbados. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/63) January 27; Lt. Col. John A. Powers, Public Affairs Officer for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 flight may extend to “as many as 22 orbits. If the flight lasts that long it will be a 34-hour flight.” Speaking before Texas Associated Press Managing Editors’ Association, Powers said nasa had not yet decided whether Cooper’s flight would be last of Project Mercuiy; “the decision on whether another [Mercury flight] will be necessary will be made after Cooper’s flight.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/28/63)
usaf awarded to United Technology Center a $15,390,000 increment to existing contract for design, development, fabrication, delivery, and flight testing large segmented solid-propellant motors, usaf also obligated to Thiokol Chemical Corp. a $1,380,000 increment to existing contract for rad on solid-propellant motors, (dod Release 1609-63) During December: In its “Statement of Purpose,” the Subcommitee on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics outlined scope of Federal Government’s support of rad and reviewed responsibilities of the Congress in answering questions of basic policy and evaluating the Federal rad effort. Report pointed out that Government provides “more than two-thirds of the total research and development money being spent in the United States. Of this total, 75 percent is spent in industry, 8 percent in colleges and universities, and 15 percent within the Government itself, according to studies of the National Science Foundation.” (“Government and Science No. 1: A Statement of Purpose,” Rpt. of the House Subcomm. on Science, rad, 1963) During December: Marshall Space Flight Center engineer Paul J. deFries spent two weeks at U.S. scientific stations in Antarctica gathering data on their experiences. Some factors might relate to the problem of supplying astronauts during long stays on the moon. (Marshall Star, 1/1/64, 1)
On first anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft friendship 7 was presented to Smithsonian Institution by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. Astronaut Glenn presented to the Smithsonian the flight suit, boots? and gloves he had worn and the tiny American flag he had earned during his three-orbit space flight. Making the presentation, Dr. Dryden remarked: “It is appropriate that John Glenn’s friendship 7 spacecraft should join the Wright Brothers’ first airplane in this hall, dedicated to man’s pioneering efforts in flight. “These two machines . . . stand as constant reminders that mankind aspires to the stars .... “As in the early days of aeronautics we can only dimly foresee the future of space exploration, what we Shall find, and what benefits will come to us. We know only that we must move forward in knowledge and practical accomplishment as we strive to discover the nature of our universe .... “We are surrounded here by the cherished treasures of the Nation. Today, we add still another to bring to mind the promise of the future that men of imagination and courage will always find new frontiers to conquer . . . .” (WasJi. Post, 2/21/63, Bl; Text)
Little Joe II launch vehicle left General Dynamics/Convair plant en route to White Sands Missile Range, N.M., where test launch would be made next month. Purpose of flight would be to qualify Little Joe II launch vehicle for later flights with boilerplate Apollo payload and Apollo spacecraft built to production standards; Little Joe II tests would provide engineering information for use on manned Apollo orbital flights, (msc Release 63-115) 1 .D Axj JJpCCU 60,000-ft. altitudes at He du Levant launch center. {M&R, 7/15/63, 9) By this deadline, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center received 271 applications for astronaut openings. 71 applicants were military pilots recommended for possible astronaut duty; remaining 2(X) were civilians, including three women. {Av. Wk., 7/22/63, 325) Sen. Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) inserted in Congressional Record a letter from physics prof. John H. Gardner, Brigham Young Univ., criticizing “the trend in nasa and in the Department of Defense toward the development of inhouse capability for the performance of basic research and other scientific tasks which can and, under our private enterprise system, should be performed by the private sector of the economy with a secondary role being played by the university .... “It is far from evident that the creation of new Government laboratories in competition with and at the expense of existing laboratories will help us to achieve our goals in space any faster. Appropriate utilization of the private scientific resources of the country would seem to be faster and more in keeping with our traditions. The statement that nasa has too much money is frequently heard among scientists and it is indicative of the widespread fears and misgivings scientists have about the ominous changes taking place in the kind of role they play in our society. These fears and misgivings may underlie much of the growing opposition to our lunar landing goal . . . .” (Letter, CR, 7/15/63,11884)	_
Sen. Ernest Gruening (D.-Alaska) criticized nasa on the Senate floor for its indifference to training and use of women astronauts in the manned space program. Also he inserted in the Congressional Record a recent article in Life by Clare Boothe Luce, in which she said: “The astronaut of today is the world’s most prestigious idol. Once launched into space he holds in his hands something far more costly and precious than the millions of dollars’ worth of equipment in his capsule; he holds the prestige and the honor of his country .... But the astronaut is also something else: he is the symbol of the way of life of his nation. “In entrusting a 26-year-old girl with a cosmonaut mission, the Soviet Union has given its women unmistakable proof that it believes them to possess these same virtues. The flight of Valentina Tereshkova is, consequently, symbolic of the emancipation of the Communist woman. It symbolizes to Russian women that they actively share (not passively bask, like American women) in the glory of conquering space.” (CR, 6/27/63,11228-30) Jwne 27: usaf launched Minuteman icbm from amr in 4,000-mi. flight down Atlantic Missile Range in successful test, (dod Release 929-63)
Moscow Radio said U.S. astronauts “become bourgeois exploiters [of the people] in their own right,” but the Russian people had “profound respect” for U.S. spacemen, who needed “no little bravery” to let themselves be launched in rockets “whose reliability is highly dubious.” (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 1/8/63)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper greeted by crowds of thousands in Houston as he returned home for first time since his 22-orbit MA-9 space flight, (upi, AFT’, 5/24/63)
Millions of Americans heard and watched MA-9 launching and subsequent flight activities on commercial radio and television. Estimated 8,000 people watched launching on Grand Central Station, New York, 12-by-16-ft. television screen. Attempt to telecast launching to European viewers via relay i communications satellite was unsuccessful because “an error on the part of the broadcast company programmers . . . resulted in the transmission of live TV monitors at Cape Canaveral which consisted of a hodgepodge of random pictures and sounds that was virtually meaningless.” Videotape of launch activities and of first TV pictures from Astronaut Cooper was successfully transmitted via relay i later in the day. Beginning at 6:55 p.m. edt, the three U.S. TV networks received via relay i a three-minute program on European reaction to Astronaut Cooper’s flight. (NYT, 5/16/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/16/63; nasa Release 63-106)
nasa announced from Cape Canaveral that recruiting 9-12 new astronauts would begin next month. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/16/63)
Thirty nasa astronaut candidates underwent physical examinations at School of Aerospace Medicine. Final selection would be made next month. (M&R, 9/2/63,12)
In meeting of legal subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Soviet delegate Roland M. Timerbaev declared that it would be “delusion” to report to the Committee that any progress had been made during 28-nation subcommittee’s three-week session. Business before subcommittee had been drafting of legal code covering space exploration activities and considering of proposals concerning liability for space vehicle accidents and return of astronauts and spacecraft after emergency landings in foreign territory. {NYT, 5/3/63,3)
Dr. E. C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke before the Georgetown University Forum: “In brief I would list some solid reasons for the moon trip: “1. [There is] No other place so near in space where we can test the equipment and the men for future space travel. “2. A clear objective gives impetus, order, and efficiency to a program. “3. The lunar project requires the development of powerful rocket engines, sophisticated spacecraft, trained astronauts, tracking systems, and capability to protect man against the multiple hazards of space. “4. Success in this venture gives prestige essential at negotiating tables. “5. It will give an impetus to our standard of living, to education and employment, and to new methods and materials for the productive process. “6. There will be substantial defense spin-offs, in addition to the political and economic benefits which also tend to deter aggression. For example, rendezvous technique, life-protective measures, control and guidance systems, improvement in rockets, etc. “7. The moon is an excellent platform for mounting astronomical instruments, without atmospheric handicaps. “8. The moon can be a relay point for communications and a refueling point for space travels.” (Text)
Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (usaf), X-15 pilot, was presented military astronaut wings by Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Curtis E. LeMay. (Wash. Post, 72663)
Contract award for two Apollo mission simulators, for training astronauts from launch through lunar orbit and return to earth, was announced by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., was selected by North American Aviation’s Space Systems Div. to develop and install the two spacecraft simulators, one at msc in Houston and one at Atlantic Missile Range, (msc Release 63-79)
Discussing the National Space Program before Iowa City Daily Press Association in Des Moines, nasa Associate Director of Plans and Program Evaluation Addison M. Rothrock said: “The prime objective of . . . [the manned space flight] program is to land men on the moon before the end of the decade. The scope covered by the program is much broader than this. It is in fact the research, development and operation of a series of research manned spacecraft that will determine for us man’s ability to operate in space. By focusing on the moon-landing we have set a goal that insures we develop all basic phases of the operation of manned spacecraft. I cannot emphasize this too strongly. “By the time our three astronauts leave for the moon-landing we as a nation will have accumulated 2000 flight hours in earth orbit of manned craft. To indicate to you the significance of this number—we have as of now less than five flight hours of manned aircraft at speeds in excess of Mach 2.5. ... In these 2000 hours we will have orbited the earth some 1300 times. Men will have gone to and from craft in orbit. We will have rendezvoused and inspected craft and transferred men and material between craft. We will have maneuvered the craft both in regards to the attitude of the craft as has been done with Mercury and the Orbiting Solar Observatory and in regards to changes in the flight path as has been done with Mariner II and Syncoms. These are the things that must be done and will be done in the development, operation, and functioning of manned craft in space. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Edward P. Ney, Univ. of Minnesota physicist, said in New York Times interview that sightings by Astronauts Glenn, Carpenter, and Cooper during their orbital Mercury space flights represented the “first direct observation” of what probably is cosmic dust in the airglow layer of about 48- to 54-mi. altitude. Major Cooper reported that light of two stars in Big Dipper had been extinguished by airglow layer, and Dr. Ney said this was “strong evidence for the existence of dust” which could block out the light. (Toth, NYT, 8/12/63, 17)
In response to inquiries about rumors that Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter and Walter M. Schirra were ill with space-flight aftereffects, unnamed nasa Hq. spokesman quoted Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of msc Medical Operations Office, as saying: “Neither Carpenter nor Schirra has any difficulties at all, and they are in excellent health. “In fact, none of the astronauts who have made space flights has suffered any ill effects, and the entire group is in top physical condition.” (ch, Houston Chronicle, 8/3/63, 9)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center confirmed that Astronaut Lerov Gordon Coopers MA-9 space flight would be delayed because of “electrical wiring problems in the launch vehicle control system which are peculiar to Atlas 130-D,” the vehicle for • ( Arcr T? oIoooa C Q OA\
Richard N. Thomas, professor of astrophysics and chairman of Faculty Committee for Astrophysics of Dept, of Physics and Astrophysics, Univ. of Colorado, was awarded Dept, of Commerce Gold Medal for Exceptional Service. (Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, 5/63,9) During March, April, and May: Total of 227 nasa appearances at 70 hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, involving 246 hours. This involved 546 man-hours of primary witnesses, not including backup witnesses, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/88) Jv/ne 1: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., returned to U.S. after vacationing in Japan with his family since shortly after MA-9 manned space flight, during which he had been stationed aboard Pacific tracking ship Coastal Sentry. Glenn’s candidness and openness during visit was said to have “boosted U.S. image” in Japan. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/2/63)
22-orbit MA-9 flight of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper was reported delayed from planning date of May 7 until at least May 21 because of difficulties in Atlas booster’s guidance system. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
Maj. Donald K. Slayton (usaf) one of the original seven Mercury astronauts and the only one of them who was grounded during the course of the project, submitted his letter of resignation to the usaf and would join nasa as a civilian pilot qualified for space flights. (Finney, NYT, 10/17/63)
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., contractor to nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center to build the lunar landing vehicle in which two U.S. astronauts would descend to the moon’s surface, named Space Technology Laboratory, a division of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge Corporation, to develop the lunar descent and landing engine. The lunar excursion module (lem) of Project Apollo would detach from the Apollo spacecraft orbiting around the moon and slowly descend to the lunar surface, (msc Release 63-92)
C. Leo DeOrsey, attorney for the original seven nasa astronauts, announced the astronauts had sold their interest in the Cape Colony Inn in Cocoa Beach, Fla. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/31/63)
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
Contract awarded to rca Services Company to create the sun’s intensity in two space environmental chambers. The largest chamber would measure 120 ft. high and 85 ft. in diameter; it would house the Apollo vehicle, consisting of command, service, and lunar excursion modules. The smaller chamber, measuring 85 ft. high and 65 ft. in diameter, would house the Apollo command module and provide the space environment for astronaut training. (Fact Sheet #96, msc)
One-year anniversary of orbiting of tiros vi meteorological satellite, its year-long operational lifetime setting new record for weather satellites. On July 31, 1963, tiros vi discovered first hurricane (Arlene) of 1963 season in tropical Atlantic ; altogether, tiros vi photographed two hurricanes in Atlantic, two tropical storms in eastern Pacific, eight typhoons in central and western Pacific, as well as sand storms in Saudi Arabia and ice conditions in southern and northern hemispheres. Along with tiros v it supported Mercury space flights of Astronauts Schirra and Cooper. National Weather Satellite Center issued about 600 weather advisories around the world based on some of the 63,000 cloud-cover pictures from tiros vi. (nasa Release 63209; Commerce Dept. Release WB 63-11)
Addressing National Conference on Citizenship in Washington, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said: “No one can foretell with certainty the tremendous import this broad technological revolution may have. But its implication is really much more broad and deep than a single reference to space, for space accomplishments are but one fruit of a greater advancement. There have been matching broad advances in many technical fields that have affected, and will continue to affect every facet of life from our homes, to automobiles, to medicine, to buildings, to roads, and to education. History has shown that such surges of advancement are times of greater opportunity to mold the future . . . .” (Text, CR, 9/16/63, A5799)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, was the principal speaker at the Space Age Symposium held in Shawnee, Okla., in conjunction with the city’s homecoming celebration for Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2)
The Collier Trophy for 1962 was presented to the seven Project Mercury astronauts by President Kennedy in the White House Rose Garden: “I hope this award, which in effect closes out a particular phase of the program, will be a stimulus to them and to the other astronauts who will carry our flag to the moon and, perhaps, some day, beyond.” (AP, NTT, 10/11/63,18; naa Release 10/7/63)
Project Mercury officially ended. Initiated in autumn of 1958, Mercury had achieved its goal of placing manned spacecraft, in orbital flight around earth, investigating man’s survival ability and performance capabilities in space, and recovering man and spacecraft. Mercury-Redstone suborbital flights paved the way toward ultimate goal, with Astronaut Alan B. Shepard becoming first U.S. man in space in freedom 7 (May 5, 1961), followed by Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom in liberty bell 7 (July 21,1961). First U.S. manned orbital space flight was achieved with Mercury-Atlas MA-6 flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn in friendship 7 (Feb. 20, 1962). This three-orbit space flight was followed by: MA-7, three-orbit flight of Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter in aurora 7 (May 24, 1962); MA-8, six-orbit flight of Astronaut Walter Schirra in sigma 7 (Oct. 3, 1962); and MA-9, 22-orbit space flight of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper in faith 7 (May 15-16, 1963). Project Mercuiy logged 34 orbits of manned space flight with 52 hrs. 23 min. of flight tune. Jwne 12: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of six-month study contract to Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for establishment of environmental control and life support requirements for manned earth-orbiting space station. Duration of 24-man station would be from one to five years, (msc Release 63-100)
President Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral, his third tour of the test site within two years. Flying in from Palm Beach, where he was spending the weekend, the President spent three hours watching the launching of a Polaris missile from the submerged nuclear submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson, riding in a helicopter over the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) where nasa is constructing facilities for Saturn V launches, visiting the Saturn I rocket on its launch site. Speaking of the Saturn I flight scheduled for earlv December, the President said that if successful it would give tlie U.S. “the largest booster in the world and show significant progress in space. “I think that would be an important milestone for us.” The President was briefed on Projects Gemini and Apollo and the related booster programs by a group of nasa officials including nasa Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and msfc Director Dr. Wem-her von Braun. At one point in the illustrated lecture, the President lagged behind his party to examine models of the various boosters in the space program. He picked up a model of the 72-ft. Atlas D which had boosted the Project Mercury astronauts into orbit and compared it with a model of the 281-ft. Saturn V intended to propel Project Apollo astronauts to a manned lunar landing. “This is fantastic,” the President said. (NYT, 11/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 11/17/63,2)
Writing in Hypnosis Quarterly, Frank M. Frazitta said astronaut trained in self-hypnosis could alleviate pain and discomfort during space flights. In event of air-conditioning unit’s failure, selfhypnosis could be used to lessen astronaut’s perspiration rate or make him feel cooler or warmer. (M&R, 4/8/63, 21)
Selection of two new X-15 pilots, Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf) and Milton O. Thompson (nasa) was announced by Paul F. Bikle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center, and Brig. Gen. Irving L. Branch (usaf) , Commander of AF Flight Test Center. Pilots would fill vacancies left by nasa research pilot Neil Armstrong, now a nasa astronaut, and Maj. Robert White (usaf), recently assigned other usaf duties, (nasa Release 63-127; frc Release 12-63)
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)
At the State Department luncheon honoring Astronaut Gordon Cooper, Vice President Johnson remarked: “In 1942, President Roosevelt called together our wartime leaders for the final decision on continuing or abandoning the Manhattan project which produced the atomic bomb. One of the most eminent leaders present heard presentation from all sides. Then, he solemnly gave President Roosevelt his verdict: ‘The bomb will never go off—I speak, of course, Mr. President, as an expert on explosives.’ “In that first, uncertain spring of the space age 5 years ago, some conscientious experts took the same attitude toward Project Mercury. History has proved them grossly wrong. . . . “Hitler once predicted the Nazis would wring England’s neck like a chicken. After the Battle of Britain, Winston Churchill said to Commons, ‘Some chicken. Some neck.’ We have heard some say recently that the civilian space program is only ‘leafraking.’ Considering Major Cooper—considering the vast technological cooperation which made his mission a success—I would say today, ‘Some leaf. Some rake.’” (Text, CR, 5/23/63, A3299)
In the wake of Washington reports that Lt. Col. John H. Glenn might be candidate for U.S. Senate from Ohio, the nasa astronaut said in Houston Post interview that his plans were to remain with nasa and that he had given no thought to a political career. {Houston Post, 7/7/63)
Patent to Boeing Co. engineers Joseph H. Doss and Gary A. Graham for method of suspending astronaut in his spacecraft with netting and cables was reported in New York Times. Inventors claimed system would give astronaut more mobility than couches used in Mercury spacecraft. (Jones, NYT, 8/3/63, 21)
Air Force Association presented Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper the David C. Schilling trophy for the year’s most significant aerospace achievement m field of flight—his 22-orbit Project Mercury space flight MA-9.	(msc Space News Roundup, 9/18/63,8)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. announced it was withdrawing its $3.2 million contract offer to 16 U.S. astronauts for their personal stories. “It is with deep regret that we are withdrawing our bid. We knew there would be a vast number of subtle and complex problems to resolve before we could arrive at a viable contract. “Following our most recent conversations with [nasa] officials, we have reached the conclusion, most reluctantly, that further negotiations would be futile.” (upi, NYT, 7/9/63, 1)
Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream, nasa Langley research {illots, reported to ias meeting on research results of simulated unar spacecraft landing, lunar orbit rendezvous, and atmospheric re-entry made in simulated three-man spacecraft. Realistic tests demonstrated ability of research pilots to complete precise maneuvers of flight, despite necessarily cramped quarters and seven-day duration. Lane aerospace scientists Jack E. Pennington and Roy F. Bris-senden reported on experiments to investigate astronauts’ ability to rendezvous in space by visual means. Pennington and Bris-senden concluded that pilot could sight target vehicle from perhaps as much as 200 mi. away if it is lighted by sun or bright beacon; he could then successfully brake his own spacecraft along an intersecting path. Dr. Leonard Roberts, LaRc physicist, reported to ias on implications of lunar landing if moon has, as many scientists believe, dust layer on surface. Dr. Roberts concluded that spacecraft descending to moon would erode a crater by action of its rocket exhaust. If dust exists on lunar surface, it would be blown outward and away from descending vehicle; air would not be present to recirculate dust in envelnnimr cloud so astronaut’s visibilitv '	...... ... ... .. IT-----Q -----7	—	----------- should not be reduced by lunar dust. Other Lane scientists presented research reports covering instruments for satellites, supersonic aircraft flutter problems, and wind tunnel experiments on helicopter rotors. (Langley Release)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper flew simulated launch countdown and aspects of MA-9 Project Mercury space flight at Cape Canaveral. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/8/63)
First college program to train usaf astronauts nad been established at Purdue Univ., u6af announced. Fourteen June graduates of Air Force Academy had been selected to begin the specialized program in Purdue’s School of Aeronautical and Engineering Sciences, their studies leading to newly created Master’s degree in astronautics. (Chicago Trib., 4/10/63)
Adm. Sergei Gorshkov, Commander-in-Chief of Soviet Navy, wrote in Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) that US.S.R. had successfully fired missiles from underwater submarines during training exercises last year. He said “radical re-equipment” had provided Soviet navy with submarines and surface vessels armed with missiles capable of striking anywhere in the world. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/6/63, A15)	_ February 5:	System to determine composition of moon’s crust by explosions on lunar surface was described by Francis E. Lehner, senior project engineer on lunar seismology, Cal Tech. Under development for nasa by Lehner and Dr. Robert L. Kovach, geophysicist at jpl, system was designed to be sent to moon in “unmanned instrument package weighing about 50 pounds .... “We propose to obtain subsurface information about the moon by touching off a series of small explosive charges and then with one or more geophones placed at some distance from the explosives detect the resulting waves that have penetrated into the crust and have been refracted again to the surface. “A geophone converts a mechanical wave into an electrical one that may be amplified and recorded. Different kinds of rock formation, and cracks and layers of material will affect the wave patterns, which can be amplified and radioed back to earth.” (ctps, Chicago Trib., 2/6/63) February 5-6:	First intra-agency technical conference on optical communications and tracking held at gsfc with representatives of nasa’s field centers and installations attending. Purpose of the conference was to provide for an exchange of technical information on laser optical and tracking programs at each of the centers. (Goddard News, 2/25/63,2) February 6:	nasa announced it would use TV to monitor Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper during his Project Mercury space flight MA-9. Slow-soan television monitoring equipment had been installed at Cape Canaveral and aboard tracking ship to be stationed in South Pacific; third monitor might be established in Canary Islands. Television pictures received at Cape Canaveral could later be fed into U.S. networks, it was reported, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/7/63, A4)	_	_
Reported that usaf Vice c/s General William F. McKee had dispatched message to usaf commanders urging “personnel attention and active support” in recruiting volunteers for forthcoming nasa astronaut selections. (A-N-AF Jonm. & Reg., 6/15/63, 4)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Titan III program director, quoted as saying usaf planned to fly at least 10 X-20 (Dyna Soar) spacecraft, the first two to be unmanned and remaining eight carrying astronauts. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/14/63, 238)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced ejection seat escape system for Gemini two-man spacecraft had successfully undergone first high-speed rocket-sled test, at Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, Calif. Both dummy astronauts were safely recovered after ejection at nearly 600 mph from boilerplate spacecraft, simulating emergency ejection during boost phase of Gemini mission. Tests simulating ejection before launch were also being conducted, consisting of firing ejection seats from 150-f£. tower and parachuting dummy astronauts to safe landing, (msc Release 63-111)
Unnamed U.S. official was quoted as saying Astronaut Gordon Cooper’s one-day Project Mercury flight MA-9 was set for April 2, “for planning purposes.” Flight would be 18 orbits (about 27 hours) or, if all goes well, 22 orbits (about 34 hours), nasa had not yet officially announced precise launch date in April or length of flight. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/63, A2)
Astronauts on the five-day manned lunar landing trip would not only pilot the Apollo but would make repairs to malfunctioning systems out of a stock of spare parts carried along for that purpose. This would be one means of upgrading the reliability of the entire system and reduce the need for redundancy of systems, saving weight and space. (Finney, NYT, 10/15/63, 22)
At meeting of American Institute of Biological Scientists in Amherst, Mass., Max D. Lechtman of Magna Corp. presented report by team of researchers predicting use of certain bacteria in life-support, systems of future manned spacecraft. One means of supplying oxygen to astronauts on long-duration flights would be electrolysis of water—breaking down water into its oxygen and hydrogen components by electric current. Microbes such as H. eutropha and H. ruhladi which absorb hydrogen would be valuable in removing the hydrogen. (Wash. Post, 8/30/63, All)
Reported that Lear Siegler, Inc., delivered to nasa the slow-scan television camera systems and receiving equipment intended for use on the forthcoming flight of Astronaut Gordon Cooper. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., repeated in Washington press conference that he was not planning a career in politics. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/63)
Reorganization of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Michoud Operations was announced by Michoud General Manager Dr. George N. Constan. (Marshall Star, 6/26/63,7) Jwm 27: X-15 No. 3 piloted by Maj. Robert A. Rush worth (usaf) to 285,000-ft. altitude and 3,425-mph speed (mach 4.89) in 13-min. flight. X-15 was launched from B-52 mother ship over Delamar Lake, Nev., its engine burning 80 sec. Maj. Rushworth qualified for military astronaut wings by piloting the rocket research aircraft to altitude higher than 50 mi. Purpose of flight was to familiarize 38-year-old Major Rushworth with comparatively high-altitude flight, (frc Release 14—63; nasa Release 63142)
An msc operations team finished a study at Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., that indicated an astronaut could effect rendezvous in space using only his piloting skill and simple spacecraft radar. Although Apollo flight would have automatic guidance and navigation equipment and continuous assistance from ground tracking stations, developers of backup systems needed to know the minimum with which the astronaut could operate, (msc Release 63-238)
Perfection in manufacture of engines for Project Gemini would be sought through a Verification Instruction Program (vip) to train and qualify manufacturing and test personnel at Aerojet’s Liquid Rocket Plant. The program would include 30 days of classroom instruction followed by on-the-job training for top management and senior hourly personnel. Program would be operated by nasa Astronaut Frank Borman and Aerojet plant manager Ray C. Stiff, Jr. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/8/63, 228)
T„	f_•_______£___________t>___:j__i. T':__l_____ ' Alt ' '<f! ’ll u l/y	t. r /If /<*/ a { .11 lull' 1U1U1C1 j- rroiucill riinniiimwni “Let us turn to the space exploration program, which I publicly have called downright spongy. Now clearly the strong competitive spirit of the American people has been aroused by the so-called space race. But let us step back for a moment from emotion and be objective. This is what my scientific advisers and I tried to do when we started space work back in 1955 and thereafter enlarged it into a comprehensive program. We didn’t and don’t want to be a second-best nation, not in any important field, and certainly not in total accomplishment. But can we best maintain our overall leadership by launching wildly into crash programs on many fronts? This is where we seem to have got out of focus. “Let me make it perfectly clear that we should have an aggressive program of research and exploration, so broadly based that in the long run there will be no question of our space leadership; but we should pursue it in an orderly, step-by-step way to enlarge systematically our knowledge of the scientific, military, and industrial potentials in space. This sort of a program would be a strong, steady push from the known into the unknowns of space 741-023 O—64--------14 science, accumulating along the way the techniques and skills to put our astronauts on the moon, among other developments. The annual cost would not include money for stunts and unnecessary contests. “Most of the scientists who advised me on space matters—all men of great knowledge and integrity—believed in this step-bystep program as most effective for the long pull, pointing out that the things we need to learn in space are almost as endless as space itself. Proud as we may be of our astronauts and, our Venus probe and other accomplishments in space, this racing to the Moon, unavoidably wasting vast sums and deepening our debt, is the wrong way to go about it, as I see it. Because it has been stated that the country’s prestige is at stake in this race, the average citizen may be loath to question the huge sums now being requested. But he should . . . .” (Sat. Eve. Post, 5/18/63, 1519; CR, 5/15/63, 8111)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced the 271 applicants for astronauts had been screened to 30. Of these, 10-15 would be selected in late October. (AP, Wosli. Post, 8/29/63)
Astrovoice,” device to enable voice communications with astronauts during manned spacecraft re-entry, was displayed publicly by Avco Corp. Device adds voice channel to tracking radar, which is not blacked out during re-entry ionization. Modifications to existing ground radar receivers would require only “a few hours,” Avco spokesman said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/13/63)
The astronauts making the United States’ first two-man Gemini endurance space flight next year would be wired for sound as never before—to a pair of small magnetic tape recorders registering their physical and mental reactions second by second throughout the flight. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
Soviet Cosmonaut Major Andrian Nikolayev, speaking over Radio Moscow in a “Cosmonautics Day” broadcast, called U.S. Project Mercuiy spacecraft sigma 7 an “unreliable American contraption. . . . To be frank, I would not like to find myself in his [Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s] place. You have no idea how cramped and uncomfortable this capsule looks in comparison with the cabins of our remarkable Vostok cosmic ships.” Nikolayev had seen sigma 7 during his recent visit to Sao Paulo, Brazil, where the spacecraft was on display. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/13/63)
Questioned at nasa Budget Briefing about nasa’s substituting pickaback rendezvous target for Agena stage in Project Gemini flights, Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans said: “That is definitely by the boards We did study that kind of possibility. We feel it is very important to have a program where there will be two separate launches. We will put up the Agena. . .” as target object in Gemini flights training astronauts for Project Apollo lunar orbit rendezvous, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter addressing the usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Texas, said: “The main goal of Project Mercury is to prove the design and engineering concept and the usefulness of Man in space, but the capabilities of the Mercury system can be streched only so far. I had hoped that the flight of “Aurora Seven” would be a humble beginning in the gathering of scientific data from space about . the universe in which we live. In the three short months that preceded the flight, we developed many special instruments for this purpose. . . . There is untold wealth of information to be gained as a result of space flight if we turn our talents and curiosities in that direction. “I have worked closely with scientists from many fields, but perhaps most closely with those in medicine. “There have been some wonderful intangibles I attach to working with these men. They are more than vein probers, brain pickers and pulse takers. I am continually challenged by their curiosity and insight, and fascinated by their research. I respect their intelligence and I treasure their friendships. “It is this intelligence, this special education and innate curiosity scientists of all types have in common that demands they be included in future space flights. “Perhaps one day the astronaut will be the least important person aboard as he ferries a cargo of astronomers, geologists, biologists, and flight surgeons to Mars.” (Text)
Announced that transistorized sensory system, Myoelectric, to provide astronauts with automatic control during high g was patented recently by two Sperry Gyroscope engineers. (A&AE, December 1963, 5)
On 36th anniversary of Lindbergh’s historic transatlantic flight, Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper was presented nasa Distinguished Service Medal by President Kennedy in White House ceremony. Also presented were nasa Medals for Outstanding Leadership to: G. Merritt Preston, Manager of Project Mercury Operations at nasa Launch Operations Center; Floyd L. Thompson, Director, nasa Langley Research Center; Kenneth S. Klein-knecht, Manager of Project Mercury Office, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center; Christopher C. Kraft, Director of Flight Operations Div. of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center; and Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis, commander of afmtc, Cape Canaveral, nasa Group Achievement Awards were presented to: dod Recovery Forces; and Air Force Space Systems Div. Following ceremony, Astronaut Cooper was hailed by thousands in motorcade to the Capitol, where he addressed special joint session of Congress:	. .1 don’t think I have ever been with a team that was more dedicated, or striving harder, or was more completely sold on their product than the total space effort and particularly the manned flight effort in which I am involved .... “I named my spacecraft faith 7 for three reasons: First, because I believe in God and country; second, because of the loyalty to organization, to the two organizations, actually, to which I belong; and, third because of the confidence in the entire space team .... “I think of all things that I am constantly amazed at is the public’s response to this program ... it is tremendously impressive.” The parades and activities following each flight “show tlist Americans want to express tlieir fsslin^s and tlieir confidence-that we . . . can conduct peaceful research programs; that we can conduct them openly, and under the surveillance of every man, woman and child in the entire world.” (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2; CR, 5/28/63, A3420-21)
McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of St Louis shipped the first of two Gemini mission simulators to Cape Kennedy, Fla., to provide nasa astronauts and ground crews with realistic training before actual launching of the two-man spacecraft. (AP, Kansas City Times, 12/14/63)
Eclipse of the sun visible across Canada and Northeastern U.S. nasa joined other scientists and astronomers in scientific studies during the eclipse, with emphasis on ionosphere and on sun’s corona. At Churchill Research Range, usaf oar facility located at Ft. Churchill, Can., six Nike-Apache sounding rockets equipped with instruments to measure electron density, electron temperature, and solar radiation in ultraviolet and x-ray regions were launched for nasa Goddard Space Flight Center; Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with spectrophotometric instruments to measure absolute intensity of spectral features in ultraviolet region was launched for Johns Hopkins Univ.; and Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket with instruments to measure variations in D and E layers of ionosphere was launched for usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, gsfc and afcrl scientists said preliminary results indicated collected data confirmed previous predictions of composition of the ionosphere. At White Sands Missile Range, gsfc project for eclipse was Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with coronagraph to photograph sun’s corona, ultraviolet spectrometer aimed at sun’s center, and camera to photograph Lyman-Alpha rays. At Wallops Station, gsfc project was measurement of electron and neutral particle temperatures in the ionosphere using instrumented payload launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket to 207-mi. altitude. At Pleasant Pond, Me., gsfc team photographed eclipse with specially made instrument for photographing stars and comets near the sun. DC-8 flying observatory flew north from Edmonton, Can., to meet eclipse at Great Slave Lake, following path of moon and flying above much of atmospheric-haze layer. Sponsored by Douglas Aircraft Co. and National Geographic Society with 11 other participating organizations, expedition included nasa Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nasa astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill studying various scientific details of the phenomenon. Also onboard were Sheldon Smith and Ray Torrey of nasa Ames Research Center, photographing rays of sun’s corona, (nasa Release 63-148; msc Release 63-113; Goddard News, 7/15/63, 1, 8; oar Research Review, Vol. II, No. 11; dod Release 978-63; Wallops Release 63-70; M&R, 7/29/63,24)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj. usaf) flew simulated Project Mercury launch in faith 7 at Cape Canaveral in preparation for MA-9 flight scheduled for May 14. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/63)
The Iven C. Kincheloe Award was presented by Mrs. Dorothy Kincheloe to the seven original Mercury astronauts as the highlight of the Seventh Annual Awards Banquet of The Society of Experimental Test Pilots held at Lancaster, Calif. The award is presented annually for the recognition of outstanding professional accomplishment in the conduct of flight testing. (Space News Roundup, 10/16/63) e non	r»r\n TTinito /I tbo	-f n oiIiItt	l W o 11 at»c?	I?o1oo eac* _QA	onrl UjWO	OOUO tioitvu LilCl	IUCH1 cj .	y v f	AiL/AUWkAAJ	wt/ O A	Muu
Mercury astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, accompanied by nasa astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill, would observe solar eclipse over central Canada, on July 20 from a specially equipped DC—8 jet, flying above most of atmospheric haze at 42,000 ft. During the flight Dr. Gill would point out to Astronaut Carpenter various scientific phenomena likely to be encountered in future manned space flights, and Carpenter would attempt to photograph airglow caused by zodiacal light. Scientists from nasa Ames Research Center also would be onboard to photograph rays of the sun’s corona, seeking particular detail in sun’s polar regions to trace solar magnetic fields. Flight would be sponsored by Douglas Aircraft Co., National Geographic Society, and 11 other organizations. (NTT, 6/28/63, 1; nasa Release 63-148)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Project Mercury launch crews conducted simulated MA-9 final countdown and launching. (AP, NYT, 5/11/63,4)
Addressing U.N. General Assembly, President Kennedy listed results of U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations: “We have, in recent years, agreed on a limited nuclear test-ban treaty, on an emergency communications link between our capitals, on a statement of principles for disarmament, on an increase in cultural exchange, on cooperation in outer space, on the peaceful exploration of the Antarctic, and on tempering last year’s crisis over Cuba .... “Finally, in a field where the United States and the Soviet Union have a special capacity—the field of space—there is room for new cooperation, for further joint efforts in the regulation and exploration of space. I include among these possibilities a joint expedition to the moon. “Space offers no problem of sovereignty; by resolution of this Assembly, the members of the United Nations have foresworn any claims to territorial rights in outer space or on celestial bodies, and declared that international law and the U.N. charter will apply. Why, therefore, should man’s first flight to the moon be a matter of national competition ? “Why should the United States and the Soviet Union, in preparing for such expeditions, become involved in immense duplications of research, construction and expenditure? Surely we should explore whether the scientists and astronauts of our two countries—indeed, of all the world—cannot work together in the conquest of space, sending some day in this decade to the moon, not the representatives of a single nation, but the representatives of all humanity. “All these and other new steps toward peaceful cooperation may be possible. Most of them will require on our part full consultation with our allies, for their interests are as much involved as our own, and we will never make an agreement at their expense. “Most of them will require long and careful negotiations. And most of them will require a new approach to the cold war—a desire not to ‘bury’ one’s adversary but to compete in a host of peaceful arenas, in ideas, in production, and m service to all humanity. “The contest will continue, the contest between those who envision a monolithic world and those who believe in diversity, but it should be a contest in leadership instead of destruction, a contest in achievement instead of intimidation. Speaking for the United States of America, I welcome such a contest. For we believe that truth is stronger than error, and that freedom is more enduring than coercion. And in the contest for a better life, all the world can be the winner . . . .” In addition to urging U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations, President Kennedy urged U.N. to work on five major projects, among them “a global system of satellites [which] could provide communication and weather information for all comers of the earth.” (Text, Wash. Post, 9/21/63, A10)
Presentation on Project Gemini, prepared by Drs. Stanley C. "White and George B. Smith of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and presented at Lectures in Aerospace Medicme series, sam, said that present Gemini “flight program includes the performance of manned extra-vehicular operation. The accomplishment of this maneuver requires the opening of the hatch over the astronaut who will venture outside. During this period, the cabin pressure is lost, and both astronauts are dependent upon the suit for prime environmental protection. “. . . The program as it is now planned would start out with flights of two-days duration and move forward to flights of up to two weeks duration upon successful completion of the first phase. Ultimately, the more complex 14-day duration mission, the inter-vehicular rendezvous, and the extra-vehicular manned operation goals would be achieved. The intermediate steps offer an excellent opportunity to study the man, the vehicle, the man-machine interface, and to accomplish other bioscience experiments while the program moves toward its final objectives . . . .” (Text, msc Fact Sheet 134)
At aaas meeting in Cleveland, biophysicist Dr. Harold C. Urey expressed disappointment with cutback in scientific exploration of the moon preparatory to manned lunar landings. Criticizing advocates of exploring the moon by instruments instead of men, he repeated his view that only personal observations by trained men will provide answers to scientific questions about the nature of the moon. In this connection, he deplored criteria for selecting astronauts, arguing that the emphasis should be on trained geologists rather than jet pilots. Later at press conference, Dr. Urey stated that there is no scientific reason to believe the moon is devoid of water and that “most probably” there are pools of water below the rocky surface. Dr. Urey discussed eruptions on moon near the crater Aristarchus, observed by Lowell Observatory and others. He said sightings may have been carbon in a form not found on earth. Action of water on calcium carbide beneath moon’s surface may have released acetylene gas, which was then broken down by the sunlight into a molecular form of carbon in which the atoms are paired. Such substance could exist in moon’s near-vacuum atmosphere, but on earth the atoms would join and form graphite. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/31/63, 5; Wash. Post, 12/31/63; AF/’-cts, Chic. Trib., 12/31/63) _	_	_	_
nasa announced problems with two connectors to electrical amplifier in faith 7 Mercury spacecraft had caused loss of automatic control system during MA-9 space flight, forcing Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper to re-enter from orbit with manual control. Premature lighting of .05 g panel light during 19th orbit had indicated that automatic control system would be inoperative until spacecraft descended to point of feeling .05 g. Then, in final orbit, trouble in inverter caused loss of automatic control system altogether. Postflight examination of faith 7 circuitry traced .05 g signal and inverter failure to independent electrical connectors that failed to function due to moisture; in both cases, electrical insulation of the connectors broke down. Correction of problems for future spacecraft would include tighter control of moisture and increase of insulation of electrical components, (nasa Release 63—118)
Dr. Nancy G. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics, nasa Office of Space Sciences, at Marymount College, Tarrytown-on-the-Hudson, New York, stated that: “There [is] a great deal of discussion of whether the United States should have women astronauts, and I am frequently asked for my own opinion on this subject. Frankly, it makes little difference to me. I believe that there will be women astronauts some time just as there are women airplane pilots, but there are so many other ways that women can contribute importantly to the space program that the fact there are no women astronauts as yet should not worry us . . . .” nasa had over 146 women who were classified as professional Aerospace Technologists, 77 of whom were professional mathematicians whose responsibility was the programing and operation of nasa’s highly complex computers and similar equipment, Dr. Roman said. “Moreover, I should emphasize that as badly as we need scientists and engineers, we also need educated women as well as men in other fields and no one, man or woman, should go into science simply because of its glamour . . . The space program, the country and the world need young people who have been trained to think logically and clearly regardless of the area in which they have specialized.” (Text)
Ballute drag balloon was being built by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for use in Gemini manned spacecraft, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Ballute would be used as part of Gemini ejection-seat-escape system, planned means of emergency escape for altitudes below 70,000 ft. The inflatable rubberized fabric structure would stabilize and slow the astronauts’ fall until conventional parachutes could be deployed at lower altitudes. ( msc Release 63-67)
nasa announced delay from a previously planned April launching date of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 orbital space flight, because of decision to rewire Mercury-Atlas flight control system. Rescheduled date of flight was not given, but nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Chief of Manned Flight Operations, Walter C. Williams, estimated delay would be at least three weeks—putting launch date no earlier than mid-May. (msc Release 63-26; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/13/63)	*
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $30,500 contract to Whirlpool Corp. for design and development of feeding system for four astronauts for long periods of time, first hardware fabrication for space station simulation facility. (M&R, 9/9/63, 9)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said in Palo Alto, Calif., press conference: “People who do the spectacular things in space are few—they owe their success to many, many people behind the scenes who are not given proper recognition—scientists, technicians, industrial workers—people in all walks of life .. ..” (Palo Alto Times, 1/5/63)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, director of President Kennedy’s Office of Science and Technology, was asked in Voice of America interview whether an attempt to land astronauts on Mars in 1971 or 1973 “could be considered.” Dr. Wiesner replied: “I think it could be considered, but I don’t think it would be done. I think it is a very major effort, even considerably larger than the moon effort. We have made estimates of a Mars program cost and a round number like one hundred billion dollars seems to be a reasonable figure. It is obviously technically possible, [but] I doubt whether one could do it in the time period between now and 1970 without just an unbelievable crash program. I think that before the century is out we will probably have done just that, and it would be interesting to do, but I don’t believe anyone can deny the vital reason for undertaking the program of the kind you are talking about.” (Transcript)
Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D.-W. Va.), addressing Alumni of Concord college, said: “Our marvelous technological developments, our flights into outer space, have demonstrated that there is virtually no limit to the development of the human mind. Today the moon is within range, tomorrow the stars—after that, who knows? Human knowledge is a pyramid whose topmost point stretches into infinity .... “Who develops the mind of the astronaut, and his co-workers? That is the job of the teacher, of education. That pyramid of knowledge .... rests upon a base of solid, fundamental learning which makes all of our splendid achievements possible . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/6/63, A3655-56)
On anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Mercury Project Manager at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said: “Three U.S. Astronauts have accumulated 1,144.51 minutes in orbital space flights. The flights of Glenn, Carpenter and Schirra have confirmed that man can perform in a space environment and that he can enhance the mission success and flight safety by virtue of his flexibility and his capability to exercise judgment to solve operational problems. “The flights have also confirmed that the approach and philosophy followed in the design of the Mercury spacecraft was technically sound. Each of these flights has elevated our confidence level in the spacecraft systems and has demonstrated that, although not a simple task, the resources of the United States— that is, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, private industry and other elements—can be unified toward a common end with unparalleled cooperation to accomplish a national objective on a minimum time schedule. “All these benefits derived from the Mercury Project, are directly applicable to future manned space flight programs and ____: j____j *. j-x: ________1_;_i_ x_ i______xu _ t-: _ j a n~ pl UVIUO a &U11U. AUUIlU.U'blUll Ull WIUCU UA	1116 AJR5II11111 clilU ApVllO programs.” (msc Release 63-30)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received 1962 Gold Medal of French Association Pour l’Etude et la Recherche Astronautique. Colonel Glenn accepted the award “on behalf of myself and the thousands of persons here and abroad who have made these space flights possible.” {Av. Wk., 8/12/63,109)
Text of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on legal principles of space exploration was released at the U.N. in New York. The document would be brought before the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on Nov. 22. Even if approved, the statement of principles would not be legally binding on U.N. members. The plan was for two treaties based on the principles to be submitted to member nations early in 1964. The treaties would cover (1) rescue and return of astronauts and space vehicles, and (2) liability for death, injury, or damage caused on earth by space vehicles. (Wash. Post, 11/22/63; Text, NYT, 11/22/63, 18)
Radio Moscow wished Astronaut Cooper good luck on his space flight and said: “The Soviet people, who were pioneers in space, are hoping that this scientific experiment works out successfully. We sincerely hope that its results will serve the development of peaceful cooperation and above all cooperation between the Soviet Union and the United States in the study of the laws of the universe.” (upi, Wash. Post, 5/16/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced recruitment of astronauts had been broadened in current recruitment call for volunteers: change in criteria for selection, eliminating need for test pilot school certificate; and soliciting letters of recommendation from industries, professional groups, military services, and other organizations throughout the country, (msc Release 63-102)
Advertising executive Hany A. Batten, representing nine nasa astronauts, said that withdrawal of Field Enterprises Education Corp. contract offer for astronauts’ personal stories did not mean nasa disapproved this type contract. Rather, he said nasa believed astronauts should conclude such a contract to protect their own and their families’ privacy. He predicted astronauts would reach story-contract agreement with some other firm. (AP, Houston Post, 7/10/63)
The lunar landing research facility was nearing completion at Langley Research Center. A gantry structure 400 ft. long and 250 ft. high with a 50 ft. clearance would suspend a model of the Lunar Landing Module (lem), sustaining % of the model’s weight to simulate the % lunar gravity and enable astronauts to practice lunar landings. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,83)
The concensus of a number of visual experts consulted by nasa is that Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper did in fact see houses, roads, and vehicles from his orbiting faith 7 capsule. Dr. John A. O’Keefe of gsfc dismissed the theory that the atmosphere had acted as a magnifier of the objects. Maximum atmospheric magnification would be 1.00002, or a rise of 8.5 ft. Normal human visual acuity is normally considered to be one minute of arc, but under good combinations of illumination and contrast objects of minute of arc or even smaller can be seen. From 100 miles altitude, this would work out at 30 ft. on the ground. Line or ribbon objects can be seen much more easily, down to one-sixth or less the diameter of circular objects. (M&R, 10/14/63, 14)
Former President Eisenhower in Rochester, N.Y., hailed Astronaut
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, speaking before aerospace medicine conference at sam, San Antonio, said that all three U.S. astronauts who had made orbital space flights had found state of weightlessness presented no problems; rather, it tended to become “addictive.” (upi, Wash. Post, 2/5/63, A 4)
New York City honored Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper with tickertape parade. At city luncheon honoring Major Cooper, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and the entire Project Mercury team, Mayor Robert Wagner presented Major Cooper and Mr. Webb with city’s Medal of Honor and scroll acclaiming MA-9 space flight. Mayor Wagner said: “. . . It is remarkable how such a feat not only unites our own country in prideful pleasure, but also gives satisfaction to the rest of the world—to friend and foe alike. This is not man against man, but man against the elements, man against the forces of nature, man armed with the power of knowledge . . . .” {NYT, 5/23/63; CR, 5/29/63, A3487)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Cook Technological Center Div. of Cook Electric Co. had completed first of new biomedical tape recorders for use in first two-man Project Gemini space flight. Each recorder would receive and record continuously, for 30 hours, six kinds of simultaneous biomedical signals from sensors within astronaut’s spacesuit. Post-flight play-back of the tapes would provide continuous analysis of astronauts’ physical and mental endurance in long periods of space flight, a major goal of Project Gemini, (msc Release 63-78)
nasa announced at msc the selection of 14 astronauts for the Gemini and Apollo projects, bringing the total number of NASA astronauts to 30. New astronauts were: Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt. William A. Anders, Capt. Charles A. Bassett II, Capt. Michael Collins, Capt. Donn F. Eisele, Capt. Theodore C. Freeman, and Capt. David R. Scott, all usaf; Lt. Alan L. Bean, Lt. Eugene A. Ceman, Lt. Roger B. Chaffee, Lt. Cdr. Richard F. Gordon, Jr., all usn; Capt. Clifton C. Williams, Jr., usmc ; and R. Walter Cunningham and Russell L. Schweickart, civilians. nasa announced another contingent of astronauts would be named in the fall of 1965. (NYT, 10/19/63,9)
Brig. Gen. Charles H. Roadman (usaf) , nasa Director of Aerospace Medicine, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics' Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. Replying to press criticism of nasa plans to use pure oxygen in Project Gemini spacecraft, General Roadman said: “. . . in our investigations to date we have no physiological information that would permit us to say that 100% oxygen from a physiological standpoint is contraindicated in a two-week mission. This is not to say that there are not many physiologists who would like more information concerning 100% oxygen over a time period, which we thoroughly support . . . .” (Transcript) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in keynote address May 6, cited recommendation by Iowa Summer Study that one or more scientists be included in Project Apollo lunar flights: “To those who have the responsibility for success in reaching the moon, it has appeared that the nature of the Apollo effort requires the training of astronauts who have substantial experience as test pilots in high speed jet aircraft, and to the extent possible engineering training as well. “Meanwhile, it is apparent that the view of the scientists that trained scientific personnel should participate is valid, and that at the earliest appropriate stage in the program scientists will be included on Apollo missions. So far as we can now tell we are obligated to utilize astronauts with the maximum of test-flight experience and highly conditioned reflexes on the first flight of the most difficult of all undertakings. Should training and experience in intermediate flights indicate otherwise we will, of course, take this into consideration in determining the stage of development in manned space flight at which a scientist-astronaut will directly participate. “In its effort to insure maximum scientific benefit from the manned space flight program nasa is doing several things: “First, manned space flights are being used to take scientific measurements in order that they will provide results beyond crew training and technological experience. “Second, efforts have already begun to provide scientific training for the present group of astronauts including geological field trips to enhance their capacity for scientific observation. “Third, a manned space science working group has been established [within nasa] .... This group is already at work in the planning of a program for training scientists for space flight . . . .’’ (Text) Dr. David H. Stoddard, Assistant Director of Medical Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed human factors in manned space flight and said “we are confident that the biomedical needs of our currently approved manned space flight program can be met from within the scope of our existing technology.” (Text) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, reviewed U.S. manned space flight program. Describing Project Gemini, he said:	. . the Gemini is more than an experimental spacecraft. At the end of its scheduled developmental flight program, it will be available for missions ranging from scientific and engineering experiments to the ferrying of astronauts to and from a permanent space laboratory. The end goal of Gemini is, therefore, an operational spacecraft which can be launched by relatively small boosters. We expect Gemini to be a useful space vehicle for several years .... The Gemini spacecraft will reach operational status by 1966 . . . .” (Text)	. Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn), Director of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said: “The nation’s program to achieve pre-eminence in space and to insure that, the United States occupies first place among the nations of this world in science, in technology and in conquest of space is critically dependent on the power of the rocket. “You may have heard much about the ‘booster gap’ and the effect this situation has had on our position vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union started well ahead of us in the development of large rockets, so necessary for manned flight. The Soviets have been ahead of us, and are still ahead of us in their ability to launch reliably large masses to Earth orbit. “However, with the acceleration of our own progress and by the establishment of our program on a sound engineering basis we can, we believe, surpass the Soviets in time and clearly establish and demonstrate United States pre-eminence in manned space flight. . . .” (Text) Reviewing nasa space program, Director of nasa Office of Programs D. D. Wyatt said: “In its broadest context the nasa program can be classified into three complementary parts. First, we have those phases of the program which are aimed at the exploration of the very nature of space .... “The second major element of our program is aimed at the earliest practical utilization of space for the benefit of mankind .... “Complementing our programs to understand and define space is a third major program element aimed at developing and improving the highly complex technologies which will enhance our future capabilities in space . . . .” (Text) John E. Naugle, Director of nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, said: “. . . the scientific program which we have in nasa is a logical extension of the research work which has been underway in laboratories on the earth since the time of Galileo. Just as astronomers once carried their telescopes to the top of a mountain to see better, now we carry telescopes beyond the earth on rockets and satellites. By doing this we see entirely new phenomena and enable scientists to broaden their studies in certain scientific disicplines . . . .” He then discussed scientific results from each of the six scientific satellites launched by nasa since beginning of 1962 (oso i, explorer xiv, explorer xv, alouette i, ariel, and explorer xvii).	(Text) nasa Director of International Programs Arnold W. Frutkin said in May 7 address delivered by J. H. Barnes, nasa Chief of Cooperative Programs, Office of International Programs: “What other nations are doing in space and in particular, what they are doing together, is in fact small when compared with the resources going directly into national programs in the US and the ussr. Yet, what has been accomplished provides substantial evidence of the feasibility, the benefits, and the promise of joint action by the nations in this new field . . . .” (Text) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, described scientific spacecraft now under development, and said: “We must continually assess our progress .... The flight performance of our spacecraft has been increasing dramatically .... The useful life of unmanned spacecraft launched in 1962 has exceed six months and is still rising because most of those intended for long life are still operating successfully. “Our progress with launch vehicles has been equally gratifying. In 1962, 82% of all major nasa launchings were successful. This performance has been paced by the remarkable Thor-Delta which has successfully launched 16 out of 17 spacecraft. In addition, the huge Saturn has scored 4 out of 4 perfect flights. During this time period, both the Thor-Delta and the Scout payloads were increased over 60% at no increase in their $2.5 million and $1 million price tags. These dramatic increases in performance, life, and reliability of spacecraft and launch vehicles represent by far the most effective way to achieve economy in the space program . . . .” (Text) nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said: “There are four principal areas where a continuing and driving program of advanced research is required if this nation is to achieve pre-eminence in aeronautical and space activities in the decades to come. These are energy conversion and propulsion; materials and structures; control, guidance and communications; and space sciences and the environment of space.” (Text) Louis B. C. Fong, Director of nasa Office of Technology Utilization, said on May 8 that the “basic objectives of the [nasa] Technology Utilization Program are:
Proposal by nbc to television industry to televise Astronaut Gordon Cooper’s Mercury flight MA-9 in color would not be adopted, Executive Vice President of nbc News William R. MeAndrew acknowledged. Proposal had been rejected, science reporter William Hines said, in February by officials of abc and cbs networks, but nasa had been quietly trying to persuade them to accept the proposal. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
Inter-Parliamentary Union’s seven-nation space subcommittee, meeting in Geneva, approved draft treaty on space law. Treaty would provide that outer space be subject to international law, including U.N. Charter, and that astronauts forced to land in foreign countries would be granted diplomatic immunity. Treaty would be presented to plenary meeting of ipu’s 60-member nations in Lausanne, Switzerland, April 15-21. (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 3/3/63)
Tass announced postage stamp commemorating vostok v space flight had been issued by Soviet Ministry or Communications. (Reuters, NTT, 6/18/63,10) Walter C. Williams, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Associate Director and Project Mercury Operations Director, summarized Project Mercury, emphasizing that primary lesson taught by the manned space flights was value of attention to detail. Discussing biomedical results, he said orthostatic hypotension first noted in Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (MA—8, six orbits) was more pronounced in Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (MA-9, 22 orbits). Lowered blood pressure was believed to be cause of Cooper’s temporary dizziness when he emerged from Mercury spacecraft: “The effects seem to be post-flight, and continued from 18 to 24 hours.” {Av. Wk., 7/1/63, 71) Astronauts Walter M. Shirra, Jr., and L. Gordon Cooper received the aiaa Astronautics Award. (Av. Wk., 7/1/63, 31) Rombus (Reusable Orbital Module—Booster and Utility Shuttle) concept described June 18 by Philip Bono, Chief Advance Project Engineer of Future Space Systems, Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. Single-stage manned space cargo carrier, capable of orbiting many hundreds of tons and reusable at least 20 times, could be developed by late 1970’s. Eight strapped-on liquid-propellant tanks would be jettisoned and parachuted to earth after providing initial boost; Rombus would be recovered from orbital mission with use of parachutes, main engine retro-thrust, and extended landing legs. Bono’s paper was based on study performed for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and was one of many large vehicle concepts under study by industry and government. ( dac Release 63-122) Speaking on June 19, Dr. Stanley Deutsch, Chief of Systems Research and Analysis in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, declared Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper could not have sighted houses, boat, and train during his MA-9 orbital space flight “because of the visual angle.” Dr. Deutsch speculated the visual impressions might have involved hallucinations or transfer of stored impressions. “We need a great deal of study in the area of perception [in the weightless condition].” Interviewed at meeting, Astronaut Cooper said: “I’m not changing my mind one bit, I know what I saw.” (Av. Wk. 7/1/63, 31)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s faith 7 Mercury spacecraft was clearly visible to unaided eye to observers in Johannesburg, South Africa, (upi, NYT, 5/16/63, 19)
Faith 7” Mercury spacecraft was installed on Atlas booster at Cape Canaveral, in preparation for Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 flight, (upi, NYT, 4/23/63)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and nasa cosponsored second Manned Space Flight Meeting, in Dallas, Tex. (Advance Program) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter described flight experiences in Project Mercury at the aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting, Dallas, and concluded: “I think this philosophy sums up our attitude toward manned space flight. It is the increasing importance of man in the system that is going to characterize our space flights of the future. We will need skilled pilots to fly these missions, and we are in the process of developing those skills now. “The era of manned space flight is just beginning, however, and Project Mercury is only the first step. We are convinced that it has been a very profitable step and that succeeding programs in manned space flight will continue to expand our knowledge of the universe, hopefully for the benefit of all mankind.” (Text)
J. A. MacTaggart, managing director of Niagara Falls, Ontario, wax museum, said wax image of Astronaut John Glenn was not on display because of “astronomical” $3,000 it would cost to purchase space suit from American manufacturer. Wax figure of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was on display, Soviet Government having supplied copy of his space suit after request through British Aeronautical Board. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63)
In Washington ceremony, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., tjsmc) presented U.S. flag he carried during orbital space flight in friendship 7 to Marine Corps Assistant Commandant Lt. Gen. Charles H. Hayes. Flag would be placed in Marine Corps Museum. (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/28/63, 8)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp., publishing subsidiary of Marshall Field, was reported as having offered nasa astronauts a multimillion-dollar contract for their personal stories. Spokesman for Field Enterprises said proposition was under discussion with C. Leo DeOrsey, Washington lawyer representing original seven Mercury astronauts, and Harry A. Batten, Philadelphia advertising man representing nine Gemini-Apollo astronauts. {NYT [Western Ed.], 2/9/63)	...	.
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper arrived in home town of Shawnee, Okla., for weekend celebrations in his honor, his first visit there since Project Mercury MA-9 space flight (May 15-16). (AP, Wash. Post, 6/29/63)	...	.
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Life Magazine announced signing of four-year contracts with 16 nasa astronauts for their personal stories; Field Enterprises acquired newspaper syndication and book rights, Life, the magazine rights. (AP, NYT, 9/18/63,15)
At regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “Did the astronauts raise with you . . . their desire for another Mercury flight? Do you have any opinion yourself, tentative or otherwise, as to the desirability of another Mercury flight?” President Kennedy replied: “I think they feel that it’s worthwhile. I haven’t discussed it with Mr. Webb, nasa should make the judgment and will make the judgment, and I would not intervene. But they do feel that a flight is useful and that the experience of Major Cooper has indicated that the time between the last Gemini flight as scheduled—the Mercury flight and the new Gemini flight, which is a period of almost 18 months—they feel may represent a gap which could be filled very usefully by another Mercury flight. “This will be a matter which I think they’re going to be talking about this week with Mr. Webb and which I will discuss with him next week. But the final judgment must be nasa’s.” (Transcript, NYT, 5/23/63,18)
Under questioning by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed the future space programs to follow the manned lunar landing program: “There are three principal candidates for what might be called the next program. These are the manned orbital laboratory; the further exploration of the moon; and finally, man’s interplanetary travel. “One difficulty is the definition, mercury is a one-man orbital laboratory; gemini is a two-man orbital laboratory; apollo is a three-man orbital laboratory; and all will stay up for the duration of the trip to the moon. “If you are going further, you come to a question, Do you want something for 3 men, 6 men, 12 men, or 20 men ? “One of our problems is to define the requirements and both the Department of Defense and ourselves are making studies. We have agreed there should be only one project for the time being because this will be a 2 or 3 billion project. We have agreed we will not proceed unilaterally. A decision, of course, has to be made as to what, if anything, in the 1965 budget will be in this field or another .... “As to the further exploration of the moon, the definition is a very variable one. You might leave an astronaut out and, figuratively speaking, take camping equipment along for a few days. Or you might convert a whole lunar bug to a freight carrier to extend the length of stay. You can go from that to a lunar base where you try to build a station, as m the Antarctic, that man can occupy for some time .... “All of these things run into the billions of dollars and certainly Congress will be involved in it. “There are people who favor one or another of these projects. I personally favor the manned orbital laboratory as being the next project. What we find on the Moon may change our minds on this, but from present knowledge I feel priority should go to a manned orbital laboratory. Some of this equipment has been in space for a period of a year or more. That is the length of a trip to Mars or Venus and back. “As you know, the matter of making major decisions of this kind in Government is a complicated one and I cannot say at this time when the hardware will be recommended by the administration. One reason for saying the manned orbital laboratory has priority is the possible military application.” (Hearings . . . Independent Offices Appropriations for FT 1964, Part 3,242-243)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., officially opened Chicago and Midwest Space Month with his televised dinner address in the Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago. Dinner marked the opening of “America in Space” exhibit in the museum, largest space display ever made available by nasa in the midwest. Space Month activities would be climaxed by third national conference on the peaceful uses of space in Chicago, May 1-9. {Chicago Trib., 4/9/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced eight nasa astronauts were working with manned space flight simulator at LingTemcoVought, Dallas, evaluating manual control and instrument display should the Apollo lunar excursion module’s primary guidance system fail during descent to the moon, (msc Release 63-81)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced assignment of areas of specialization for nasa astronauts. Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, flight MA-9 pilot, and Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., flight MA-9 back-up pilot, would be responsible for pilot phases of Project Mercuiy; Maj. Virgil I. Grissom’s area of specialization would be Project Gemini; Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., would concentrate on Project Apollo; LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter’s duties would cover lunar excursion training; Cdr. Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would be responsible for Gemini and Apollo operations and training. As Coordinator for Astronaut Activities for msc, Maj. Donald K. Slayton would maintain overall supervision of astronaut duties. Specialty areas of the 9 new flight-crew personnel: trainers and simulators, Neil A. Armstrong; boosters, Maj. Frank Borman; cockpit layout and systems integration, Lt. Charles Conrad, Jr.; recovery systems, LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr.; guidance and navigation, Capt. James A. McDivitt; electrical, sequential, and mission planning, Elliott M. See, Jr.; communications, instrumentation, and range integration, Capt. Thomas E. Stafford; flight control systems, Edward H. White II; environmental control systems, personal and survival equipment, LCdr. John W. Young, (msc Release 63-11; M&R, 2/4/63, 36)
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on The Peaceful Uses of Outer Space convened in Geneva. {NYT, 5/3/63) Mercury spacecraft faith 7, with Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) as pilot, lifted off Pad 14, Cape Canaveral, at 8:04 a.m. est. Atlas launch vehicle placed spacecraft in initial orbit of 166-mi, apogee, 100-mi. perigee, 88.7-min. period, 32.5° inclination to equator, 17,544-mph speed. Be-sides participation in flight procedures, astronaut ate, slept, and conducted scientific experiments. Because automatic control system (acs) failed during 19th orbit, spacecraft was oriented manually during 22nd orbit, retrorockets were fired manually, and re-entry phase was conducted without acs. faith 7 landed two miles from U.S.S. Kearsarge near Midway Island in Pacific. Value of trained pilot’s presence in spacecraft was underscored by successful mission achievement despite acs failure. MA-9 provided biomedical data confirming man can survive and function during prolonged space flight with no ill effects. Experiments during flight included: ejecting from spacecraft in third orbit a 10-lb. flashing-beacon sphere (testing visibility of objects in space in preparation for future rendezvous maneuvers), which Cooper sighted during fifth and sixth orbits; photographs of zodiacal light nighttime airglow layer; horizon definition experiment, using colored filters in 70-mm. camera; radiation measurement experiment, using Geiger counters mounted on spacecraft exterior and detectors inside spacecraft and inside astronaut’s space suit; tethered balloon experiment (to measure atmospheric drag) which Cooper attempted in sixth orbit but balloon did not deploy; infrared photography for meteorological purposes; television photography, which achieved historic “first” in U.S. manned space flight with direct transmission of TV pictures to tracking stations; cabin environmental temperature study, another historic “first” with cabin coolant valve and fan turned off from orbit #5 until about two hours before re-entry, astronaut relying on space suit for cooling while cabin temperature stabilized at around 96° F; HF antenna tests, another “first”, involving transmissions with antenna horizontally polarized and vertically polarized; ground light experiment, with astronaut observing three-million-candlepower xenon light at Bloemfontein, Republic of South Africa; window attenuation experiment, with astronaut viewing calibrated standard light source and stars to evaluate transmission of light through spacecraft window; and white paint patch measurements, investigating changes in paint pigments during re-entry heating. Cooper’s historic flight covered estimated 593,885 mi. in 34 hrs. 20 min. Nearly 36 years before, Charles Lindbergh’s historic flight from New York to Paris covered 3,610 mi. in 33 hrs. 30 min. (nasa MA-9 Press Kit; NYT, 5/15/63; NYT, 5/16/63; NYT, 5/17/63; Press Conf. Transcript, NYT, 5/20/63; Aerospace Yearbook, I960)
President Kennedy telephoned Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper aboard carrier Kearsarge, saying, “I just want to congratulate you. That was a great flight .... We are very proud of you.” (upi, NYT, 5/17/63,1)
Aetna Life Insurance Co. issued first individual life insurance policies to seven Project Mercury astronauts, astronauts’ legal adviser C. Leo DeOrsey announced in Washington. (Goodman, Wash. Post, 5/9/63)	_
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center had begun training nasa’s 16 astronauts in techniques of water and land parachute landings. In preparation for safe parachute landings in low-altitude abort during Project Gemini launching, astronauts were towed to heights of 400 ft. suspended under pre-inflated canopy, then cut loose for free descent to earth. Towing was by power boat for water descents and truck for land descents, (msc Release 63-151)
In Wells College (Aurora, N.Y.) commencement address, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes said: “How about women in space ? The answer is yes, but not immediately. At the moment, however, all of the qualified pilots are men. “In a larger sense, of course, women are already in space. The astronaut does not fly alone. He relies on the thousands of people in his supporting team on the ground. These include women as well as men. On the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, there are about 150 women scientists and engineers. Many more are employed by the contractors throughout the country who perform the bulk of our work. In this rapidly growing program, there are many interesting career opportunities for those of you who complete the necessary preparation . . . .” (Text) Jwne 3: Students in Washington, D.C., area began helping Weather Bureau in Project Skywatch—drawing cloud formations, recording wind speed and direction, temperature and relative humidity and precipitation, in project to identify specific cloud formations photographed by Tiros meteorological satellites. About 50 students were participating in project. (Commerce Dept. Release WB-63-6)
Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., awarded $9.5-million contract to develop two Apollo mission simulators for training astronauts at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and Cape Canaveral. Contract was awarded by North American Aviation, Inc., prime Apollo spacecraft contractors. {Av. Wk:., 5/6/63,25)
Informed nasa sources were quoted as saying Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s Mercury flight MA-9 would be delayed about a week from the May 7 planning date because of technical problems in the Atlas booster. Also revealed was name Astronaut Cooper selected for his Mercury spacecraft—“Faith 7,” (rrpi, Wash. Post, 4/19/63)
Ford Motor Co.’s Aeronutromc Div. was selected by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center to investigate requirement for Mars excursion module (mem)—unit designed to ferry astronauts between orbiting spacecraft and surface of Mars, (msc Release 63-98)
Mrs. Sara Bartholomae disclosed plans for $1 million Mercury Space Capsule Chapel near Los Angeles in tribute to Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/8/63)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, accompanied by nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, and msc Deputy Director for Flight Operations Walter C. Williams, held press conference at Cape Canaveral carried on nation-wide TV. Major Cooper presented orbit-by-orbit account of his MA-9 space flight. Asked about possibility of MA-10 flight, Dr. Seamans said: “It is quite unlikely that we will have another Mercury flight,” but final decision on MA-10 would be made “within a week or so.” (NYT, 5/20/63, 24; New York Herald Trib., 5/20/63)
nasa was tentatively planning to extend one-day MA-9 flight of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) from 18 to 22 orbits (27 to 34 hours), John Finney of New York Times reported. Scheduled for April 1963, MA-9 would be last flight in Project Mercury. (NYT Co., Atlanta Constitution, 1/3/63)
Perth, Australia, was ablaze with Christmas lights far into the night. Perth was celebrating its new tradition as “City of Lights” begun Feb. 20,1962, when its lights were a beacon for Astronaut John H. Glenn’s orbital Mercury space flight. (Lukas, NYT, 12/28/63,_6) _	_	__
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke before the Society of Experimental Test Pilots in Washington: “. . . it occurs to me that perhaps some of our best known astronauts took greater risks, with less thoroughly tested equipment, when they were, flying aircraft in the atmosphere than when they went into space .... I simply want to mention that our astronauts, just as all test pilots, had done many courageous things before the Space Age descended upon us and too few were recognized as heroes for those feats.” (Text)
Gemini astronauts would learn how to “apprehend” another vehicle traveling in space on a special trainer in a darkened hangar-high structure now being erected at Manned Spacecraft Center’s Clear Lake home, (msc Space News Roundup, 1/8/64)
