Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and aiaa Board Member, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial: “For some years past, it has been asked whether electric propulsion meets a ‘requirement’ in our space program. It may be well to remember that the airplane, the atomic submarine, the radio, and the first satellite were not developed in fulfillment of ‘requirements.’ An artificial atmosphere is certainly a requirement for an astronaut in space, and must Be developed for that reason. But the astronaut does not go into space because it is his requirement, but because our country has decided to excel in the exploration of outer space with the most appropriate means. Electric propulsion promises to be a very appropriate method of vastly expanding our exploration capability in space beyond that of chemical and nuclear systems. For that reason, its development should be pursued with high priority and great vigor.” (A&A, 8/64, 14—15)
A study at Northrop Space Laboratories was reported as indicating that a fluid-filled “bladder” might offer the best form of protection to astronauts during impact acceleration. Using guinea pigs, the investigators found that the fluid-filled garment seemed to offer the same advantages in minimizing internal organ displacement as did water immersion, but without the risk of generating high hydraulic pressure pulses. (M&R, 12/21/64,21)
Astronaut Russell Schweickart removed spacesuit at NASA Ames Research Center, where he had undergone three rides on centrifuge. Schweickart, who had celebrated his 29th birthday in the spacesuit, had worn it constantly since Oct. 19. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/27/64)
22,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine for Project Apollo service module, to return Apollo astronauts from the moon, was test-fired twice at Las Cruces, N. Mex. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/16/64)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in press conference preceding address at Texas a&m Univ. that a geologist would be in crew of second Apollo lunar landing mission. Geologists probably would be sought when NASA recruited astronaut trainees for subsequent Apollo lunar flights. In his address, Dr. von Braun advised that U.S. must protect itself from any hostile force that attempts to “use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us.” (Houston Post, 2/15/64; Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, talked and dined with Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., at the home of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of MSC, in Houston. Afterwards, Col. Glenn told an interviewer: “We talked about a number of different areas in which I could work. I want a part-time job, a consulting job.” (NYT, 7/12/64)
Three NASA astronauts began flights in T-33 trainer jets simulating approaches to the lunar surface. Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt. David R. Scott, and Elliott M. See, Jr., sent their planes into dives from altitudes of about 15,000 ft. toward the large, rugged lava flow in southern Idaho; cameras in the planes recorded the,.approaches, and the astronauts made their own observations of the surface. Planes were leveled out at about 3,000-ft. altitude. (Houston Post, 9/3/64)
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
Jet-propelled back-pack, part of a Modular Maneuvering Unit (mmu) for Gemini astronauts, was described by AFSC, whose Aero Propulsion Laboratory conceived the device. The unit would enable astronauts to fly outside their Gemini spacecraft for up to an hour and travel as far as 1,000 “ft. from the spacecraft, although the first flight would be made with astronaut on a 200-ft. tether to send the astronaut forward, backward, up, and down. In addition to the back-pack, mmu consisted of a chest-pack, furnished by NASA, which the astronaut would use when leaving and entering the spacecraft, before donning and after discarding the back-pack. First flight test of the unit on Gemini mission was planned for mid-1965. (afsc Release 47-22—113; MSC Roundup, 1/16/64,5)	_
NASA and dod announced Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Lt. Cdr., usn) would participate in USN Project Sea Lab I off coast of Bermuda in July. The submerged lab would collect and evaluate scientific data on physiological and psychological reactions to the undersea environment. (nasa Release 64-112; dod Release 383-64)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
15 NASA astronauts began three days and two nights of jungle survival training in the Panama Canal Zone, under supervision of the usaf Tropic Survival School, (msc Roundup, 6/24/64, 8)
At meeting in Geneva, U.S. delegation to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Legal Subcommittee submitted to the Subcommittee drafts of two treaties. One draft treaty dealt with aid to astronauts in distress, calling for nations to take “all possible steps to assist or rescue promptly the personnel of spacecraft” having difficulty or making emergency landings. Astronauts making emergency landings would be returned to their own country “promptly and safely,” and any spaceship or its parts falling to earth would be returned to country of ownership at the country’s request. The second treaty, dealing with liability for damage caused by spacecraft, would establish a “simple and expeditious procedure to provide financial protection against damage.” (nyt, 3/10/64, 8)
Radiation hazards to Project Apollo astronauts bound for the moon were described at American Medical Association conference by Dr. Hermann J. Schaefer, scientist at U.S. Naval School of Aviation Medicine. Dr. Schaefer predicted that in 1969 proton streams from the sun could range from deadly “downpour” to very light “shower.” He calculated chance of lethal-dosage proton stream was three in 10,000; chance of moderate but incapacitating “rain” would be one in 1,000; and chance of light “shower” would be one in 100. Dr. Schaefer emphasized his forecast was based on predictable solar behavior and that the weather of the sun, like that of the earth, could be unpredictable. (Justice, Houston Post, 6/23/64)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD i spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said voskhod i was first of a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard voskhod I, revealed he had made astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aeronavigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously on hoard the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed voskhod i’s attitude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described voskhod i’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the spacecraft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after parachutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of general discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/ 22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/22/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/64) • Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I. Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the moon “may be somewhat commonplace. . . . The moon will also be serving as an important scientific station for radio astronomers . . . [and] many other kinds of scientists. . . . We may be maintaining sizable installations on the moon. . . . “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . . In space stations orbiting above the earth we shall likely be fabricating space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one continent to another. . . . “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory expeditions to the outermost reaches. We will be considering the extension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am somewhat doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man. “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established outposts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I doubt that this will take place on the moon, unless the moon turns out to contain resources of great economic value to us here on earth. The resources required for such extensive exploration of Mars will require cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not, likely to be accomplished. . . .” (Text)
World Book Encyclopedia announced 14 new NASA astronauts had been added to the 16 astronauts with four-year contracts for newspaper distribution rights to their life stories. World Book—a unit of Field Enterprises Educational Corp.—also said the astronauts had signed separate contracts with Life magazine. (AP, NYT, 3/28/64, 20)
In Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut to orbit the earth, announced that he would he a candidate for the Ohio Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator in the May 5 primary. He added that he was retiring from the U.S. Marine Corps after 22 years of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is certainly a challenge and a high calling.” Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It could very well he wishful thinking on my part to train for another six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old. “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best opportunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other research and development activities. These are areas with which I am well acquainted. . . .” (AP, Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/64, Al; Finney, NYT, 1/17/64,17)
John H. Boynton of MSC discussed pilot’s role in Mercury space flight systems failures, in paper to aiaa first annual meeting. He summarized: “For the two unmanned missions, MA-4 and MA-5, control system difficulties made impossible the successful completion of a three-pass orbital flight, which was the design mission for the Mercury spacecraft. But in both cases, the presence of a pilot and the capability to control the spacecraft attitudes manually would have made die three-pass mission possible. This fact was demonstrated in the MA—6 mission in which a similar malfunction occurred but in which the astronaut completed the flight by using his manual control modes. . . . “For the MA-6 mission, . . . the flight would undoubtedly have been terminated before the planned time because of an excessive rate of fuel consumption in the automatic control mode. In the successful MA—7 flight, manual initiation of the retrorocket-ignition sequence prevented the horizon scanner malfunction from significantly delaying this critical event. Although an error in yaw angle caused the spacecraft to land somewhat beyond the planned landing area, this error would have undoubtedly been much greater had the pilot not been present. The six-pass MA—8 mission was successful, although a problem of an abnormal increase in suit temperature could have terminated the flight early had no means been available for reducing this temperature. The pilot, however, was able to correct this situation by manual adjustment of his coolant flow valve. Short circuits in the automatic control circuitry during the MA-9 flight made it essential for the pilot to control the spacecraft manually during retrofire and reentry.” (Text)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell* Jr., and Maj. Thomas P. Stafford practiced in the Gulf of Mexico developing a training technique for escaping from Gemini spacecraft, both with and without flotation collar, (msc Release)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said at dedication of Aerojet General’s Dade County (Fla.) plant: “Leadership in propulsion is . . . synonymous with leadership in space—for both military and non-military purposes. We cannot afford to relax in this area. There is no room for complacency, only room for urgency. . . . “In supporting the thesis that there is real danger from complacency, I list the following points: “1. The USSR is having some economic difficulties, particularly in agriculture. Yet, their space program is expanding. “2. The USSR is far ahead of the United States in manned flight experience. Even their female cosmonaut has flown more orbits than all of our astronauts combined. “3. The USSR has flown their heavier Vostok spacecraft in manned and unmanned flights some 45 times as many earth orbits as we have flown our much smaller Mercury. “4. Practically all of the competences developed for space could be used for aggression as well as for peaceful purposes. “Please do not misunderstand what I am saying. We have made great strides, particularly in the past three years. We are actually ahead of the Soviets in some applications of space, such as communications and meteorology. We are, however, not yet ahead overall. But, our rate of progress is very impressive. “Probably what I am warning about more than anything else is the danger that we might slow down our rate of progress—that we might heed the voices of defeatism and impracticality. This is the one thing we cannot afford. We cannot afford to lose the momentum which stems from a growing program. To slow down is to be content with second place. This we should not do. In fact, we dare not do it.” (Text)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said at Washington press luncheon that the two astronauts in Project Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module would stand up during the descent to the moon. He described support gear—like elasticized parachute harness—which would cushion the landing for the crewmen. Elimination of chairs and rearrangement of Lem’s gear permitted weight reduction of 1,000 lbs., he said. (Halsell, Houston Post, 2/4/64)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in informal press gathering in Washington that when nasa had decided on 30 trainees for its astronaut pool, it had anticipated losing 4 of the 30 men, for various reasons, before completion of Project Apollo. Commander Shepard said, “we figured on two casualties as a result of space flight,” explaining that the figure was “just pulled out of the air” but was considered a reasonable guess. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden emphasized “We have no idea what the casualty rate will be. We’re hoping it will be zero.” (Troan, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 2/21/64)
Washington Post editorialized: “The failure of the sixth straight Ranger spacecraft hoists aloft the question of whether the United States will accomplish its goal of putting an American on the moon by the decade’s end. . . . “A delay would not simply be a case of a stretchout in which work would continue but at a slower pace. A delay would take much of the binding and motivating tension from Apollo. It would increase costs by underusing men and facilities brought together for a tighter schedule, and it would allow projects and personnel to drift out of the main stream into the eddies of lower priority. A delay also would entail loss of prestige for NASA, for the Administration and for the Nation as well. “No schedule, however, is sacred. If it is determined that the landing of a man on the moon by Jan. 1, 1970, is simply not feasible, or cannot be done with reasonable assurance of safety for the astronauts, then the space agency and the country will have to adjust to this reality, no matter how costly and comfortless it may be. A manned flight to the moon will be no less exciting or valuable for being somewhat delayed.” {Wash. Post, 2/6/64,18)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told group touring Saturn-Apollo industrial facilities at NASA Michoud Operations that astronauts on flight to the moon would not be harmed by radiation from Van Allen belts or solar flares. Project Apollo astronauts would be “safer than test pilots in industry have ever been,” he declared. (Maloney, Houston Post, 5/12/64)
David B. Clark Co. began building eight flight suits for Project Gemini astronauts, msc suit engineer Henry Friloux said the pressurized suits would protect astronauts up to 150-mi. altitudes. (M&R, 5/25/64, 31)
Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of msc Apollo Spacecraft Office, said that U.S. would land men on the moon before Dec. 31, 1969. He stated that in his judgment “we have a much better than even chance” of landing the first two astronauts on the lunar surface ahead of the 1970 deadline set by the late President Kennedy, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/6/64)
NASA announced the next U.S. manned space flight, Project Gemini GT-3, had been delayed into 1965 because of time lost as result of lightning damage to GT-2 launch vehicle and removal of the rocket from launch pad during hurricanes Cleo and Dora. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said GT—2 unmanned suborbital mission would be made in last quarter of 1964. GT-3, with Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young as crew members, was scheduled for first quarter of 1965. (nasa Release 64-233)
Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems, sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, Fla., with some 200 engineers and scientists attending. In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 'or Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion and control of energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. “The state of man’s technology in every age has depended on his ability to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge of the equivalence of different forms of energy. . . . “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy conversion and control are breathtaking. New methods of energy conversion from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program. . . . Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in the NASA program are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite reactor at 6000° R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a device about the size of an American motor car. . . .” (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of nasc staff said in address at the Conference: “. . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite different. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for the year before. ... “My 'best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very complex missions. Let us look at j ust the main outlines. “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit: . . . The Soviet Union is clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In the Earth-orbital regime, it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites with a minimum of fanfare, and these have included a range of experiments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles. “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of unmanned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accomplishments. . . . But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet capabilities. . . . “Lunar and Planetary Probes:. . . In absolute number of launchings the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner II carried about 40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are rightfully proud of this accomplishment. “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962, ten such launchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a difficult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner II. Not one of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . . “While neither country should he overly proud of its lunar probe record, the pictures taken by Lunik III back in 1959 are still a high-water mark. “Manned Space Flight: . . . Through the 1963 season each country had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astronaut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. . . . “Human Safety: . . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika, four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs, before the first man was sent. . . . “Future Manned Missions: ... To the best of our knowledge, the Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of convenient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then, if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that the United States is building a lunar capability either. . . . “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . . With all this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even probable that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant manned flights. . . . “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reactions, but with sound, consistent planning. . . .” (Text)
Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (Capt., usaf) was killed when his T—38 jet trainer crashed near Houston. The former experimental test-flight instructor was among third group of NASA astronauts, selected last October, and was first U.S. astronaut to lose his life. (AP, NYT, 11/2/64)
USAF announced selection of the first six astronauts for its manned orbiting laboratory (MOL) program. An additional six would be named in early 1965. Following a six-month basic training course, the crewmen, all graduates of USAf’s Aerospace Research Pilot School, would be assigned specialty areas. (Av. Wk., 11/23/64,25)
NASA began recruiting 10-20 scientist-astronauts for future manned space flights. Qualified applicants—with doctoral degree or equivalent experience in natural sciences, medicine, or engineering—would be screened and evaluated according to standards established by NASA and ad hoc Committee on Scientific Qualifications of Scientist-Astronauts of the nas Space Science Board. Before final selection as astronauts, applicants would receive training in a limited space-simulation program designed to familiarize them with space environment and test their ability to withstand physical stresses of space flight. Departing from previous requirement that astronaut candidates be experienced jet pilots, NASA said selected astronauts not already qualified pilots would be given individual flight training to qualify them as pilots of high-performance aircraft and helicopters. (NASA Release 64-248)
Royal Crown Cola Co. president W. H. Clenn announced Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former NASA astronaut, had heen elected a director of the company. (Hammer, NYT, 10/20/64,49)
Article written by Sen. Barry Goldwater, Republican nominee for President, in which he laid down his views on the form the U.S. space program should take, appeared in Science and Mechanics: “The concept that speeding men to the moon is the same as jockeying trotters over a muddy track must be abandoned, regardless of Kremlin propaganda. The idea that we can cooperate with the Russians to do the job quicker and cheaper is too ludicrous for comment. We are spending entirely too much money on the manned moon program, when a carefully plotted program using unmanned lunar landing equipment could steadily build up a solid body of scientific knowledge about the lunar environment that would increase the safety factor for astronauts much later. Automatic landing equipment could be designed at minimum cost. The program should expand in easy steps, each one leading to the next. The billions of dollars thus saved could be profitably invested in other aspects of space research.”	, Speaking of the military role in space, he said: “All manned space research should be directed by the military, with national security and control of the access to space as primary goals. The threat from space now and in the foreseeable future is from spatial regions within a thousand miles of Earth and not from lunar distances. Routine daily surveillance of these regions must be established, and the additional capabilities of positive identification, interception, and destruction of hostile enemy space vehicles will be necessary. This would be the greatest deterrent to an enemy’s military space aspirations. It would also give us the means of developing experienced space pilots, scientific and technological methods, and new scientific knowledge which could be used later in sending men to the moon and the planets. The hardware, on a routinely reliable basis, would be available ofi-the-shelf. “It might be added that almost every successful NASA launch to date, manned and unmanned, has been made with military support—with missile rocket-boosters, launch facilities, technical know-how, communications (including air transport of boosters) or safety procedures—or with all five. . . . “Finally, I believe that an immediate initial step of any effective military space program must be a manned station in near orbit about the Earth, with necessary support equipment. . . .” Senator Goldwater also stated that in his opinion there was the need for two crash programs in space research. The first would develop the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, and the second would develop the potentiality of lasers for use as military weapons. (Science and Mechanics, 6/64; Wash. Post, 7/21/64) During June: France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aero-spatiales (ONERA) revealed it had successfully flight-tested hybrid rocket engine in a rocket launched April 25 from Ceres sounding rocket facility on the lie du Levant in the Mediterranean Sea. Engine employed combination of liquid nitric acid oxidizer and unidentified solid fuel. (Av. WL, 6/29/64, 24)
George M. Low, NASA MSC deputy director, said all pilots in Projects Gemini and Apollo would be astronauts trained by NASA for its own manned space projects. Brig. Gen. Bleymaier (usaf), in interviews at Houston, had previously said he thought pilots selected by usaf, whose mol project he heads, would participate in Apollo and Gemini in order to acquire experience for the MOL project. Without NASA training for its astronauts, usaf would have to orbit its men without previous space flight experience or launch its own Gemini training flights. (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/10/64; HoustonChron., 6/10/64)
msc announced issuing requests for proposals for six-month study of how astronaut on the moon could conduct selenodetic measurements (lunar surface surveys), making maximum use of scientific equipment already planned for Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module and Command Module. Proposals for the study were due March 5. (msc Release 64-457)
Capt. Theodore C. Freeman (usaf) was buried with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetey, Va., with the entire astronaut team attending the services, (msc Roundup, 11/11/64, 1)
Paul P. Haney, Public Affairs Officer at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, asserted that the bulk of 550 communications regarding NASA scientist-astronauts had to be classified as letters of interest. Seventy-five per cent of this number, or 412, were lacking some detail and about 100 had been eliminated altogether. The number of applications was ahead of the number received for other classes of astronaut, he said. These figures clarified figures given by Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, who had said on Nov. 22 that only 20 applications had been received and that only nine of these applicants qualified. (Houston Post, 11/24/64)
msc announced approval of improved Gemini spacesuit for use by Apollo astronauts in the earlier flights in earth orbit. Adoption of Gemini spacesuit would allow more time for development of Apollo suit, which would allow astronauts greatest mobility for walking on surface of moon. (Houston Post, 7/7/64)
Weber Aircraft Co. of Burbank, Calif., demonstrated the astronaut escape system that it had developed for NASA. System was designed to boost astronauts out of their Gemini spacecraft and open escape parachutes in 10 sec. if a spacecraft malfunction should develop. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 10/30/64) 0 Minuteman II icbm flight test from Cape Kennedy marked second success in as many launchings, usaf said the advanced missile achieved all test objectives. (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
An msc investigative board announced that a snow goose, weighing about eight lbs., with a wingspan of more than 24 in., caused the fatal crash of Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (usaf) on Oct. 31. The bird struck the left side of the airplane canopy causing both engines to flame-out on impact. Captain Freeman, however, still had control of the aircraft and attempted to make a landing at Ellington. He flew a looping pattern over the Gulf Freeway and lowered his landing gear as he approached the field. When he apparently realized that a landing was not possible, he veered to the left into an open field, probably to avoid buildings at Ellington. Seconds later, at slightly under 100-ft. altitude, he ejected, too late for his parachute to deploy fully, (msc Roundup, 11/25/64)
The U.S. Fighter Aces Association awarded Astronauts Walter Schirra, Alan Shepard, Virgil Grissom, and Donald Slayton honorary memberships. (Houston Chron., 5/14/64)
Soviet space scientists Dr. Vladimir Lebedev and Dr. Oleg Kuznetsov, writing in Soviet Air Force magazine, discussed U.S. Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s sightings of houses and other objects from space as he orbited over Tibet in May 1963. The scientists noted that some U.S. experts had attributed Major Cooper’s sightings to hallucinations caused by spaceflight conditions. However, the Soviets said, their own experiments with men in soundproof, dark chambers simulating spacecraft led them to conclude that Major Cooper’s observations were “an illusion of recognition caused by insufficient information.” (AP, NYT, 10/19/64, 3)
At Manned Spacecraft Center press conference, MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth announced Astronauts Gus Grissom and John Young would be prime pilots for the first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3), with Astronauts Walter Schirra and Tom Stafford as backup pilots. Also at the press conference it was disclosed that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was suffering from labyrinthitis, msc’s Dr. Charles Berry emphasized that Shepard’s inner ear inflammation was not caused by space flight but by infection that spread into his inner left ear. (msc Press Conf., msc Historian)
President Johnson personally congratulated scientists and technicians responsible for the successful flight of ranger vii. He congratulated Dr. William Pickering, Director of JPL, and Dr. Homer Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and then issued a statement on the experiment. He called the flight “a basic step forward in our orderly program to assemble the scientific knowledge necessary for man’s trip to the moon. . . . The pictures obtained of the lunar surface should prove extremely useful. ... They will be a guide in constructing the lunar excursion module and in planning the trip. Now we shall be able to better map out our descent route. We’ll be able to build our lunar landing equipment with greater certainty and knowledge of the conditions which our astronauts will encounter on the moon. I recognize that this great success has come only after a number of failures and partial failures in our efforts to send probes to the moon. This success should spur us on to added effort in the future. . . . On behalf of a grateful nation, let me again congratulate you on this magnificent achievement. All of you today have helped further the peaceful exploration of space.” (NYT, 8/1/64)
More than 900 persons had applied to NASA for the 10 to 20 positions for scientist astronaut that it would fill next year. To qualify, a scientist had to be under 34 years old, a U.S. citizen, no taller than six feet, with a B.A. degree and a doctorate or the equivalent in experience. Recruitment would end Dec. 31. Recommendations would be made by the National Academy of Sciences to NASA in the spring of 1965. (AP, Miami Her., 12/18/64)
Awards at 1964 Air Force Association national convention included H. H. Arnold Trophy to General Curtis E. LeMay (USAF CofS), who was named “Aerospace Man of the Year” for his “enlightened and aggressive leadership in behalf of the status and welfare of fhe military man”; David C. Schilling Trophy to Maj or Sidney J. Kubesch, SAC B-58 pilot, for his record Tokyo-to-London flight in October 1963; and Theodore von Karman Trophy to Clarence L. Johnson, Vice President (Advanced Development Projects) of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., for designing theYF-12A (A—11) aircraft. Among the citations of honor: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, nasc, was cited for his “broad understanding and vigorous pursuit of aerospace goals.” Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), deputy director of Apollo program in NASA Hq., was cited for his contributions to Minuteman icbm program in previous assignment with afsc/bsd. Chief M/Sgt. Frank M. Davis (usaf) and Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) were named outstanding airman and outstanding officer of 1964 by afa. Davis was cited for leadership in desert survival training including program for Gemini astronauts, among other citations. Engle was cited for “his active and aggressive” role as an X-15 test pilot. (AF Mag., 10/64, 33; Wash. Post, 9/12/64)
14 men selected last October for astronaut training reported to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center to begin training for the Gemini and Apollo space flight crew pool. ( msc Release 64-24)
Two-man crew and backup crew for first manned Gemini space flight would be selected in May or June, according to Astronaut Donald K. Slayton at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Flight was expected in late 1964. (Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
Soviet cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pavel Popovich (VOSTOK ill and rv) had orthostatic hypotension following their space flights, Soviet physiologist Prof. Vasily V. Parin revealed. The condition was noted in the cosmonauts “even two days after the flight.” In address at cospar—prepared and delivered in English—and in the discussion which followed, the Soviet Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology, Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, said that the cosmonauts “showed no disturbances in their state of health” after their prolonged space flights, and the “transient functional reactions” were said to have “disappeared in seven or 10 days. . . He added that “post-flight disturbances were largely related to the central nervous system, the cardiovascular systems and metabolism.” Prof. Nello Pace, head of Physiology Dept, at Univ. of California (Berkeley), closely questioned Prof. Parin about his statements. Prof. Pace considered that hypotension was “among the most significant facts” disclosed at the conference. He noted that the condition had been observed in U.S. Astronauts Schirra and Cooper, and that NASA had said that implications of blood pressure responses “will have to be given very serious consideration as larger missions are undertaken.” (Text; Hillaby, NYT, 5/16/64,8; Burkett, Houston Chron., 5/17/64)
It was announced that in the first two-man Gemini flight, set for Feb. 1965, Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom might become the first man in space to alter the orbit of his own spacecraft. .The change would be after about 90 minutes of flight in the first orbit over Guaymas, Mex. Major Grissom, the command pilot, would be sitting on the left side of the spacecraft and Lt. Cdr. John Young, pilot, would be sitting on the right side. (AP, Sunday Oregonian, 11/1/64)
On third anniversary of his historic space flight, first American in space Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn) received the Langley Medal, highest award of the Smithsonian Institution, in ceremonies at the Smithsonian, Washington, D.C. (CR, 5/5/64,9767-68)
Czechoslovakian news agency Ceteka reported Czechoslovakia would issue series of eight postage stamps in April bearing faces of 10 Soviet cosmonauts and American astronauts. (Reuters, Houston Post, 3/30/64)	#	#
It was reported that NASA was actively considering methods to be used for exploration by astronauts on the moon. Two devices were under consideration: a mobile laboratory (Molab) in which men could work and also go out in spacesuits to gather rock and soil samples, and a “lunar hopper,” a helicopter device for short flights to sites that could not be reached on foot or by Molab. Parallel studies of the Molab concept were being undertaken by Boeing Co., Seattle, and Bendix Corp. of Ann Arbor, under contracts of $800,000. Bell Aerosystems Co., Buffalo, had been awarded a $199,333 contract to study the lunar hopper concept. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64)
Maj. Edwin Aldrin, Jr., from the newest group of NASA astronauts, already was qualified as a scientist-astronaut, holding a doctorate in astronautics. Two other astronauts were nearing completion of doctoral studies: R. Walter Cunningham (physics) and Russell L. Schweikart (aeronautics/ astronautics).	(Houston Post, 10/20/64)
FAITH 7 Mercury spacecraft, in which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper made 22 orbits of die earth in final space flight of Project Mercury, went on display at NASA Hq., Washington. Nov. 2 the spacecraft would resume its tour of the 50 state capitals. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
Maj, Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of usaf Office of Aerospace Research, addressed National Space Club in Washington: “I am sometimes asked how military space research differs from space research conducted by civilian institutions or other government agencies. The answer, of course, is that there is no difference, except in the ultimate purpose for which it is conducted. As a matter of fact, there is very close liaison in this field between my Command, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Office of Naval Research, and the scientific community. We make every effort to keep them informed about the work we are doing or sponsoring, and we are constantly exchanging information with them about our findings on the characteristics of space. Our job, however, is specifically to support the Air Force mission in space. . . . “I know that you are all familiar with the potential radiation hazards to man in space, particularly with the deadly proton showers that accompany certain solar flares. We have made great strides in predicting the onset of these showers at our Sacramento Peak Observatory in New Mexico. “We can predict safe periods with increasing accuracy—better than most weather predictions here on earth—but there is still a large gray area in which we do not know whether conditions will be safe or unsafe. It is possible that we could narrow this gray area significantly with that which penetrates the atmosphere and can be picked up at the observatory. “If we had this knowledge, it would extend the time we could operate in space with absolute assurance of safety. It would also give us advanced early warning that would enable us if necessary to get our astronauts out of danger. “Even in the present state of the art, our Sacramento Peak predictions have been crucial to the safety of the astronauts participating in the Mercury program. We have been able to give NASA absolute assurance of safe conditions, insofar as proton showers are concerned, when the astronauts have gone into orbit; and warnings of potential danger, at other times. . . .” (Text)
Development of astronaut techniques for egress from Gemini spacecraft began this week at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, msc announced. Boilerplate model of Gemini spacecraft floats in water-filled tank; two subjects in the closed spacecraft practice egress and the manner, procedure, and time required are recorded for study, (msc Release 64^-19)
The USn’s Sea Lab I, with four Navy divers aboard, began ascent to the surface after 10 days on the ocean floor at a depth of 192 ft. The experiment was terminated 11 days ahead of schedule because of an approaching storm. Astronaut Scott Carpenter was to have participated in the experiment, but was forced to withdraw because of the broken arm he suffered recently, (dod Release 558-64)
Dr. Ted Foss, geologist at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, described model of the moon to be constructed at Msc for conducting time and motion studies with astronauts in their space suits. To be covered with slag rocks and ash, the area would be about 340 ft. in diameter and feature several craters about 50 ft. in diameter and about 15 ft. deep, as well as ridges as high as 12 ft. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers would perform basic work on the $50,000 construction job. (Houston Chron., 5/24/ 64; AP, 5/23/64)
Astronaut Scott Carpenter was involved in a motor bike accident in Bermuda and suffered a fracture of his lower left arm. Carpenter was in Bermuda to participate in a Navy test in which he would have submerged in Sea Lab I diving chamber with four Navy divers to a depth of 192 feet, but his injury precluded his participation in the test. He was reported to be resting comfortably. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/17/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64)
Hand-held navigational device called a “stadimeter,” conceived by usaf scientists at Air Force Avionics Laboratory, was displayed by afsc. To be tested in Project Gemini manned space flights, the device used only manual and visual alignment and required no electronics. Astronauts would use stadimeter to determine optically the range of the spacecraft from the earth. (afsc Release 44-14-56)
C. Leo de Orsey, attorney for the seven NASA Mercury astronauts, revealed former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc) had turned down a $1,000,000 contract with private industry in 1963. (St. Louis PostDispatch, 10/7/64)
Former NASA astronaut Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), completed 15-day assignment at El Toro, Calif., mcas, where he was on TDY for flight refresher training. {J/Armed Forces, 11/28/64,5)
Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. concluded in its manned Mars exploration study for NASA Marshall . Tlight Center that future interplanetary space travelers should be no taller than 5'7" and no heavier than 145 lbs. Six of these “20 percentile” men—smaller than approximately 80 per cent of American men—on a manned Mars flight would require 1% lbs. less food per day than larger men, thus saving nearly 500 lbs. of food cargo weight on a one-year trip. Study said 70,000 lbs. could be saved in gross weight of Mars spacecraft if the six astronauts were 20 percentile men. (dm&ssd Apogee, 6/64)
In testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year. It was the year of transition to hardware—now we can fill the pipeline and move forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade. . . . “The resources for the Gemini and Apollo programs are moving forward. The major developmental resources are essentially completed; the manufacturing resources are under construction and approaching our goal; the test and operational resources have been initiated; a logistics program is being formulated and our personnel build-up is progressing. “The personnel staffing at the NASA Centers ... is increasing from 11,858 at the end of FY 1963 to 13,711 at the end of FY 1964 and a forecast total of 14,711 at the end of FY 1965. In addition to the government team of personnel there are approximately 181,000 contractor personnel who are working on Manned Space Flight programs. With the continued buildup of construction, manufacturing, test and operations, it is anticipated that this figure will approximate 300,000	personnel at the peak of the Manned Space Flight Program. ...” Discussing planned activity in manned space flight program, he said: “A major decision was made in 1963 to adopt the ‘all-up’ testing concept as a basic approach to our flight verification test program. ‘All-up’ testing means, all flights will be scheduled with complete space vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft. ... “There are several advantages to the ‘all-up’ approach. It will permit us to land an American astronaut on the moon, and return him safely to earth, in accordance with our schedule even though we are operating this year on a reduced budget. It will permit us to capitalize on successful flights. It will also allow us to gather a very large amount of data early in the flight program and thereby provide much needed information to our design organization. It is planned in the Saturn IB and Saturn V programs to launch a complete unmanned space vehicle on the first flight in an earth orbital trajectory.” (Testimony) February 6: NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined NASA’s program of advanced research and technology and proposed activities for FY 1965. Objectives in advanced research and technology were summarized: “1. Basic research aimed toward an understanding of the natural laws underlying aeronautical and space technology. “2. Engineering research aimed at the application of these laws and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles. “3. Experimental subsystem development, using advanced concepts and components, to produce test ‘know-how’ for the design of future operational systems. “Our aim in basic research is to contribute to the fund of relevant scientific knowledge and, in so doing, to maintain the best possible contact with the scientific and engineering community. Engineering research, that is the creation of engineering design principles, is also conducted by these same institutions with industry playing a somewhat greater role than in the case of basic research .... “A program of [advanced] research . . . which looks beyond today’s technology is believed to be a pre-requisite for continued advancement in the performance and efficiency of aeronautical and space vehicles.” (Testimony)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned Space Flight, afsc, said that usaf would sharply increase its participation in NASA’s manned space flight program; usaf astronauts might be assigned for training as crew members on some Gemini and Apollo flights, and 100 officers would help staff Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc) at msc. [George Low, msc Deputy Diricetor, denied this claim three days later (see June 9).] General Bleymaier disclosed that: (1) flight crews of Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) would come from nine Dyna-Soar pilots now at Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb; (2) usaf would begin discussing specific flights aboard Gemini and Apollo when Sec. of Defense Robert S. McNamara gave approval for production of mol; (3) 17 Titan III—C launches were planned, two allocated to MOL; (4) payloads of 6,000 lbs. would contain scientific research projects, with NASA experiments to be accommodated. (Houston Post, 6/10/64; M&R, 6/15/64, 12)	_
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former astronaut, was presented the George Washington Award for 1963 by the Freedom Foundation, in Valley Forge, Pa., ceremony. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/64)
NASA received patent for life preserver carried by Mercury astronauts on all orbital space flights. Invented by MSC engineers Mathew I. Rad-nofsky and Glenn A. Shewmake, life-preserver was called “Ram’s Horn” because of its shape: main part fits across wearer’s chest and hook-like ends fit over the shoulders. (Jones, NYT, 10/17/64, 35)
NASA awarded $1,125,040 contract to Ling-Temco-Vought for construction of Dynamic Crew Procedures Simulator which would allow astronauts to simulate orbital, lunar, and interplanetary flights in model spacecraft. Simulator’s completion was scheduled for May 1965, when it would be delivered to msc. (msc pao; Denver Post, 7/5/64)
Researchers at Lankeneau Hospital in Philadelphia had concluded that orthostatic hypotension such as occurred in Astronauts Schirra and Cooper after orbital space flights could be caused as much by dehydration as by weightlessness, Missiles and Rockets reported. (M&R, 4/6/64, 25)
X-15 No. 3, piloted by Capt. Joe Engle (usaf), flew 3,511 mph (mach 4.94) and gained altitude of 170,000 ft. in first test of infrared horizon scanner designed to give sharper outline of earth to astronauts re-entering earth’s atmosphere. Flight also enabled Engle to make pilot checkout of adaptive control system which had ability to sense atmospheric conditions surrounding the craft. Flight was postponed twice before successful effort, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 7/9/64)
Speaking at the dedication of a monument at Cape Kennedy honoring Project Mercury and the nation’s seven original astronauts, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Acting Chairman and Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council said: “Mercury served to lift the selfrespect of our nation when it badly needed such a boost. I know that we still have widespread public support of our national space programs in spite of the criticism of some short-sighted individuals.” (NYT, 11/11/64, 48; AP, Balt. Sim, 11/9/64; Rossiter, upi, Miami Herald, 11/11/64)
NASA announced requesting from industry proposals for feasibility and design study of possible payloads for manned lunar exploration with an Apollo Logistic Support System (alss) . One of the payloads was a mobile laboratory capable of supporting and transporting two Apollo astronauts for about 14 days; the other payload concept included both a stationary base and a smaller vehicle. The ALSS concept, making maximum use of Apollo-developed systems, provided for Saturn V launch vehicle to launch into earth-moon trajectory a manned Apollo command module, service module, and lunar excursion module modified for landing equipment rather than men on the. moon and called the lem Truck. Following alss landing, astronauts would land nearby in unmodified Apollo lem. MSFC would manage the nine-month study. (NASA Release 64-62)
NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight was holding three days of meetings with msc officials on problems related to Project Apollo. Members of Committee, established by nasa Administrator James E. Webb in December 1963, and which functioned in advisory capacity to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, delved into problems posed by launch vehicle systems, spacecraft systems, launch operations, science program, and space medicine. MIT physicist Dr. Charles Townes said at msc meeting of the Committee that he believed astronauts, not scientists, should be first men to explore moon. Scientists, he said, would concentrate on their own specialties in exploring the moon’s surface, but astronauts trained in scientific principles would bring back important information on the moon as a whole, (msc Roundup, 7/8/64, 1; Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
Scientists at Aerospace Medical Div., Brooks Afb, said in paper presented by Maj. William B. Clark at space medicine conference that, with proper reconnaissance training, astronauts in space could easily spot missile bases, encampments, troop movements, and “unsuspected targets of opportunity” from outposts 100-mi. high. The scientists’ report was based on studies of visual reports of six U.S. astronauts who made space flights and relied heavily on accounts by Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) . (AP, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/5/64; AP, Phil. Eve. Bull. 2/6/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced $133,358 contract was awarded to AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. of Garrett Corp. for design and production of extravehicular pressurization ventilation system to be used by astronauts in Project Gemini, (upi, San Diego Union, 2/9/64)
usaf was reported continuing to seek industry support for avionics subsystems studies for DOD’s manned orbiting laboratory (mol) program. The Space Systems Div. of afsc asked avionics companies to submit bids for a study of an image velocity sensor subsystem, which would enable orbiting astronauts to acquire and track space targets visually and to take fixes on terrestrial bodies for navigation. SSD also asked Honeywell to submit a sole-source proposal for a study of the laboratory’s attitude control system. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 24)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, interviewed in Washington World, replied to interviewer’s question: “Yes, Gemini is really necessary to the Apollo program. As a matter of fact, Gemini would be necessary as the next major step in manned space flight even if there were no Apollo mission. Gemini provides the United States large increments of manned space flight capability. Gemini is vital to the Apollo program since our astronauts must learn— and perfect—the techniques of rendezvous and docking in space before attempting the trip to the moon and hack. . . .” (nasa)
In experiment to test reactions of astronauts under environmental conditions they would encounter outside their spacecraft, three out of four subjects suffered the bends. Capt. Eugene A. Degner, expert in body metabolism conducting tests planned on 50 volunteers at Brooks afb, said: “All three men with the grade one [least severe] bends had them dramatically dissipate as the altitude chamber pressure dropped below that of 30,000 feet. “I was surprised at the results, and a little worried because the three men complained of the bends and mild discomforts early in the experiment period. “I was afraid they would keep getting worse, but the trouble was intermittent and not severe enough to abort the [10-hour] test.” (upi, Houston Chron., 3/21/64)
NASA announced the large air-filled bag safety system performed successfully in DC-7 crash experiment conducted April 24. Results indicated that if a man had sat in for the dummy, he would have survived the crash. Martin Co. designed the airbag system under NASA contract, for possible use by both airline passengers and astronauts. (NASA Release 64-121)
NASA Astronaut Coordinator Donald K. Slayton said in World Book Encyclopedia Science Service feature article that physical training of U.S. astronauts differed greatly from that of his Soviet counterparts. He pointed out: “There is a basic difference in philosophy between Soviet and United States flight crew selection and training. The Soviets select and train bodies as biological specimens for space experiments. The United States selects and trains engineer-pilots as integral operators of spacecraft. Our emphasis is on intelligence and skill as opposed to physical prowess.” (wbe Sci. Serv., Ind. Star, 10/8/64) 7-66—598 0—65-----23
NASA Astronaut Donn F. Eisele dislocated his left shoulder during weightless flight training at Wright-Patterson AFB in KC-135 jet aircraft, and was placed on limited duty for about three weeks. (Houston Post, 9/17/64) ■September 15: Two NASA-USAF memoranda of understanding providing for exchange of technical management and scientific personnel became effective. Signed by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and usaf Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert, the agreements were based on recommendation by joint usaf/nasa Military Requirements Review Group. Previously no NASA personnel had been assigned to USAF; under the new terms, NASA would assign personnel to usaf on a “when-needed” basis. NASA personnel would be GS-13’s and above, and usaf officers assigned to NASA would be majors or higher unless “the position offers exceptional opportunity to the Air Force,” according to agreement. Under basic agreement dating from 1959, about 100 USAF officers were now on duty with NASA, including 13 astronauts, not affected by the agreement, and 40 recent rotc graduates. About 40 more senior officers were scheduled for assignment to NASA in the near future. (nasa Release 64r-234; dod Release 671-64)
U.S. Committee for International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) and usn announced satellite to monitor solar x-ray emission, instrumented by Naval Research Laboratory scientists, was launched recently to initiate continuous “watch on the sun” during iqsy (1964-65). First signals from the satellite showed the sun now is close to its minimum activity, reported nrl scientists Robert W. Kreplin, Talbot A. Chubb, and Herbert Friedman. Any solar activity that occurs this year should be isolated and relatively uncomplicated, permitting the satellite to record individual storm centers, in contrast to igy which was marked by succession of overlapping storms. Observatories in 14 countries joined U.S. in preparing to utilize continuous data transmissions from the satellite. At press conference, the NRL scientists said that astronauts on lunar flight would be under no more radiation danger during maximum period of solar cycle than during minimum period. Friedman explained: “All available evidence indicates that solar minimum is as bad as solar maximum for superflare eruption.” To date, superflares occur at random and cannot be predicted, (nas-nrc Release; USN Background Statement; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/5/64)
Dr. Charles A. Berry of NASA’s msc said that some communicable diseases could develop on space missions of up to 14 days if astronauts were exposed during preflight preparation period. Therefore nasa plans included turning the spacecraft around and returning to earth in severe cases and equipping vehicles with emergency medical supplies. Also, doctors might be trained as astronauts for 30- to 60-day missions. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 7/14/64)	_
On the eve of his 85th birthday, M/G Renjamin D. Foulois (usa, Ret.) was honored for his achievements in aviation at a dinner at Andrews'afb. General Foulois, who was the United States’ first military pilot, was inducted into the Primus Club—an elite group of aerospace pioneers— and hailed as “a living link between the age of the Wright Brothers and today’s astronauts.” (Raymond, NYT, 12/9/64,53)
The newest 14 NASA astronauts began week-long desert survival course in Nevada, under direction of usaf 3637th Survival and Special Training Squadron, Stead afb. (msc Roundup, 8/19/64, 2)
usaf annual report of unidentified flying objects said there were 382 sightings in 1963 compared with 469 in 1962 and 1004 in record year of 1957. During past 16 years, report said, usaf had investigated more than 8,000 sightings, all but 7.7 percent of which had been explained by natural phenomena, (upi, Houston Chron., 5/1/64) During April: Aluminum pressure suit designed for astronaut use on the moon was undergoing evaluation at msc. Officially called a “constant volume, rigid articulated, anthropomorphic protectic suit,” it featured increased mobility and constancy of pressure. Rigid suit concept was first introduced by Litton Industries in 1956 for use in pressure chambers. Advanced version for space use, with adaptations and improvements, was proposed to NASA by Litton last year, (msc Roundup, 4/15/64,8)
msc reported that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard had had a small benign tumor removed from his thyroid gland by surgery. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64,
It was reported that former astronaut John Glenn had recovered sufficiently from his inner ear ailment to work in his yard and walk around the neighborhood. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/13/64)
Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of NASA Langley Research Center, said in speech before National Space Club in Washington that the problem of maintaining radio communications with astronauts during atmospheric re-entry may have been solved. He said LaRC research in Project Ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) showed that ejection of small amount of liquid into the air “provides an effective means of dealing with radio blackout,” the liquid apparently preventing buildup of an ionized sheath that cannot be penetrated by radio waves. While it may not be the “completely workable answer, it looks like a very promising method of dealing with the problem.” (nsc Release)
In study financed by NASA, a Mexico City matador had his heart heat, respiratory rate, and body temperature monitored during the height of a bull fight. Readings from sensors fixed to his skin were telemetered to instruments inside bull ring. Doctors at msc used information in study to determine how much physical stress human body could withstand and what effect stress had on performance. It had been determined previously that many athletes undergo more physical stress than do astronauts in flight. (AP, NYT, 7/8/64,12; msc Roundup, 7/22/64,7)
At AIAA meeting and press conference, Dr. Bernard M. Wagner, Chairman of New York Medical College’s pathology dept., reported Soviets had decided not to send any more women cosmonauts into space. Soviet doctors were not satisfied with performance of Valentina Tereshkova, first woman cosmonaut. She had been too excited during the space flight, as seen by wide variations in her pulse rate, and she did not recover from effects of space flight as quickly as the male cosmonauts. Dr. Wagner visited in Moscow earlier in June at invitation of Prof. Vassily V. Parin, Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology. Dr. Wagner reported Prof. Parin, prominent in Soviet space program, believed artificial gravity would be necessary for astronauts on long space flights, and Soviet space planners were considering possibility of equipping Vostok spacecraft with centrifuge providing periodic spin of Ys earth’s gravity for the crew. Dr. Wagner added that Soviets were preparing for another manned space flight before the end of the year. (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/30/64)
John H. Glenn, Jr., discussed with NASA Administrator James E. Webb the possibility of the former astronaut’s returning to NASA in advisory capacity, according to NASA spokesman, but nothing had been decided by the two. (upi, Wash. Post, 7/2/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, A8)
Researchers reported the centrifugal experiment conducted for the Air Force by Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. indicated that a centrifuge device in a space station could help to recondition astronauts living for prolonged periods in a weightless condition. Tests in which five college students spent 42 days in a horizontal position showed that tendency to faint on standing diminished after periodic centrifuge rides. (NYT, 12/20/64, 42)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed banquet of Aviation/Space Writers’ Association in Miami. Discussing possible hazards to Apollo astronauts, he said that based on data from explorer xvi satellite it was “not anticipated at this time that meteoroids will constitute a major problem in the planning or scheduling of the first manned lunar exploration.” Radiation did not present a hazard either: “. . . In the case of solar flares, we compared the allowable safe dose with what would have been produced within the Apollo command module by the worst flares on record, that of July 1959. If an Apollo spacecraft had been in flight on a lunar mission at this time, the astronauts would have received only 15 percent of the safe dose, calculated on the basis of a report by a group established by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences. . . . “Very recently there have been suggestions that space flight—even relatively short duration flight—is harmful to man. There is no evidence from Project Mercury to support these fears. Based on our experience in Mercury, which included a flight of 34 hours by Gordon Cooper, there is no reason to believe that flights of two weeks or less will be harmful. . . .” Dr. Mueller then outlined nine medical experiments to be conducted during the two-man orbital space flights of Project Gemini. (Text; NASA Release 64^128)
Dr. Alan T. Waterman, physicist and former director of National Science Foundation, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. He is also a member of the NASA Historical Advisory Committee. (nasa Release 64-240) *	NASA msc’s Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, announced Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Lt. Cdr., usn) would serve as his executive assistant. Dr. Gilruth called this a “convalescent assignment,” because Astronaut Carpenter still had minor injuries from a motorbike accident several months ago. Also announced was selection of Carpenter for promotion from Lt. Cdr. to Commander. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/18/64)
Msc began 10-day series of short weightlessness tests with Gemini spacecraft installed inside a KC-135 jet aircraft. Astronaut John Young took part in the tests along with four usaf and McDonnell Aircraft Corp. test pilots. (Houston Chron., 5/19/64)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), usaf Space Systems Div. Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, said at AIAA space station symposium in Pasadena that USAF planned to assign to a single contractor the task of integrating the Gemini spacecraft and the manned orbiting laboratory (mol). He said astronaut transfer from the Gemini to the mol was a major problem and described several alternative methods of transfer being studied. (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 39)
Research in extrasensory perception as a means of communication with astronauts on space flights was advocated by Harold Sherman, President and Executive Director of ESP Research Associates Foundation, Little Rock, Ark. Speaking in Los Angeles, Sherman said: “It is entirely feasible for the Air Force to experiment in the training of astronauts to transmit and receive thoughts and, in this connection, a battery of ‘sensitives,’ who can communicate with them on a two-way basis while they are traveling through space.” (L. A. Herald-Examiner, 8/6/64)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper revealed at luncheon meeting with newsmen in Washington that scientists would be invited to volunteer for training for lunar missions. Plans had been finalized at meeting between nasa officials and’members ; of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board. ’ Up to 50"’ scientists would be selected to train with the Gemini/Apollo astronauts at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center during the summer months. Then, perhaps two years before a lunar landing, nasa would select some persons from the reserve to begin full-time training as crew members for later lunar flights. (AP, 4/30/64)
gao complained nasa had spent money unnecessarily by producing four basically similar films on the flight of astronaut John Glenn, three on the Alan Shepard flight, three on the Apollo lunar exploration project, two on the Ariel satellite, and two emphasizing international cooperation in the space program. The cost of the films ranged from $216,000 for one of the Glenn-flight productions to $1,500 for one of the three on Shepard’s flight. (Orlando Sentinel, 11/4/64; NYT, 11/4/64,40)
After examining Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), U.S. Air Force doctors at San Antonio said the former astronaut was on the way to “virtually complete recovery” from his inner-ear injury resulting from accidental fall last February. (AP, NYT, 10/2/64,62)
Labor Dept, said industry employed 885,000 engineers and scientists in 1963, about 4% more than in 1962. 715,000 of the 885,000 were engineers and 170,000 were scientists. (AP, NYT, 9/l/64>, 22) During August: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received five Northrop T-38 aircraft on loan from USAF for use as space-flight readiness trainers to maintain proficiency of astronauts. (Av. Wk., 8/31/64, 25)
Team of NASA space scientists and engineers, including Astronaut Walter Cunningham outfitted in a pressurized spacesuit, began week-long mobility tests at McKenzie Pass lava area in central Oregon’s Cascade Mountains, where they investigated man’s ability to perform on surfaces thought to resemble that of the moon. (AP, Balt. Sun, 8/26/64)
usaf announced it had built the T-27 space flight simulator—a $5,500,000, 15-ton machine which would be used for astronaut training at the Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif. The simulator was built under a contract with the Link Group of General Precision, Inc. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/23/64, 24)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center awarded 29 contracts involving studies of advanced manned missions. The 29 studies, which were designed to look beyond the time when American astronauts would have landed on the moon, covered the subjects of launch vehicle development, earth orbital operations, lunar exploration, and planetary exploration. (NASA Release 64-175)
It was reported that usaf was planning to permanently preserve the launch complex from which the first American astronauts were launched into space and to develop the area around it into an Air Force Space Museum. (Strothman, Miami Herald, 7/24/64)
Astronauts’ contracts with Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Time Inc. were discussed in Editor and Publisher editorial, which stated that the “principle of letting the astronauts sell their stories is all' wrong.” Before granting personal interview, editorial said, “astronaut must get permission in writing from Field and Time which will grant approval ‘in an instance where the acceptance of such outside offers will not materially affect the value of any of the rights granted.’ . . .” It concluded by saying that reporters could not interview these “national figures” unless two “competitors say it’s okay.” (E&P, 8/15/64)
Col. John M. Stapp (usaf) said at iaf congress in Warsaw that pigs and bears had been used in tests to determine best position for astronauts to be in when Apollo spacecraft returning from the moon hits the earth. Human volunteers were used in 146 test runs, but anaesthetized bears and pigs were used in tests which were considered too dangerous for human subjects. Results: safest position would be landing backwards at 45° angle to the line of impact, (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/11/64)
Vincent L. Johnson, NASA Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, was interviewed in Data on Centaur launch vehicle. “At this point in the Centaur development program, the major portion of the ground tests have been completed, and three development flights have been accomplished. Three more devlopment flights remain before the vehicle will be considered operational in a single-bum configuration in early 1965. The two-burn capability will be certified by two additional development flights providing a proven operational two-bum capability in 1966. I would like to note, however, that lunar flights can and will be accomplished by single-burn Centaurs in 1965 and 1966, and perhaps also in future years during those lunar opportunities that allow single-burn trajectories. . . .” {Data, 10/64, 27—31) During October: Lt. Cdr. M. Scott Carpenter was awarded special gold medal by International Association of Man in Space, commemorating Astronaut Carpenter’s Project Mercury orbital space flight. (Dryden, Ltr. to Carpenter, 11/5/64)
The House Republican Conference’s task force on space and aeronautics charged that NASA was disregarding the safety of astronauts in its haste to place men on the moon. The report specifically criticized the agency for not developing means of rescuing astronauts stranded in orbit and called for a slowdown in the program until the feasibility of “rescue ships” could be explored. The criticisms were directed at the Project Gemini flights. The report suggested that NASA’s reluctance to develop a Gemini space rescue system resulted from a fear that it would slow the Apollo project. (Finney, NYT, 6/5/64)
It was reported that technicians had experienced some difficulty returning to their spacecraft couches during test designed to see how well astronauts would be able to perform certain functions in weightless space flight. The tests were performed inside a mockup of a Gemini capsule mounted in a KC-135 flown to produce short periods of weightlessness. The difficulty was caused by pressure suits swollen by pressurization and couches designed to fit the astronaut only when his suit was not pressurized. Dr. M. Debrovner of msc said that the difficulty would soon be overcome. (Houston Post, 6/9/64)
The last in a series of 11 tests of the F—2 Apollo service module engine was successfully conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineers at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The engine was fired for 20 sec. and then shut down for a five-min. “purge” before a 100-sec. test firing. The F—2 rocket engine would be expected to bring astronauts back to earth from the moon. (Lee, Houston Post, 12/10/64)
Paul Haney, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Public Affairs Officer, told the Radio and Television News Directors Association that television viewers would be able to watch the first astronauts land on the moon from the comfort of their living rooms. Television cameras carried by the astronauts would beam a signal back to earth which could be relayed to the major TV networks. The astronaut on the lunar surface would also take pictures as he walked along. All of these would be relayed back to earth, Haney said. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/12/64; Maloney, Houston Post, 11/12/64)
At the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Afb, Ohio, four college men completed a test in which they lived on astronaut food for 28 days in a spacecraft type of capsule and 14 more days in hospital isolation. They ate what was called “freeze dehydrated foods” that came in one-in. cubes of beef, chicken, etc. Liquid was distilled water, tea, and fruit juices. No ill effects were apparent. (NYT, 11/27/64, 31)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (Maj., USAF) was presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert, at the National Geographic Society, Washington. Award cited Major Cooper for “the most outstanding contribution to the Nation’s progress in aerospace during 1963,” orbiting the earth 22 times in Mercury spacecraft in May 1963. (Wash. Post, 9/22/64X
At Aerospace Medical Association conference, Dr. Dietrich E. Beischer and James C. Knepton, Jr., of Naval School of Aviation Medicine said high magnetic fields, such as those under study for spacecraft shielding, may have noticeable effect on behavior of heart. Squirrel monkeys subjected to high magnetic fields (20,000 to 70,000 gauss) showed up to decrease in heart rate and marked change in heartbeat’s rhythm. Dr. Beischer also reported sea urchin eggs exposed to 140,000 gauss were retarded in their development, but fruit fly showed no effects after two-hour exposure to high gauss. High magnetic fields were being investigated for use in shielding astronauts against cosmic radiation and other space hazards, and Dr. Cornelius Tobias and N. M. Amer reported that magnetic fields around 3.5 kilogauss appeared to have protective effect against high doses of ionizing radiation. (M&R, 5/18/64,16)
At American Astronautical Society meeting in New York, msc’s Dr. Charles A. Berry said Apollo astronauts would be kept in isolation longer than earlier space crews, to prevent infection and disease. Families of crewmen would be given intensive medical care to ensure the good health of the astronauts. If one member of the three-man crew becomes ill, the entire crew would be replaced, he said. (Houston Chron., 5/6/64)
Aerospace Medical Association honored Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II and CoL William K. Douglas at its meeting in Miami. Dr. Lovelace, President of Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research and recently appointed NASA Director of Space Medicine, received the 1964 Theodore C. Lyster award, and Dr. Douglas, Assistant Deputy for Bioastronautics at AFMTC and formerly personal physician to the original seven Mercury astronauts, received the Louis H. Bauer Founders award. (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/14/64)
Boeing Co. scientists announced invention of lightweight telescope with more than 100-mi. range for use by astronaut in satellite interceptor in spotting another orbiting spacecraft. (SBD, 1/15/64, 74)
Colonel John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), was declared fully recovered from inner-ear injury by usaf doctors in San Antonio, Tex. The former NASA astronaut was expected to resign from usmc and become an active director of Royal Crown Cola Co. (upi, NYT, 10/31/64, 11)
usaf Space Systems Div. reinitiated its program to develop Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (amu) for extravehicular space activity. Earlier this year SSD had requested bids for “remote space maneuvering system” but canceled this in favor of the amu, to be used in MOL-oriented program, amu would consist of five subsystems—hydrogen peroxide propulsion, environment control, attitude stabilization, manual control, and telemetry and voice communications. (SBD, 2/17/64, 255)
Translations of reports in Russian journals indicated that space flights lasting longer than 24 hours produced changes in the human body, including bladder and kidney troubles, that could not be corrected. Future Soviet flights would be aimed at detecting the beginning of these disorders and attempting to prevent them. The translations indicated that the Russians planned to send up more doctors and physiologists and that the primary reason for the 16-mo. delay between flights by the U.S.S.R. was the seriousness of the disorders affecting astronauts after flights lasting for five days. Future crews would be selected “as medical teams as opposed to individuals,” said one Soviet journal. The men would also be picked on the basis of their medical compatibility— to see that one man’s personal germs, bacteria, or virus did not infect other members of the team. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 12/13/64)
Astronaut Russell L. Schweikart began week-long test of continuous living in a Gemini spacesuit. Before donning the spacesuit at Edwards afb, he had biosensors attached to his body. Among his activities for the test: experiencing weightlessness in F-104B aircraft, going through reproduction of a Gemini space flight in Manned Spacecraft Center mission simulator, and spinning in Ames Research Center centrifuge. (Maloney, Houston Post, 10/20/64)
More than 2,000 high school juniors and seniors attended Student Space Conference at Northeastern Univ., Boston, where they heard remarks by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Bruce T. Lundin of NASA, John D. Nicolaides of NASA, Nancy G. Roman of NASA, and Isaac Asimov, writer and biochemist. (Boston Sun. Globe, 5/3/64)
Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, msc, announced specific assignments for astronauts. Included in assignments was that of Alan Shepard, Jr., who was named chief of Astronaut Office, taking place of Slayton, who had been acting in the position in. addition to other duties, (msc Roundup, 7/8/64,1)
Fifteen years ago Eastern Test Range was activated at Long Range Proving Ground. Hq. were established at Patrick afb, then still the Banana River nas, some 18 mi. south of Cape Kennedy (then Cape Canaveral) rocket launch site. (A&A, 1915-60; AP, Tulsa Daily World, 10/1/64) October 2: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center conducted tests of astronauts floating in model Gemini spacecraft in the open seas, simulating astronauts awaiting recovery after splash-down from space flight. MSC project engineers considered the tests successful, despite the fact that the two astronauts became ill while the enclosed spacecraft pitched and rolled in the rough Gulf of Mexico waters. The astronauts considered the heat in the spacecraft to be cause of sickness. Tests were ended after 16 hrs. rather than lasting the planned 36 hrs. because of approaching Hurricane Hilda. Astronaut participants: Lt. Alan L. Bean (usn) and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn). (Maloney, Houston Post, 10/3/64)
Prof. Marcel Florkin of Liege Univ., a member of the Committee on Space Research (cospar), said that many American and Soviet scientists shared his belief that men cannot survive weightlessness in space for more than five or six days. He said that Soviet scientists had produced photographs showing abnormalities in cell division attributable to the sustained weightlessness some of their astronauts had experienced. Prof Florkin said that under present conditions, only space robots could visit the moon or Mars and that the only alternative would be space vehicles that could produce artificial gravity to simulate normal human environment. (O’Toole, NYT, 12/24/64)
Mercury capsule (MA—9) in which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper flew 22 earth orbits was viewed by more than 20,000 people when on display in Nebraska State Capitol at Lincoln. (Omaha Eve. World-Her., 7/13/ 64)
In press interview during Third International Symposium on Bioastronautics and Exploration of Space, in San Antonio, Major Duane E. Graveline, a usaf doctor who examined each of the Project Mercury astronauts after their flights, said there was no doubt that even brief forays into space created a certain physical debilitation. “What prolonged space flights, with the constant state of weightlessness and no gravity as we know on earth might do to the human body, we don’t know yet. We know that the Russian cosmonauts have suffered from the effects of prolonged weightlessness, and that U.S. astronauts Walter Schirra and L. Gordon Cooper had temporary debility for the same reason. . . . What we must do now is determine how to condition man for long-duration manned orbital missions and journeys into the universe. Frankly, we don’t have the answers yet.” (Macomber, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 11/19/64)
By this date USAF had made 21 manned drop-tests of the ballute at El Centro, Calif., from C-130 flying at altitudes up to 35,000 ft. Basically a drag balloon, the ballute was under development by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. with NASA funds. To be installed in the ejection seat system of Gemini spacecraft, the self-inflating ballute would stabilize the astronaut during free fall down to 10,000 ft., where final recovery parachute would deploy. (Yaffee, Av. Wk., 4/6/64, 40-45; msc Roundup, 4/15/64, 8)
During annual meeting of international Committee on Space Research (cospar), which ended today, U.S. and Soviet scientists said manned space flights had raised the question of whether a man could tolerate more than five days in space, with present equipment. Scientists said astronauts showed effects of space flights, and last year’s five-day manned space flight by Soviet cosmonaut was about the longest that could be attempted safely now. (Levin, AP, 5/20/64)
Former astronaut Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC) announced his decision to withdraw from the Democratic primary campaign for Senate candidacy in Ohio. Colonel Glenn was still convalescing from severe injury to his vestibular system in the inner ear sustained when he accidentally slipped and struck his head on a bathtub Feb. 26. In Houston, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth said: “The news of John Glenn’s continued illness is upsetting. Our first concern is for his recovery. . . . We will be happy to discuss with John and the-commandant of the Marine Corps his future if John so desires. . . . We wish him a speedy recovery.” (AP, NYT, 3/31/64, 1,18,19; Burkett, Houston Chron., 3/30/64)
Soviet draft treaty for aid to astronauts in distress and for return of spacecraft was submitted to Legal Subcommittee of U.S. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva. Draft treaty differed from U.S. draft by providing that country of origin reserve “exclusive right” to search unassisted for the downed spacecraft on the high seas. Soviet draft also specified two conditions for returning spacecraft: (1) the spacecraft must have been launched “for the purposes of peaceful exploration and use of outer space” and (2) the purpose and launching of the spacecraft must have been “officially announced.” (NYT, 3/11/64,5)
Titan II rocket booster for first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was turned over to the Government in ceremonies at Martin Co.’s Baltimore plant. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini project manager of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said parachute landing system and spacecraft’s ejection seats were all that remained to 'be flight-qualified, and GT-3 was still planned for first quarter of 1965. Mathews disclosed msc had been experimenting for more than a year with braking rockets to enable manned Gemini spacecraft to land on land instead of water. Para-sail also would be used in such a landing. Among other officials present were GT-3 crewmen, Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/64; Witkin, NYT, 10/29/64)
American scientists began a two-year experiment at the South Polar ice cap in which they would study cosmic rays of solar and galactic origin. Located at the South Pole so that the same background of stars would be present at all times, experiment was to investigate any regularities in solar outbursts of cosmic rays, as well as reason for cosmic Tays from sun and galaxy. Cosmic rays could be lethal to astronauts. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/10/64)
At MSC press conference, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Deputy Project Manager of Project Gemini, stated that an experiment assigned to the second manned flight (GT-4) in Project Gemini would involve the first exposure of an astronaut to the hazards of outer space without full space vehicle protection. He said that the experiment would involve “stepping into space,” but modified this later to say that it might involve nothing more than the crewman’s opening up the spacecraft hatch and standing up in his seat In addition to this experiment, the second flight (scheduled for early 1965) also would include other scientific assignments, including medical tests, radiation measurements, and measurement of the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, NYT, 7/30/64)
In speech to cospar on the NASA Biosatellite Program, Dr. Dale Jenkins, Bioscience Programs Div., NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, remarked: “The United States Biosatellite Program is a second generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and equipment development. This program has been designed to study the biological effects of: (a) zero gravity or weightlessness, (b) the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation, and (c) removal of living organisms from the Earth’s rotation. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to critically test major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will delineate hazards to astronauts, and determine and define effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights, for example, may involve changes observed in ten days of bed rest such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. The effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown.” (Text)
RCA announced it had received $22 million subcontract from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for communications system to be used in Project Apollo lunar landing. The system would transmit continuous voice and telemetry data to earth, provide communications between the astronauts on the moon and Lunar Excursion Module (lem) and Apollo command module. (Phil. Eve. Bull.. 4/14/641
Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, NASA Director of Space Medicine, said in Dallas: “Physiologically, women would make excellent astronauts.” However, he added, “They lack the experience in flying high-speed planes and handling the complicated equipment used in the program. “All of our astronauts are seasoned test pilots or men with much experience in combat flying. It would be very difficult for any woman to gain such experience.” (Dallas Morning News, 5/23/64)
Apollo spacecraft (BP-23) was subjected to simulated catastrophic failure of its launch vehicle in a successful test of the ahort escape system at White Sands, N. Mex. Apollo command and service boilerplate modules were boosted on a Little Joe II launch vehicle to the region of maximum dynamic pressure at 29,000-ft. altitude and launch vehicle failure was simulated. The escape vehicle, mated to the spacecraft by a connecting tower, yanked the Apollo free of Little Joe and carried it almost two miles higher. The Little Joe rocket fell to earth; the Apollo modules were returned gently to the ground by three 88-ft. parachutes. This was the third successful test of functioning of the 33-ft. launch escape tower designed to jettison the command module and three Apollo astronauts to safety in an ahort before or during the launch phase of a Saturn V mission. It was the first test of the boost-protective cover subsystem, a contoured shell fitting over the command module and designed to protect the docking mechanism of Lunar Excursion Module (lem) from excessive heating during high temperatures of first-stage flight. It also protected command module windows from exhaust of the launch escape motor, (nasa Release 64-299)
Dr. Thomas B. Weber, formerly at Aerospace Medical Center, Brooks afb, Tex., and now manager of advanced research for space engineering at Beckman Instruments, Inc., Fullerton, Calif., said that all space-cabin simulation experiments so far have had to be called off within a few days because of accumulation of toxic elements in the closed atmospheres. “This may be the reason Russia’s recent three-man space flight, which was expected to last several days, ended after only 24 hours.” Dr. Weber continued, “Unless an answer is found, this is a definite threat to our own plans for a manned orbiting laboratory and it could delay the Apollo program to land men on the moon.” Working under usaf contracts, Dr. Weber had devised instruments to collect and identify more than 400 contaminants given off by the human body and by space cabin equipment. So far he had found that 20 were potentially lethal, including highly explosive hydrogen given off by water used in cooling systems; ozone, given off by electrical equipment; and ammonia, acetone, and alcohol found in breath, perspiration, and body wastes. “None of these occurs in dangerous amounts in a normal environment,” Dr. Weber said, “but in a small cabin they build up to lethal concentrations in short periods of time. . . . Our longest space flight so far lasted less than two days, but even on that one we ran into trouble filtering out the carbon dioxide exhaled by the astronaut.” (AP, Denver Post, 11/8/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/64)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
NASA msc announced Gemini test vehicle for training astronauts in recovery procedures had arrived at MSC, and water tests with the astronauts and recovery forces would be conducted in nearby Galveston Bay. (msc Release 64-2)
At Aerospace Medical Association meeting, Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Dernier, Commander of afsc Research and Technology Div., said usaf was studying use of “space lifeboats” for astronauts who might have to abandon their spacecraft. The self-contained unit would be designed to sustain astronauts until they were rescued, (upi, NYT, 5/12/64,43)
Astronaut Neil Armstrong addressed Aerospace Workshop at Drake Univ.: “We don’t feel at this time it is particularly important whether an astronaut is masculine or feminine. Astronauts are picked on the basis of experience and training. At present there are no women with the proper qualifications available. Some day we will have qualified women and I’m sure they’ll be included in the program.” (Des Moines Register, 7/11/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center named Capt. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Capt. Edward H. White II (usaf) as pilot and copilot for the second manned space flight of Project Gemini (GT—4), a four-day earth-orbital mission in early 1965. Astronauts named as backup crew for the flight were Maj. Frank Borman (usaf) and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn) . All four were “second generation’’ astronauts selected for the NASA program in Sept. 1962. (msc Roundup, 8/5/64,1)
Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced that Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr. (Maj., usaf), would receive the Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1964 for his 34-hour orbital space flight (MA—9) in a Mercury spacecraft May 15-16, 1963. Others to receive Harmon Trophy would be Aviatrix Betty Miller for her solo transpacific flight and Lt. Col. Fitz-hugh Fulton (usaf) for 11,000-lb. payload of B-58 to 85,318-ft. altitude. The Harmon awards for 1963 and 1964 would be presented to recipients in White House ceremony September 14. (NYT, 8/2/64, 78)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced scientists were investigating use of chewing gum for astronauts on long-duration space flights, “to stimulate dental tissues and freshen the astronaut’s mouth. . . (msc Release 64-69)
