afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever predicted at a Retired Officers’ Luncheon in Washington, D.C., that “the next major breakthrough in international commerce will be low cost, long haul air transportation, which could be derived in large part from prior military experience.” Gen. Schriever said he recognized “that there are problems involved in translating military systems into commercial systems . . . but these problems can be successfully attacked and solved if there is adequate long range planning now.” (Text) White’s extravehicular activity, planned for the second orbit, but delayed until the third to allow astronauts more preparation time, began at 3:45 p.m. edt. The cabin was depressurized; White, equipped with tether carrying oxygen and communication and with chest pack for emergency oxygen supply, emerged from the spacecraft just past Hawaii. Carrying a modified 35 mm. single-lens reflex camera loaded with color film and propelled by a hand-held, oxygen-jet gun, he went three times to the full length of his 25-ft. tether and then returned, using the gun to halt his motion and prevent his hitting the spaceship. When the gas supply in the gun was depleted, he returned to the spacecraft by gently tugging on the tether line. At one point, McDivitt exclaimed:	“You smeared my windshield, you dirty dog.” Flight plans had called for a ten-minute walk in space but White remained outside the spacecraft for 22 min. He experienced no disorientation during his “walk.” When he finally heeded commands to return to the capsule, he had difficulty closing the hatch and decided not to reopen it to jettison excess equipment. “It’s the saddest moment of my life,” White said as he reentered the spacecraft. On June 5 during the 17th orbit, the astronauts spoke to their wives at msc. During the 20th orbit, McDivitt spotted a satellite with “big arms sticking out.” He was unable to identify it positively. On June 6 during the 48th orbit, trouble developed with the spacecraft’s computer and attempts to repair it with the aid of ground instructions failed. The malfunctioning computer made it necessary for GEMINI IV to reenter on a ballistic trajectory. Throughout the flight the daily routine of the astronauts included eating, exercise, and performance of medical and scientific experiments. They alternated rest periods. During 12 of the 62 orbits, when gemini iv passed through a heavy radiation area called the South Atlantic anomaly, Astronauts McDivitt and White switched on radiation and magnetic field measuring devices to take readings inside and outside the spacecraft and near their bodies. They also attempted to improve the knowledge of the earth’s terrain through high-quality color photographs; to measure with instruments the electrostatic June 3; Space walk o{ gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White. charge that accumulates in space and on objects in space; to better define the magnitude and direction of the earth’s geomagnetic field; to test the accuracy of part of a prototype navigational system for future space capsules; to measure heartbeats to try to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on functioning of the heart; to determine the effects of limited exercise in space through use of a tension cord; to take high-resolution photographs of cloud formations over the earth to aid weathermen in improved forecasting from weather satellites; to determine more exactly the elevation of the earth’s atmosphere and its layers through use of filtered film; and to determine if long periods of weightlessness might make the bones brittle. On June 7, to begin reentry, McDivitt fired a 100-lb. thrusting rocket for two minutes, 41 sec.—one second too long—to guide the capsule into an orbit with 156.2-mi (252-km.J apogee and 100-mi. (161-km. perigee. Twelve minutes later, McDivitt fired the retro-rockets; 2% min. later he placed the spacecraft into slow rotation to reduce reentry dispersion. Communications with the spacecraft then ceased for about 4 min. as ion-sheath blackout phase of reentry began. GEMINI iv entered the final stage of reentry at 1:07 p.m. edt when the stabilizing chute emerged and damped the oscillations of the descending craft. The main parachute opened shortly afterward and slowed the spacecraft for its final landing at 1:13 p.m. EDT, about 450 mi. east of Cape Kennedy. The landing was 40 mi. off target because of the one-second error in the firing of the thrusting rockets and one-second delay in the firing of the retrorockets. Fifteen minutes after splashdown, Navy frogmen, lowered into the water by helicopter, placed a flotation collar around the capsule. Before egressing from the spacecraft to be hoisted to helicopter, astronauts took biomedical data on themselves. About 40 min. later, Majors McDivitt and White were landed by helicopter on the flight deck of the'carrier Wasp. They were taken immediately to the ship’s sick bay for postflight examinations. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief Flight Surgeon for the astronauts, said after the examinations:	“We have knocked down an awful lot of straw men. We had been told that we would have an unconscious astronaut after four days of weightlessness. Well, they’re not. We were told that the astronaut would experience vertigo, disorientation when he stepped out of that spaceship. We hit that one over the head.” The most serious problem was fatigue. “Both men were bushed,” said Dr. Berry. Maj. McDivitt had a few flecks of caked blood in his nostrils, caused by the dryness of the mucous membranes from inhaling pure oxygen for so long. X-rays taken of the astronauts’ little fingers and heel bones both before and after the flight to determine if long exposure to weightlessness would cause a substantial loss of calcium were being studied. Commenting on the historical significance of the Gemini flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said the flight had included “at least two world firsts”: a record length for two-man flights and the first time a pilot had maneuvered outside a ship with a propulsion gun, which gave him control over his movements. American astronauts had flown a total of 259 hrs. 34 min. in space; Soviet astronauts had accumulated 507 hrs. and 16 min. (NASA Release 65-158; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 6/4/65, 1,15; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65, A1,A6,A10; Wash. Post, 6/4/65, A1,A7,A8; WSJ, 6/4/65, 4; Clark, NYT, 6/5/65, 1,12; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/65, A3; Wash. Post, 6/5/65, A1.A7; NYT, 6/6/65, 1,70; NYT, 6/7/65, 22C; Wash. Post, 6/7/65, A1,A4,A6; Balt. Sun, 6/7/65; Justice, Wash. Post, 6/ 8/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/8/65; Time, 6/8/65, 20,25,25A; NYT, 6/8/65, 22C; NYT, 6/9/65, 1,22; Lee, Houston Post, 6/9/65; Wash. Post, 6/11/65, Al; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, Al; Wash. Post, 6/15/ 65, Al.)
As part of the ceremonies dedicating the Capt. Theodore C. Freeman Memorial Library of Astronautics at the Houston Baptist College, Faith L. Freeman, lO-yr.-old daughter of the late astronaut, was awarded a scholarship to the college. (Houston Post, 1/22/65; msc Roundup, 2/3/65, 8)
Battelle Memorial Institute reported reasons the sweet potato would be the best vegetable for a space garden: (1) it would yield a large number of calories per pound and would have a high count of vitamin A; (2) its leaves are edible, either cooked or raw; (3) under simulated space conditions, it would grow in 90 to 120 days; (4) it would give off oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide, aiding air conditions inside a spacecraft. The plan, Battelle said, would be to grow the sweet potato in a spacecraft in a soilless culture to provide fresh vegetables for astronauts, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/16/65)
In an interview with Izvestia, one of the two directors of the Soviet space program, the “chief designer,” whose identity had never been revealed, said the voskhod ii program had called for Lt. Col. Leonov to spend “10 minutes outside the cabin” but that he could have stayed much longer. He said the weight and space saved by having two men aboard voskhod ii instead of three men, as on voskhod i, had been used to install a decompression chamber and related equipment. The designer said Leonov’s spacesuit was equipped with “duplicate systems” to ensure a high degree of reliability and that a bellows had been installed to allow bending of the torso, arms, and legs. Izvestia said in another article that Leonov’s spacesuit consisted of five layers: a heat reflecting layer outside; material for strength; airtight material; heat insulating material; and an inside layer containing a ventilation system. The “chief theoretician,” joint director of the Soviet space program, told Izvestia that Col. Leonov’s venture into space had shown that future astronauts might find it easier to work in space than on earth. He said that “we shall yet live to see the day when orbiting platforms appear in space—resembling scientific research institutes in the earth’s upper atmosphere.” The theoretician was also quoted as saying that Leonov’s principal assignment had been to determine man’s reaction to “weightlessness in free space.” He told Tass: “We obtained in practice what we had visualized theoretically before.” (Tanner, NYT, 3/20/65, 1, 3)
Vice President Humphrey and the gemini iv astronauts, Maj. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Maj. Edward H. White II (usaf), won cheers and applause from visitors to the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France. Attendance at U.S. pavilion, which had been poor, picked up appreciably. Also present were nasa Administrator James E.	Webb, and Charles Mathews, manager of the Gemini program. A scheduled formal meeting between the American astronauts and Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, fell through when the Soviets announced that Col. Gagarin would be “too busy.” However, at an official luncheon, Gagarin stopped at White’s table and the two astronauts shook hands and spoke briefly, (ap, NYT, 6/20/65, 38; UPl, Wash. Daily News, 6/19/65; ap, Hudgins, Wash. Post, 6/20/65, A28)
NASA officials released clear, detailed, color and black and white photographs of the gemini vii-vi rendezvous taken by the gemini vi astronauts, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/18/65, El)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that USAF would send 12 f-5a jet fighter aircraft to Vietnam this fall to evaluate the performance of this new multipurpose aircraft under combat conditions. Built by Northrop Corp., the f-5a was a lightweight supersonic aircraft that could carry 6,200 lbs. of bombs, rockets, air-to-air missiles, or other ordnance. With two' 20-mm. cannons mounted in its nose, it could take off fully loaded from unpaved runways. (dod Release 614-65) “Why they would not appear at all, said Scheer. He said no one had cleared such a meeting with him . . . The Russians were angry and left the scene in a huff, and at a news conference later, Sedov made no secfet of the fact that they considered the incident a snub and an affront. “An air of mistrust now prevailed. There was, as Pete Conrad observed later, ‘some real bad feeling around this place.’ “Scheer, trying to right things, sent a letter to Dr. William Pickering, president of the International Astronautical Federation, urging that the astronauts be brought together. . . . “Friday afternoon Cooper and Conrad spoke before a Congress session. . . . “As soon as that meeting was over, the two Americans jumped from the conference stage and headed for the white-uniformed Belyayev . . . Conrad [said] through the Russian’s interpreter ‘Tell him we would like to show them all our pictures. . . . Tell him we’ve got 250 slides and they can see them all. When would they like to see them?’ ” Hicks said Belyayev exchanged his lapel pin with Cooper and Conrad gave his to Belyayev to be delivered to Leonov. Hicks continued: “That night, considerably more progress was made at the Congress’s large banquet. Cooper and Belyayev, strategically seated within talking distance, even went so far as to exchange watches. . . . Finally the astronauts warmed up the cosmonauts from the earlier chill. They ail posed for a four-way handshake photograph. No more fooling around through official channels, drawled Cooper. Why don’t you fellows come up to our place for breakfast tomorrow morning? “The Russians agreed. . . . The talk, through an interpreter, was almost entirely personal and non-technical. . . . Conrad and Leonov exchanged writing pens. All traded autographs and Leonov . . . drew a picture of himself walking in space. . . . “As they departed, the spacemen locked in Kussian-styie bear-hugs. . . . Said one of the Soviet pilots, ‘We are colleagues and we have a full understanding. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad are good boys.’” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/17/65, A10; Hicks, Life, 10/1/65, 113-116)
At a news conference at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini GT—4 spaceflight, Astronaut McDivitt said: “I saw three things that looked to me like they were satellites on the earth. I saw two over the Pacific, I guess. One . . . near Hawaii. ... I saw a white object and it looked like it was cylindrical and it looked to me like there was a white arm sticking out of it. . . . We saw another one at night. It looked like just a pin point of light in the sky. . . . And I saw another one over the western Pacific again just shortly before I got into the sunlight on the windshield. . . . The only one I could even define the shape of at all was the first one and it looked a lot like an upper stage of a booster.” Astronaut White commented: “. . . we were looking to find out: Could man control himself in space? And the answer is yes, man can control himself in space.” McDivitt continued: “The first thing we learned was that the Gemini 4 is a liveable spacecraft for at least four days.” (Transcript; NYT, 6/12/65, 3)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
Gemini V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., together with Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, and Paul P. Haney, MSC Public Affairs Officer, held a news conference at MSC. Both astronauts recommended that in future flights both pilots sleep at the same time; more rehydratable foods be included in the diet; daily inflight exercises to compensate for muscular inactivity of the legs be included; the crew travel without spacesuits for greater comfort and flexibility; and that the training period be less compressed. Cooper and Conrad agreed that stowage had been the main problem throughout the flight. “Any small little item that was misplaced or wasn’t placed in the proper location seemed to multiply,” Cooper said. They had seen “a great many micrometeorites, and one meteorite when it was reentering the atmosphere down below us. And on any night side, during a very short interval of time, you could see micrometeorites reentering.” Dr. Gilruth said he considered both astronauts “very potential candidates” for the first trip to the moon. (Transcript)
President Johnson sent letters to Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn), Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf), and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf), congratulating them on successful completion of the gemini vi and gemini vii space missions and advising them that promotions for new astronauts would be submitted to Congress for confirmation in January. (Pres. Doc., 12/27/65, 606)
A moving model of a proposed lunar exploration vehicle under development by the Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. was demonstrated on two acres of simulated moonscape. The two-section wheeled craft, known as a mobile base simulator, lumbered at five mph around moonlike craters made of cinders and coal dust at the Grumman test field, Calverton, L. I. The Grumman engineer in charge of the project, Edward G. Markow, explained that the aluminum working model, valued at $250,000, was being developed in the hope that NASA officials would buy the project for use possibly by 1975. The exploration craft would have a lunar range of 250 mi. and accommodate two astronauts with 50 lbs. of equipment for perhaps two weeks. It was designed for use with the Saturn V booster. {NYT, 11/30/65, 22)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White, II (Maj., usaf) of the June 3-7 gemim iv flight received usaf astronaut wings from Gen. John P. McConnell, usaf Chief of Staff, in an Air Force ceremony at the Pentagon, x-15 test pilot Joseph H. Engle (Capt., usaf) also received USAF astronaut wings, thus becoming the 12th American to receive the award and the fifth to wear the insignia for suborbital flight. Meanwhile the Senate Armed Services Committee approved President Johnson’s promotion of Astronauts Walter M. Schirra from commander to captain and John W. Young from It. commander to commander. (dod Release 458-65, 7/14/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at a press conference held in conjunction with the NASA University Program Review Conference in Kansas City, Mo., that the space research program would cost $35 billion over a ten-year period. At the end of that time, NASA expected to have accomplished (1) 12 to 15 flights of the Saturn V, (2) 5,000 hrs. of astronaut flight time, and (3) the capability of lifting 240,000 lbs. from the earth and orbiting 90,000 lbs. (Kansas City Times, 3/3/65)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), visited Pope Paul vi at Vatican City and accepted a medal commemorating the Pontiffs October 4 visit to the United Nations. (Reuters, NYT, 10/14/65, 32; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/14/65, A-2)
Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, told a press conference that “there is a question whether astronauts can stand long confinement, let alone weightlessness.” Dr. Gilruth was in Los Angeles to accept the 1964 Spirit of St. Louis Medal from the asme at the Aviation and Space Conference. (Miles, L. A. Times, 3/17/65; naa S&ID Skywriter, 3/19/65, 1)
Christopher C. Kraft, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center director of flight operations, said the three-orbit Gemini gt-3 flight with astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and John W. Young (usn) would be much safer than Project Mercury orbital space flights. The astronauts would not depend solely on the braking rockets to bring them back to earth. They would make maneuvers during the first and third orbits to bring the spacecraft back through the atmosphere even if retrofiring braking rockets failed. Toward the end of the third orbit, near Hawaii, Grissom would fire the rockets for about two minutes, sending the Gemini spacecraft into a 54-mi. orbit which would be a reentry path. Over Los Angeles, the main braking rockets would be fired to drive the spacecraft down to a landing about 70 mi. east of Grand Turk Island in the Atlantic Ocean. Kraft said if the braking rockets did not fire, the gt-3 craft would land about 1,000 mi. due west of Ascension Island. (Galveston News-Tribune, 2/16/65)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that it would take “a great deal of effort over a number of years” for the United States to achieve first place in space and warned it would be “a mistake to believe” that the successful GEMINI iv spaceflight had “overcome a lead of several years” held by the Soviet Union. He said “the most important result” of the GEMINI iv flight might be the condition of the astronauts upon their return, based on the preliminary medical examinations of Astronauts McDivitt and White. The final medical report on the flight and their postflight condition would take about two months. (Text; Clark, NYT, 6/16/65, 13)
Kansas City Star editorial: “In the long book of history, the 20th century is likely to have a place alongside the 15th and 16th centuries that saw historic explorations of the surface of the earth. Today, man is on the edge of the conquest of another world—the world of space. He now possesses the capability of leaving this planet and setting foot on the moon or another body of the solar system. “In fact, it now begins to appear that American astronauts will settle gently onto the surface of the moon in 1969. It will be an exploit that knows no counterpart in more than 4 billion years of earth’s history. . . .”	(Kansas City Star, 9/12/65)
In a memorandum report to President Johnson on Gemini vi NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “This is to report to you that the Titan ii booster which we expected to use on October 25 to launch Gemini 6, carrying astronauts Schirra and Stafford, is now being removed from the launching pad. We have examined carefully the question of whether this booster could be used for the launching of Gemini 7 into a 14-day orbit, and our studies show that the Titan booster which we have especially prepared for Gemini 7 is more suitable. This is the reason for the change from the booster now on the pad to the one especially designed for the Gemini 7 launch. “Also, we have examined a number of ways to speed up the accumulation of the information which the Gemini 6 rendezvous flight was designed to give us. We find that it may be possible to take advantage of the work we have already done in mating the Gemini 6 to its booster and to the launching facility and thus save considerable time in its re-erection. If we can launch Gemini 7 without serious damage to the launching pad, there is some possibility that we could immediately re-erect the Gemini 6 spacecraft and booster and launch it in time to rendezvous with Gemini 7 before the 14-day flight comes to an end.” (Text; Pres. Doc., 11/1/65, 734)
Reports by U.S. astronauts of seeing details on the earth’s surface while orbiting the earth at altitudes of over 100 mi. did not surprise physicists at the U.S. Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Laboratory in Indianapolis, reported the Indianapolis Star. Wind tunnel experiments there had proven that the closer a viewer is to turbulent air, the more it distorts an image: the image wavers in brightness, changes position, and shifts in and out of focus. All these effects diminish contrast—an essential factor in identifying objects in aerial reconnaissance. The effects are reduced and seeing improves as the viewer moves away from the turbulence. (Lewis, Sci. Serv., Indianapolis Star, 7/11/65)
NASA announced plans to install Unified S-Band System equipment at Corpus Christi communications station for use with Apollo spaceflights. With the system, the station would be able to combine in a single two-way transmission all types of communications with the three Apollo astronauts. Seven kinds of communications would be conducted simultaneously, including tracking the spacecraft; commanding its operations and confirming execution of commands; two-way voice conversation; continuous checks on the astronauts’ health; continuous check on the spacecraft and its functions; continuous information from onboard experiments; and television pictures of the astronauts and their exploration of the moon. All communications would be conducted with one 30-ft.-dia. parabolic ground antenna to be constructed at Corpus Christi. (nasa Release 65-250)
Special NASA awards ceremony was held at MSC, with NASA Administrator James E. Webb making the presentations. Rep. Olin Teague, Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also was present for the occasion. NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest honor, was presented to Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, MSC, and to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Command Pilot for GEMINI VI mission. Slayton’s award was for “his outstanding performance in directing NASA flight operations and for his leadership of the continuous and rapid adaptation of NASA’s astronaut training activities to the experience gained from Mercury and Gemini flights. . . .” Schirra’s dsm cited “his courage and judgment in the face of great personal danger, his calm, precise and immediate perception of the situation that confronted him and his accurate and critical decisions that made possible the successful execution of the Gemini VI mission.” This ceremony marked the first time the top NASA medal was presented away from Washington. (With these two presentations, all seven original Mercury astronauts had received the Distinguished Service Medal.) nasa Exceptional Service Medal was presented to the crews of gemini VII (Astronauts Borman and Lovell) and VI (Astronauts Schirra and Stafford); William C. Schneider, Deputy Director of the Gemini Program for Mission Operations, omsf; and John T. Mengel, Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems Directorate, gsfc. Group Achievement Awards were presented to the following groups from the Cape: ksc Launch Operations; ksc Spacecraft Operations; Martin Co. Gemini program group; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Gemini program group; Gemini Launch Vehicle Div., afsc 6555th Aerospace Test Wing: and afetr Test Operations Div. (msc Gemini VII/ Gemini VI Fact Sheet; Exec. Secy., msc Awards Committee; nasa Proj. Off.)
Gemini v backup crew members, civilians Neil Armstrong and Elliot M. See, Jr., began a training exercise in Gulf of Mexico waters designed to teach the astronauts the proper methods to leave the spacecraft after touchdown. Primary crew members Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) and Cdr. Charles Conrad (usn) would take the same training July 21. (ap, Houston Chron., 7/16/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (LCdr., usn) finished the last day of their general debriefing at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (upi, NYT, 9/2/65, 15; Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A14)
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., (LCdr., usn) discussed the GEMINI v spaceflight with the Oba (King) of Benin in his palace in Nigeria. In his luncheon speech, the Oba said: “In this age, astronauts are physically making visits to some sphere in the universe our ancient people thought was possible to visit only in spirit form. . . . Such journeys may prove or disprove such theories that the space is limitless, according to scientists, or that over and above the outer space there is a canopy, according to the saying of our ancient people.” (Louchheim, Wash. Post, 9/29/65, Al)
First Negro to receive usaf astronaut training, Capt. Edward J. Dwight, Jr. (usaf), denied Ebony magazine’s charges that he had been eliminated from selection by the NASA program because of his race. Dwight said the charge “apparently had some information out of context.” A statement released by NASA in response to queries about Dwight said:	“A formal objective rating system based on flight experience, academic background and supervisory ratings was developed and used by a preliminary selection committee in rating the candidates to make sure that the best qualified were selected as finalists to be considered for the 14 available astronaut positions. Of the 136 candidates, 102, including Capt. Dwight, were eliminated by the primary selection committee, leaving a group of 34 finalists of whom the 14 best were chosen. “Selection is made on a best qualified basis without regard to race, religion or sex. “Capt. Dwight did possess the basic qualifications; he did not score sufficiently high to be selected under the rating system.” (upi, NYT, 6/3/65; WSJ, 6/3/65, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/65)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), youngest holder of Air Force astronaut wings, was honored by his hometown of Chapman, Kansas, with a parade. Engle fle>v the x-15 to peak altitude of 282,000 ft. on June 29, qualifying for the astronaut wings, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/7/65, A-2)
Presidential Press Secretary William D. Moyers announced from the Texas White House that the U.S. would launch Gemini 6 and Gemini 7 about 10 days apart and have them rendezvous in space. The double launching would probably take place in January with the two spacecraft scheduled to maneuver within a few feet of each other but without touching. Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) would be in Gemini 6, whose Oct. 25 mission was canceled after an Agena vehicle with which they were to dock exploded in space. In Gemini 7, set for a 14-day orbital journey, would be Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James Lovell (Lcdr., usn). (Pomfret, NYT, 10/29/65, 1; Chapman, Wash. Post, 10/29/65, Al)
NASA absolved Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) of any blame in the 58-mi.-off-target landing of the GEMINI ill spacecraft following the three-orbit flight Mar. 23, according to msc spokesman. The mishap was attributed to the fact that the spacecraft did not develop as much lift as expected. The possibility that Major Grissom might have banked GEMINI in improperly as a result of misunderstanding instructions from ground stations had been investigated, (upi, NYT, 4/21/65, 11, msc gemini iii Fact Sheet)
Subcommittee Chairman Albert Thomas (D-Tex.) and the House Independent Offices Appropriations Subcommittee were highly critical of Astronaut Virgil Grissom’s deviation from flight plan instructions during the GEMINI ill flight and eating a sandwich instead of fasting. According to published reports, one Subcommittee member referred to a “$30 million corned beef sandwich,” and another asked NASA Administrator James E. Webb how he could control a multi-million dollar budget if he could not control two astronauts. (Av. Wk., 4/12/ 65, 25; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/15/65)
An editorial in the Baltimore Sun said: “Yesterday’s Gemini flight is described as ‘historic’ and so it was. So too is each successful new space exploration, launched by whatever country, manned or unmanned. . . . What is happening is that a body of knowledge is being accumulated through increasingly accurate photographs and increasingly sophisticated exercises and experiences on the part of the adventurers of our age, the astronauts. . . .” (Balt. Sun, 3/24/65)
Commencing on the visit to Washington, D.C., by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., the Washington Post wrote: “Colonel Cooper has been through all this before following his 22-orbit flight in May, 1963. The reception this time will be less spectacular. But this does not mean that the astronauts have become passe or that the American people are indifferent to their achievements. Rather it is a reflection of the public’s trust in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s space program. For if the people no longer gawk and shout, they still applaud vigorously, with their hearts as well as their hands, each monumental step in the great venture into space.” (Wash. Post, 9/14/65)
Months-long breathing of pure oxygen at the pressure used in Gemini spacecraft might damage the lungs and interfere with blood cell manufacture in the body, reported Col. Harold V. Ellingson (usaf) at a meeting of the American College of Preventive Medicine in Chicago. For that reason, he said, pure oxygen would not be used in Air Force manned orbiting laboratories in which astronauts would remain in space 30-90 days. Instead a mixture of oxygen and helium was being considered. Colonel Ellingson, Commander of the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks afb, emphasized he was not referring to brief orbital trips such as the Gemini flights, but to missions of one to three months duration. (Lewis, Wash. Post, 10/28/65, G3)
DOD selected the first eight of a planned 20 astronauts for USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program: Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) ; Maj. Albert H. Crews (usaf) ; Lt. John L. Finley (usn) ; Capt. Richard E. Lawyer (usaf) ; Capt. Lachlan Macleay (usaf) ; Capt. F. Gregory Neubeck (usaf) ; Capt. James M. Taylor (usaf) ; and Lt. Richard H. Truly (usn). Formal training would begin at Edwards afb, early next year, (usaf Release)
nasa astronauts gathered at nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center for a debriefing by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr. The meeting was held primarily for the Gemini Vi and vn crews, but other astronauts attended as observers, (ap, NYT, 9/6/65, 6; Wash. Post, 9/5/65, A8)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
Thirteen NASA astronauts left NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for an area near King Salmon afb, Alaska, for a week-long study of a large volcanic ash flow believed to be similar to the surface of the moon. The ash was deposited in 1912 from a volcanic eruption and is the largest flow of its type in the world, (ap, NYT, 6/22/65, 2)
A $3,200,000 contract had been let to the E. A. Hathaway Co. for construction of the new 93,000-sq.-ft. Advanced Flight Simulation Laboratory at NASA Ames Research Center, ARC announced. It would contain the most advanced aircraft simulator known (for supersonic transport studies) ; the most powerful centrifuge yet built (up to 50 times the force of gravity); a mid-course navigation facility where stars and planets could be projected just as they would be seen by astronauts in spaceflight; and a “virtually frictionless” satellite attitude control facility. Total values of these facilities would be $10,068,000. (ARC Release 65-16)
Hughes Space Systems Div. at El Segundo, Calif., signed a contract with NASA to propose designs of a beacon that could be placed on the moon as a guide for safe landing for moonbound Apollo astronauts. The beacon would be landed on the moon with a Surveyor spacecraft, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bui., 2/10/65)
The rendezvous of Geminis 6 and 7 had been scheduled tentatively for the eighth day of Gemini 7’s 14-day endurance flight, revealed Command Pilot Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf) at a news conference held by Gemini vu’s prime and backup astronaut crews at MSC. Gemini 7 would act as a passive target vehicle, but would expend fuel to circularize its 108-mi.-perigee orbit to 161-mi.-perigee orbit and to maneuver into range of Gemini 6’s radar, if necessary. Borman said there would be no Eva on Gemini vii because the crew would be wearing new lightweight spacesuits unsuitable for work in the vacuum of space; he was unaware of any plans for Eva on Gemini VI. During ten days of the mission, the Gemini vii crew would fly in USAF-issue longjohn underwear. Pilot James Lovell (Cdr., usn) said that training for Gemini vii had emphasized stowage reviews because of the serious stowage problems encountered by Astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on their eight-day GEMINI v flight August 19. (Transcript; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/2/65, A3)
Robert L. Sohn, scientist at Space Technology Laboratories, proposed to use the gravity field of Venus as a brake for manned spacecraft returning from Mars. “We don’t expect to have boosters powerful enough to launch spacecraft of the 1970s that can carry extra propulsion to brake reentry speeds. . . . The landing corridor will be so narrow that a small fractional error in navigation would send the spacecraft into an eternal orbit around the sun.” He said traveling near Venus on the return journey from Mars would slow a spacecraft as it passed through the Venutian gravity field. Then, with some midcourse maneuvering and navigation, the astronaut could return to earth and reenter earth’s atmosphere with greater margin of error. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 1/17/65)
Announcement was made at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) had been selected for the first Gemini docking and rendezvous mission, scheduled for launch “the first quarter of 1966.” Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John Young (Cdr., usn) would be the backup crew. (Transcript)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) qualified for the military rating of astronaut by piloting the x-15 No. 3 research aircraft to an altitude of 280,600 ft. at a maximum speed of 3,432 mph (mach 4.94). By exceeding 264,000	ft. (50 mi.) Engle, 32, met the USAF astronaut requirements. Purpose of the flight was to use a scanning device to obtain measurements of the earth’s horizon. The measurements would be used to establish the design criteria for navigational systems for future spacecraft. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; nasa Release 65-201; X—15 Flight Log)
The John Young Award, a medal specially struck by the citizens of Orlando, Fla., was presented to the astronaut as a highlight of the John Young Day celebration. The medal would be used in future years to honor Orlando residents for outstanding achievements, but would not necessarily be awarded annually. (Orl. Sent., 4/18/65)
Gemini gt-3 Astronauts Maj. Virgil I. Grissom and LCdr. John W. Young were given traditional heroes’ welcome from New Yorkers at a parade given in their honor. Honored with the astronauts was Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Associate Administrator of NASA. They were met by Mayor Wagner and the city’s official greeter, Commissioner Richard C. Patterson of the Department of Public Events. Mayor Wagner presented gold keys to the city to the astronauts and Dr. Seamans at a ceremony at City Hall. He also presented the city’s Gold Medal of Honor to Major Grissom and Dr. Seamans and the Silver Medal of Honor to Commander Young. At the United Nations, Secretary General U Thant presented medals and two autograph sets of U. N. outer space commemorative stamps to the astronauts. (Sibley, NYT, 3/29/65, 36; Talese. NYT, 3/20/65, 1: Orl. Sent., 3/30/65)	'
At Purdue Univ., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed in a speech nasa’s emphasis on man’s part in future planned space experiments:	“The role of man in space is basic to any discussion of our planned space experiments. . . . We have always recognized his inherent characteristics as a sensor, manipulator, evaluator and investigator. “As a sensor, man adds little to automatic equipment in space— sometimes nothing at all. . . . instruments can measure . . . phenomena that man cannot perceive at all. “But instruments are limited by the knowledge we now have on earth; they cannot cope with the unexpected or the unknown. Man, on the other hand, can operate in any unprogrammed situation and reap full benefits of the true objective of manned operations. He can explore the unknown. “The second function of man in space is manipulation. Gus Grissom demonstrated superbly last month that a man can operate the spacecraft controls for delicate maneuvering. . . . “In the conduct of space research also, man as a manipulator can probe into his environment. He can make use of motor responses and verbal skills to carry out procedures and to assemble, operate and repair equipment. . . . “With the capacity to evaluate, man achieves a substantial degree of self-reliance in controlling what he perceives and how he reacts. When a man remembers, analyzes, compares, and induces—using a solid foundation of knowledge—he has improved the degree to which meaningful data can be translated into useful knowledge. . . . “The most advanced role of man in space is that of an investigator who responds creatively to unexpected situations. He is able to postulate theories and hypotheses, and to devise and use systematic measurements. In this role, the astronaut is a full-fledged scientist.” (Text)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
In a White House ceremony, President Johnson conferred Exceptional Service Medals on GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Charles Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts. The President announced that military promotions for the astronauts would be submitted to the Senate immediately. (Richard, Wash. Post, 9/15/65, A3) Following the ceremony, Vice President Hubert Humphrey accompanied the astronauts, their families, and Dr. Berry to the National Academy of Sciences. Humphrey told the Academy: “The achievements of our astronauts are not just the achievements of two men. They are the achievements of family, country and of a society. . . . “This is the best example of cooperation between Government and industry, between public and private, that I know in this nation, and might I add, that it is an example that should be emulated by many others in many other endeavors in this country. “But our space program ... is more than national. It would be well enough if it were only national, but it is more than that. It is truly international. And I want ... to stress our space program’s potential as an arm of our foreign policy, of our international relations, and particularly of our peace policy, because this Government has but one objective in the world: a just, honorable and enduring peace. . . .” Astronaut Cooper summarized some of the things that man could do in space: “. . . we again showed that man can do a great deal of geological observations while in space. ... I think it is very significant that although you pass across some [geological formations] rather rapidly you still are able to . . . observe them and you are very capable of photographing them in great detail. “. . . man is very capable of doing oceanographic observations. We have noted that you can detect a great deal of detail as to the depths of water, as to the currents of running water, and even to wind patterns that run on the waters, the wave patterns caused by the wind. “. . . man could do a great deal of weather observations, both in real time and photographically. And we . . . were able to pinpoint one tropical storm in between some of the planned observations, and apparently that was very accurate pinpointing of its position. “We determined in our discussions later with the Weather Bureau people, that for future use ... we could get much greater accuracy even on pinpointing these by the use of our platform combination and taking angles to a great deal more accuracy, rather than just estimations of the angular distance and locations. “We found that you could do a great deal of visual observations of the phenomena around the earth ... we picked up ship wakes, several hundred miles away of . . . the contrast of the white wake against the blue background in very clear weather areas. . . .” Conrad revealed that photographs taken during the Gemini v mission at the request of the Mexican government, had located volcanoes in Mexico that “the Mexicans didn’t know they had. . . .” He also said: “I think a system that has been left out and nobody has talked about is our environmental control system, which performed in a most outstanding manner for eight days. We had probably the nicest, freshest air that anybody could want to breathe, and we had an unusual first in the space business: most environmental control systems had been loaded down and pilot after pilot came back and said they were too warm, and we fought and fought it, and at McDonnell, to have a little change made because of some of the problems of heat exchange between the inlet and outlet pipes. It turned out that we were too cold. “With two tubes running, we were probably the first ones to shut the cabin heat exchanger down and run everything as hot as we could get it in there. We were just right. And the thing that most surprised us on opening the hatch on landing, we couldn’t tell the difference between inside and out, and that is a monumental job for that small system.” Dr. Berry concluded the program by presenting a review of the medical data received from the gemini v mission. The astronauts’ party then proceeded to the Capitol where Vice President Humphrey presented them to the Senate and then to the House. Cooper told the House: “We set out with our prime objective on Gemini 5 to fly 8 days. We were to fly this 8 days primarily to show that man, with all the various equipment on board, and the machines, could safely and very functionally do this 8-day mission with no adverse effects. We were entirely successful in this. . . .” Conrad explained: “Gemini 5 was a significant advance in the whole program in that we flew the first all-out spacecraft. We would not have been able to go without the fuel cells for 8 days. This was the first time they were flown. We had the first radars from which we got some very excellent data to enable the GT-6 to continue with their present rendezvous plans. It was the first time that the cryogenic storage of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been run that long in space. . . .” Dr. Berry told the Senate: “We are conducting a program such as this [Gemini program] ... to make man a vital part of such a research effort and to show the facility that man has to gain scientific information using vehicles such as we are able to build in this country. . . . “I think I can report, so far as information has been obtained in this country to date and at the moment, that we are the only ones who have that sort of information for the duration of which we are speaking. We can confidently say that man has been able to perform very well up to 4 days in a weightless state earlier, and on this mission 8 days in a weightless state. He has then been able to re-adapt back to a 1-G environment. We have living proof of that.” (Texts; CR, 9/14/65, 22924-22927; nas-nrc News Report, 9/65, 1-2)
Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of nasa Manned Space Flight Field Center Development, told Theodore von Karman Memorial Seminar in Los Angeles that solutions to air and water pollution “could very well develop out of the research now being undertaken to develop self-sustaining life support systems for astronauts on missions of long duration.” (West, L.A. Times, 5/13/65)
Paraglider, in its first successful manned free flight, demonstrated it could guide a spacecraft to preselected landing site. Test pilot Donald F.	McCusker landed a Gemini-type test craft at Edwards afb, following a four-and-one-half-minute flight suspended beneath the wing. He put the previously-inflated paraglider and simulated spacecraft through a series of turn and pitch maneuvers enroute to his landing, after being towed aloft by helicopter and dropped at approximate 8,000-ft. altitude. In actual spacecraft recovery, the paraglider would be stored in a ten-cubic-foot canister onboard the spacecraft. After reentry when the vehicle would be slowed by the earth’s atmosphere and parachute drogue, the paraglider would be deployed to its full size—31 ft. long with a 31-ft. span—using an onboard nitrogen supply. The astronaut would control his glide through an onboard flight-control system. North American Aviation, Inc., was conducting the paraglider program for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, studying the feasibility of a controlled earth landing system, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 9/3/65, 1)
Gemini vii would be launched Dec. 4 and Gemini vi Dec. 13 in a combination long-duration, rendezvous mission, NASA announced. Astronaut Frank Borman (l/c, usaf) would be command pilot and Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), pilot, on a 14-day mission to determine the effects of long-duration spaceflight on man; 20 scientific, medical, and technological experiments would be performed. Astronauts Edward H. White ii (l/c, usaf), and Michael Collins (Maj., usaf) would be Gemini vii’s backup crew. Gemini vi mission would be nearly identical to the original rendezvous flight postponed October 25 when the Agena Target Vehicle failed to achieve orbit, and would demonstrate rendezvous of two vehicles in space. Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Pilot Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) would maneuver the Gemini 6 spacecraft within close proximity of Gemini 7 during the fourth revolution and station-keep for a period of time, but would not dock. Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (l/c, usaf) and John W. Young (Cdr., usn) would be Gemini Vi’s backup crew, (nasa Release 65-347; UPl, NYT, 11/10/ 65)
United Airlines announced that fog-dispersal plans involving aerial seeding of clouds were being discussed in nine cities in addition to those where the technique had already been successful. United had conducted successful seeding operations last winter using light planes to drop ice pellets into the top layers of super-cooled fog. The airline estimated that the fog-abatement program had permitted 135 of its flights, carrying 3,200 passengers, to operate at airports that otherwise would have been closed, (ap, NYT, 8/21/65, 48) August 21-29; CE.MiNi v launch (left), and Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and L- Gordon Cooper, Jr., onboard U.S.S. Lake Champlain after eight-day mission and recovery (above). First stage of the booster burned for 156.8 sec. Second stage then separated, burned for 179.6 sec. Traveling at 17,605 mph. 7,947-lb. Gemini v was inserted into orbit: apogee. 215.4 mi. (347.4 km.); perigee, 100 mi. (161.3 km.); period, 89.58 min.; inclination to the equator, 32.6°. Fifty-six minutes after liftoff, astronauts fired thruster rockets to raise the perigee to 106 mi. (179.9 km.) in preparation for rendezvous with Rep, a practice maneuver to prepare for Gemini 6’s rendezvous in orbit with an Agena stage. At beginning of 2nd orbit, astronauts ejected Rep from the adapter section behind the spacecraft. Rep moved away at five miles per hour. About two hours after insertion of gemini v into orbit, oxygen pressure for the new fuel cell dropped from 800 to 60 lbs. psi because of a failure in the heater element circuitry. This pressure-drop severely reduced the fuel cell’s output of electrical power. The Rep experiment was abandoned and there was some apprehension as to whether the flight could continue. At 27 hrs, into the flight. Cooper and Conrad successfully locked their spacecraft radar on a spare Rep transponder mounted on a tower at NASA Merritt Island Launch Area during a six-minute pass. Oxygen pressure began building up in the fuel-cell system and hopes of completing the mission were raised. On Aug. 23, as gemini v made its 32nd revolution around the earth, the spacecraft began a series of maneuvers to rendezvous with a simulated Agena upper stage in lieu of the Rep experiment. By the 34th orbit Gemini v was only 16 mi. behind the simulated Agena, very close to the planned 15-mi. separation NASA hoped to have on GEMINI VI prior to final closing and docking maneuver. Last maneuver was not attempted because of the need to conserve fuel on GEMINI V. On Aug. 24, Astronauts Cooper and Conrad twice spotted objects on the ground; they observed a Minuteman icbm launch from Vanden-berg afb, and tracked and photographed it; they sighted a huge checkerboard design laid out on the ground near Laredo, Tex., and reported direction in the which arrows in the center of the blocks were pointed. During the flight, the astronauts both remained in good spirits. Sixteen of the planned seventeen experiments were conducted. Despite the heavy work schedule, Cooper and Conrad each slept about five hours a day. The astronauts ate about 2,000 calories of food a day, less than the 2,900 calories prescribed for the mission, and each drank six pounds of water daily. Aug. 27 saw problems with the steady accumulation of water in the fuel cell, which threatened to exceed water-storage capacity; faulty attitude and maneuvering thrusters; and the boiling off of hydrogen gas which caused the spacecraft to roll. On Aug. 28, the fuel cell and the left thruster were functioning well. Conrad reported seeing “a carrier and a destroyer steaming right into Jacksonville”; it was actually a tug pulling a large barge. On Aug. 29 Cooper and Conrad talked via radio with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), in Sealab II on the floor of the Pacific off La Jolla, Calif. Approach of Hurricane Betsy from the coast -of South America forced NASA officials to order GEMINI V to land one revolution early. Two more of gemini v’s thrusters froze, but there was still sufficient steering power to correct minor variations. To begin reentry, the astronauts fired four braking rockets as the spacecraft passed 700 mi. north of Hawaii. Reentry was normal. gemini v splashed down into the Atlantic at 8:56 a.m. edt, 600 mi. east of Jacksonville—90 mi. off target. A human error in computing the elapsed time of flight caused the target error. Assisted from the capsule by Navy frogmen 45 min. after splashdown, the astronauts were taken by helicopter to U.S.S. Lake Champlain for medical debriefing. (nasa Release 65-262; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 8/22/65, 1, 72, 73, El; 8/23/65, 1, 16; 8/24/65, 1, 16; 8/25/65, 1, 24; 8/26/65, 1, 15; 8/27/65, 1, 12; 8/29/65, 1, 68, 69 ; 8/30/65, 1, 16, 17; Wash. Post, 8/22/65, 1, 34; 8/23/65, 1, 3; 8/24/65, 1, 6; 8/25/65, 1, 10, 24; 8/26/65, 11; 8/27/65, 1, 6, 7; 8/28/65, 1, 7; 8/29/65, 1, 8, 10; 8/30/65, 1, 9, 11; WSJ, 8/23/65, 1; 8/24/65, 1; 8/27/65, 1; 8/30/65, 1; Av. Wk„ 8/30/65, 24^28)
Rep. Oren Harris (D-Ark.), in France for the International Air Show, endorsed the idea of an international exhibition at Dulles International Airport in 1966. Harris, who headed the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce which would handle any American counterpart of the Paris show, made his statement after comment by American aircraft builders participating at Le Bourget that the U.S. had let the Soviet Union “steal the show.” During the first days of the exposition, the Russians had displayed the prototype of a 720-passenger commercial aircraft to be ready in two years. Also, Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, was on hand. The U.S. had recovered some lost ground during the final weekend by flying in Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Astronauts Edward White II (Maj., usaf) and James McDivitt (Maj., usaf). American jets had also put on spectacular acrobatic demonstrations. Rep. Harris said the project had been discussed at the White House but that further studies by the FAA and the Budget Bureau would be necessary, (upi, Bruns, Wash. Post, 6/22/65)
Lt. Frank K. Ellis (usn), who had lost his lower legs in an aircraft crash, was advised that the Navy was considering his application to become an astronaut. “The only difference between me and any normal man,” he said, “is running and jumping ability. There is no change in my flying ability . . . I’ve wanted to be an astronaut ever since I first heard the word. That field is moving more and more into actual controlled flying. I’m a fly boy. Count me in.” (ap, NYT, 10/30/65, 28C)
Gemini vi Astronauts Schirra and Stafford were “very healthy,” reported Dr. Howard Minners at the conclusion of their post-flight physical examination aboard the carrier Wasp, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (LCdr., usn) would undergo intensive debriefing and medical tests for 11 days following their spaceflight, NASA announced. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: “Producing scientific and technical information is the purpose of the flight. This information is vital in determining the effects of long-duration flight on the human system and in proving out flight systems for future flights.” (NASA Release 65-273)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s Public Affairs Officer, Paul Haney, announced that daily newspapers might have VoAit. interviews with the crew of the GT^l flight on the same basis as television networks and wire news services. Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would spend two full days in personal interviews at MSC early in May. There would be a mass press conference for all news media in Washington, D.C., on April 30. Without such an arrangement, the only newspapers that would have had personal interviews would be those that subscribed to the service that paid astronauts for their stories. (Houston Post, 4/23/65)
The Soviet Union’s apparent effort to penetrate the world commercial aircraft market was reported by Evert Clark in the New York Times. He said the U.S.S.R. had formed a new organization called Aviaexport to direct commercial sales. It was expected to pick satellite countries as its first target, then so-called “dependent” nations, and eventually the Western countries. Showing of the Antonov 22 700-passenger aircraft and a model of a supersonic airliner scheduled to begin test flights in 1968 had enabled the Soviet Union to dominate the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) until the arrival of Vice President Humphrey and Astronauts White and McDivitt. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/65, 30)' During week of July 4: Ambassador Tran Thien Khiem, South Viet Nam, visited NASA Langley Research Center. (Langley Researcher, 7/16/65, 8)
A mouse-size “algatron,” life-support system designed to make outer space habitable for astronauts on prolonged missions, was demonstrated by Univ. of California scientists Dr. William J. Oswald and Dr. Clarence G. Golueke. In the system bacteria break down animal wastes, algae live off the result, and emit oxygen while absorbing carbon dioxide. According to the scientists’ report, the algatron, in which a mouse lived for six weeks and could have stayed indefinitely, would weigh about 1,000 lbs. in a man-sized version. (Wash. Post, 5/14/65)
freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft, flown by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., USN), on May 5, 1961, was put on exhibit at the Science Museum in London. (Reuters, Boston Globe, 9/17/65)
Addressing the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “I would like to acknowledge the debt that NASA owes to the armed forces for early and continuing work that has contributed to some of our most successful space projects. As you know, NASA works closely with the Air Force in the development of launch vehicles and in the general technology of space flight. . . . “As an example—among many—of cooperative nasa-dod activities: on January 1, NASA transferred control of its operating SYNCOM II and syncom in communications satellites to the Department of Defense. . . . “When the great dod missile site construction program—which ran at one time to $2.8 billion a year—subsided, the Corps of Engineers brought its tremendous engineering capability to the construction of NASA facilities. As the Corps moved toward completion of its work for NASA, its abilities will have been enhanced by the experience of building these great new national resources. The Corps, with new skills, will be able to move to new national requirements with assurance that it has performed extraordinarily well in engineering fields never before attempted. “Today there are detailed to NASA 254 active duty military personnel. Five of our astronauts are graduates of this great Academy. Nothing could be more fitting. For the debt modern American science and technology owes to West Point is too large to be repaid. It can visibly be traced back to Sylvanus Thayer who not only is the father of this Academy but who had a tremendous influence for half a century in the field of technical and scientific education throughout the United States.” (Text)
GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., arrived in Athens with their wives and children at the start of a six-nation goodwill tour and were greeted with cheers from the crowd. The astronauts would attend the International Astronautical Federation Congress which opened Sept. 13. (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/16/65)
Cape Kennedy and Moscow’s Red Square were linked in a British television program, “East Meets West,” marking U.S. and Soviet space achievements. First part of the program showed the triumphant return to Moscow of Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Aleksey Leonov. Then the scene switched to Cape Kennedy to show preparadons for the gt-3 flight of Astronauts Virgil Grissom and John Young. Both parts were screened "live”—the Moscow scenes via Eurovision and the Cape Kennedy one via comm unications satellite. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3, 2-1/65! starch 24: tiAVRKK IX photograph of moon, 38.fi seconds before impact and 58 miles above lunar surface. March 24; After transmitting 5.814 close-up lunar pictures to earth, ranger ix. traveling at 5.677 mph, imparted the moon at 0:08 a.m. EST at 12.0° south latitude and 2.-10 west longitude in the crater Alphonsus. The 10-ft,, 800-lb. spacecraft, last in the Ranger series, was only four miles off Larget. NASA had made real-time TV coverage available and the three major networks broadcast “live7’ pictures during the last ten minutes of ranger tx’s flight. First pictures, taken as the photographic probe was 1.300 mi. from the moon, had about the same degree of detail as telescopic views from earth. Those taken a few seconds before impact defined objects as small as 10 in, across, including close-ups of canal-like rilles on the floor of the crater and dimple-like depressions at points along the rilles. Photographs shown on television were taken by the “B” camera, one of two wide-angle cameras used. Four narrow-angle cameras took other shots. Pictures were received on 85-ft. antennas at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station in the Mojave Desert and recorded on both 35mm film and magnetic tape for detailed analysis. Simultaneously signals were relayed by microwave to the JPL laboratory in Pasadena where an electronic scan converter “translated” electronic impulses from the 1,152-lines-per-picture of the ranger IX signal system to the standard 500 lines of commercial television. The Ranger program had begun inauspiciously in 1961 with a series of failures and near-misses. Rangers 1 and 2 had been designed to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle but were not injected into the desired orbit, ranger iii, iv, and v were to rough-land a seismometer package on the moon to record moon quakes, and to transmit closeup photos of the moon to earth by radio. None of the missions was successful, ranger VI, first of the reworked and redesigned spacecraft, impacted within 17 mi. of its point of aim—but its television system failed. On July 31, 1964, ranger vii successfully relayed to earth 4,316 high-quality close-up photos of the lunar surface, ranger viii, launched on Feb. 20, 1965, transmitted 7,137 pictures. Total number of photographs from ranger vii, viii, and ix was 17,267. (nasa Release 65-96; Sullivan, NYT, 3/22/65, 1; ap, Dighton, Wash. Post, 3/25/65, Al, A12, A16; Hill, NYT, 3/25/65, 1, 23; nasa Proj. Off.)
At a news conference in Washington, D.C., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said that although “extravehicular activity” was not planned for Gemini astronauts until GT-5, “we are working hard at trying to qualify the space suit and the hatch itself to see whether we can accelerate that date.” If their spacesuits and the spacecraft’s hatch passed tests in time, Astronaut Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would lean halfway out of the capsule for perhaps 15 min. on flight GT-4, scheduled for early June. He and Astronaut James A. McDivitt would attempt to orbit the earth 63 times in 98 hours, taking off from Cape Kennedy and landing in the Atlantic near Grand Turk Island. Maj. White and Maj. McDivitt appeared at the news conference with their backup crew—Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), and Maj. Frank Borman (usaf). (Transcript)
Reported that NASA Administrator James E. Webb had ruled against a protest by a group of nasa astronauts of the NASA decision to limit the first manned Gemini flight to three orbits. The astronauts had requested that the CT-3 flight should be “open-end,” leaving it to the astronauts as to whether they should go for three or even 30 orbits. (Macomber, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 1/13/65)
“Should the MOL blueprint as envisioned by the Air Force’s Systems Command be approved by Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara, the Navy conceivably could be the first to use this earth-orbiting station as a new technique for charting ship movements on all the oceans of the world,” wrote Frank Macomber in the San Diego Union. Macomber envisioned “two Navy astronauts . . . spinning around the earth as early as 1968 in a 10-foot diameter, 25-foot long orbital laboratory—about the size of a small house trailer filled with electronic detection gear . . (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 7/25/65, 13)
New York World’s Fair opened for its second season. It featured NASADOD U.S. Space Park, containing two and one half acres of full-scale rockets and spacecraft. Among the exhibits were a full-scale Gemini model, an X-15 model, full-scale reproductions of Tiros, Nimbus, Relay, Telstar, and Syncom satellites, and aurora 7 Mercury spacecraft. An honorary astronaut card signed by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn), the first American in space, and Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf), the first astronaut to make two trips into space, was available at the U.S. Space Park to young visitors taking a ride in the full-scale animated Mercury spacecraft on display there. (Press Release)
The Washington Post editorialized: “Decision of the Gemini-5 space flight commanders to try for the scheduled eight-day voyage, despite the power shortages that threatened the exploit during the first two days is one that the whole country will greet with delight. The astronauts have accomplished no mean feat already, but the execution of the intended plan will prove the sophistication of the American space engineers. . . . “The power difficulties on Gemini-5 have, in a curious way, reminded us that these incredible penetrations of space are not yet so commonplace as to he devoid of risk and misadvanture. A succession of triumphant experiments by Americans and Russians have made it look easy. The powerpack troubles, like the dips and bobs and pauses of gifted high-wire performers, have succeeded in reminding the ‘audience’ that the whole act is indeed very difficult and dangerous. We may have forgotten it for a moment, but now we are convinced.” (Wash. Post, 8/24/65, A12)
ComSatCorp, in a letter to the FCC, outlined its position regarding ITT World Communications, Inc.’s request to use EARLY BIRD I satellite for live television coverage of the recovery of the Gemini 5 astronauts. George P. Sampson, ComSatCorp’s Vice President of Operations, said that although itt and ComSatCorp had agreed that technical and operational aspects of the shipboard station would be subject to ComSatCorp’s control, ComSatCorp took “firm exception” to itt’s insistence that the fcc designate ITT as the responsible operating entity. Sampson noted the Fee’s May 12 decision giving ComSatCorp sole responsibility for operation of the initial terminal stations for the proposed global satellite system and said: “Despite our fundamental concern with the proposal, ComSat Corp is willing to give consideration to a joint application for the operation of the station.” (ap, Wash. Post, 7/23/65)
Laboratory research prompted by weight losses of American and Russian spacement on orbital flights had indicated a relationship between a person’s water-drinking habits, working ability, and real or imagined stresses and strains, reported William J. Perkinson in the Washington Evening Star. American astronauts had lost between three and five percent of their body weight in orbital flights; Russian cosmonauts had lost less—between one and three percent—partly because they perspired less in the shirt-sleeve environments of Soviet spacecraft than Americans did in spacesuits. One NASA report on hypohydration— condition when a person drinks too little water—noted a 5% weight loss due to water imbalance was tolerable, but a 10% loss could cause gross mental and physical deterioration. (Perkinson, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, B10)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., left with their wives on a six-nation goodwill tour arranged by President Johnson to demonstrate the U.S.’ peaceful intentions in space. They would visit Greece, Turkey, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Kenya, Nigeria, and the Canary Islands. At a State Department luncheon prior to departure, Cooper told the audience, which included ambassadors from the six countries he and Conrad would visit, that from the GEMINI V cockpit “you don’t see any of the combat, you don’t see any of the fighting and bickering, the world looks like a very peaceful place.” (vpi, NYT, 9/16/65, 27)
Launch of Gemini VI from Eastern Test Range on a two-day mission no later than Oct. 25 was announced by NASA. It would be man’s first attempt to rendezvous and dock with an orbiting spacecraft. Pilots for Gemini VI were Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf). Backup pilots were Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John W. Young (Cdr., USN). This would be Schirra’s second space flight. His first was Oct. 3, 1962, a six-orbit flight in Mercury spacecraft SIGMA vi (nasa Release 65-307)
. . . The Biosatellite Program is a second-generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and development. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to test critically major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will help delineate hazards to astronauts and assist in determining and defining effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights may involve, for example, physiological changes such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. Also, the effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown. “Twenty experiments have been selected for flight to study the effects of weightlessness and decreased gravity during 3- to 30-day orbital periods. The experiments include a wide variety of plants and animals from single-cell organisms to higher plants and animals. The effects of weightlessness will be studied on the primate, especially the central nervous, the cardiovascular, and the skeletal systems during orbits of 30 days’ duration. “Experiments have been selected to study the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation to determine if there are any antagonistic or synergistic genetic or somatic effects on various organisms. “Experiments are included to study the effects of the unique environment of the Earth-orbiting satellite and removal from the Earth’s rotation in relation to biological rhythms of plants and animals. . . (Text) Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, outlining progress made toward the objective of solar system exploration, said:	“ ... It would appear . . . that enough experience and know-how has been accumulated to make the move to a five-ton Voyager spacecraft on the Saturn IB Centaur launch vehicle a reasonable next step in the unmanned exploration of the solar system. There is no question but that the size and weight of Voyager, plus the increased demands that will be placed upon it, will make the development of the Voyager a complex and difficult undertaking. But certainly, the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory and Mariner have shown us that we can deal successfully with complexity. As a matter of fact, the increased weight and size may afford considerable relief from the need to tailor every last function to a gnat’s eyebrow in order to achieve the intended mission, as has been the case hitherto. . . .” Dr. Newell said that reliability was probably the most difficult problem for deep-space long-duration missions and that “. . . the development of adequate spacecraft systems will not be the problem. The most serious threat to long life operation will lie in the potential random failure of one or more [spacecraft] components.” He added that this would probably be an ever-decreasing problem as we gained experience with launch vehicles and that “. . . launch vehicle reliability is far less a difficult program than that of long spacecraft lifetime for very deep-space missions.” In conclusion, Dr. Newell said:	"... Nevertheless, the time has arrived when many thoughtful people urge a vigorous program of solar system exploration. The President has in his Fiscal Year 1966 budget request included funds to support initial conceptual and design studies of a Voyager spacecraft. Funds are also included for the development of a launch vehicle consisting of the Saturn IB plus the Centaur. Final decision as to whether to move ahead with the development of the Voyager spacecraft would come a little over a year from now.” (Text) Missiles and Rockets reported that scientists at the Symposium had differing opinions on Mars goals. Gilbert V. Levin of Hazleton Laboratories opposed the 1971 scheduled landing of the Voyager:	“. . . although we insist that Mars should not be contaminated by terrestrial life before we search for Martian life, we fail to recognize that this is tantamount to saying that the U.S. must get there first, because the U.S. appears to be the only nation willing and able to sterilize its spacecraft. “I’m all for Voyager, but an initial step in the Voyager program should be some early landers at the earliest opportunities. We should go ahead and devote efforts to develop a program to land on Mars in 1969.” Temple Neumann, Automated Biological Laboratory program engineer with Philco’s Aeronutronic Div., agreed with Levin:	“If the planetary biological exploration task is to be performed in a sound scientific manner, the U.S. must do it—first.” Lawrence B. Hall, NASA Special Assistant for Planetary Quarantine, re-emphasized “the disastrous effects that an unsterilized spacecraft could have on Mars. ... If a single micro-organism should land on Mars and have a replication time of 30 days, it could grow to the bacterial population of Earth in eight years. This could not only compete with Martian life but could result in drastic changes in the geochemical and atmospheric characteristics of the planet.” JPL’s Gerald A. Soffen said that “since the decision between Mariner landers and Voyager missions has not been made yet, scientific experimenters have to think in terms both of small payloads and large ones. Numerous small missions would provide a good opportunity to perform experiments in different locations and during different planetary seasons.” Bruce C. Murray, of Cal Tech, said:	“. . . finding the right location, getting there, and interpreting the biological experiment results in a way that would indicate definitively whether life was or was not present would call for at least 100 times more photography than was currently assumed.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (usn), said he probably would be assigned as command pilot to the sixth Gemini flight, which would be the first U.S. attempt to meet and join two vehicles in space. (ap, Balt. Sun, 2/2/65)
Gemini V launch counted down to T-10 min. before it was canceled and reset for Aug. 21. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr., (Lcdr., usn) were disappointed, but took the delay in stride. Cooper commented: “. . . you promised a launch today and not a wet mock.” Five hours before the scheduled launch, computer studies suggested that the liquid hydrogen in the spacecraft’s fuel cells was boiling off too quickly. Engineers’ attempts to force additional liquid hydrogen into the fuel cells succeeded only in hastening the escape of hydrogen gas. Finally, a colder liquid hydrogen was used with success. Ten minutes before lift-off, apparent troubles with a telemetry programer caused another hold in the countdown. During a thunderstorm, a lightning-induced power surge affected the electrical instruments. At 5:00 p.m., edt, as NASA officials were opening a press conference, they were informed that a fire had broken out in a communications cable linking the Gemini v launch complex with mission control center. The officials said that there was a “very good possibility” that Gemini 5 could be launched on Aug. 21, but that no definite date could be set until a partial countdown was held the next day to determine the damage caused by the power surge and the cable fire. (Clark, NYT, 8/20/65, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 8/20/65; A1; WSJ, 8/20/65, 1)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that the time had come for the Administration to decide on what goals it wanted to set for the period after landing astronauts on the moon. The U.S. must use the tremendous space capability it had carefully built up since sputnik I, he said, “or see its value erode. If we do not use what we have created, continued expansion of the Soviet program will likely lead to future Soviet missions that will have the impact of Sputnik I.” (Text)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center analysis showed that radiation shielding offered by the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) was negligible: a particle flux producing a 1-rem dose in the Apollo command module would produce a 17-rem dose in the Lem. The Apollo space radiation warning system would provide advance indication of need for astronauts to return from the Lem to the command-service modules. (.M&R, 3/22/65, 23) During March: usaf San Bernardino Air Materiel Area reported that Atlas and Titan icbm’s scheduled for phase-out by summer would be used in antimissile and space booster research and development assignments. Requests had been received to use the silos as civil defense shelters and for storage of petroleum, gas, and grain. (M&R, 3/22/65, 12)
Eight NASA astronauts began geology field training in Hawaii, where they visited lava fields of Mauna Loa and Kilauea, active volcanoes, as well as upper elevations of dormant Mauna Kea. Geologists believed that these shield volcanoes contained features similar to those of the lunar surface. Study emphasis was on mechanics of lava flow, fissure eruption, deep lava lakes; examples of hot and cold basaltic flows; physical composition of lava rock; and topographic forms of shield volcanoes. Underfoot textures theorized as being typical of lunar terrain ranged from the glassy form of “pahoehoe” lava, through the crusty snow effect of “aa” lava, to the sinking feeling of loose cinders and pumice. The study was conducted by Dr. Ted Foss, head of the Geology and Geochemistry Section at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronauts were Charles Conrad, Jr., Clifton C. Williams, David R. Scott, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Alan L. Bean, Donn F. Eisele, Roger Chaffee, and Richard Gordon, (upi, Houston Chron., 1/11/65; Bryan, Houston Post, 1/14/65)
President Johnson told Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young during a telephone call: “Your mission . . . confirms once again the vital role that man has to play in space exploration, and particularly in the peaceful use of the frontier of space. I am sure you would be the first to say that on this flight, as well as on our other manned flights in space, there were heroes on the ground as well as in space, and the record made by men like Jim Webb, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans, as well as all of those at the Cape, Cape Kennedy, and around the world, is a very proud record under Project Mercury and now on Project Gemini. And to all of those who have helped to make our space flights safe and successful, I want to . . . say ‘Well done’.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/24/65)
Physical condition of GEMINI VII Astronauts Borman and Lovell was “better than expected,” reported Dr. Charles Berry, Gemini medical director. (Waldron, NYT, 12/19/65, 68)
Gemini vil astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., reviewed for several hours where they would put food wrappings and other waste materials during their 14-day spaceflight scheduled to begin Dec. 4. Study of the problem was part of the final phase of training for the mission, (ap, NYT, 11/29/65, 55)
Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, NASA’s Director of Space Medicine, said NASA physicians screening future astronauts were eliminating people with heart and spine defects so slight they would be insignificant on earth. “We are interested in finding minute defects between the left and right heart,” he explained. “If you lose pressure and you have this defect, thousands of little air bubbles may find their way up to the brain. If there is no defect, they are removed from the lungs. We are also looking for congenital defects of the spine. When someone experiences the acceleration astronauts do, however, a small defect may be magnified in effect.” (Kass, Houston Post, 3/11/65) Senators and Representatives from all three states that had helicopter service testified in support of subsidies. Sen. Robert F. Kennedy (D-N.Y.) said: “I think that, really, if we don’t do it now [continue subsidy] it won’t be done and that will affect not just New York and the other two cities but the entire country.” Opposition came from Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) who argued for a “user tax on the people who use helicopters . . .” (Clark, NYT, 3/11/65, 55; Clark, NYT, 3/12/65, 66)
President Johnson, after viewing on television the launching of gemini vii, said: “Once again, two brave Americans have carried the quest for knowledge to the threshold of space. They also take with them our prayers, and our pride. As they orbit the earth in the days and weeks ahead, Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell will broaden our knowledge of space. But they will do more. Their voyage will be a continuous reminder that the peaceful conquest of space is the only form of conquest in which modern man can proudly and profitably engage. In this struggle, all men are allies, and the only enemy is a hostile environment. The victory over the final enemy will belong, not just to Americans, but to all the world. We are proud that these fine young Americans have brought us one step closer to that goal.” (Pres. Doc., 12/4/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn) were briefly united with their families at Ellington afb near Houston. The astronauts had flown to Ellington from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, where they had been undergoing medical debriefing. After a short visit at Manned Spacecraft Center, the astronauts left their families for more debriefing sessions and tests, (upi, NYT, 9/3/65, 10)
Gemini 5 Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Lt. Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (LCdr., usn) and their backup pilots Neil Armstrong and Elliot See met a news briefing at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini V mission, scheduled for August 19. Cooper explained that during the flight the astronauts would try to sight a USN Polaris missile to be launched from the East Coast and an unidentified missile to be launched from the West Coast. It was not disclosed at what point during the mission either of the launches would occur. In addition, Cooper said he and Conrad would attempt to sight rocket engines ignited on a rocket sled at Holloman afb, N. Mex. Also on the program would be an attempt to rendezvous with a Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) which would be ejected from the spacecraft and would drift to a distance of about 60 mi. from the spacecraft. The radar equipment onboard would then assist in performing maneuvers to achieve rendezvous with the Pod, although actual contact was not planned. Cooper said that backup system for reentry would not be used again because the thrust fuel would be used in the rendezvous experiment. No extravehicular activity would be performed during this mission. The astronauts announced they would attempt to communicate with fellow astronaut Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) participating in the USN Sealab ii experiment beneath the Pacific. Flight plans called for a landing in the West Atlantic. Both astronauts felt that personal hygiene would be one of the main problems of the flight. (Transcript)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., were lost briefly over Kenya while flying a small aircraft to Keekerok Game Lodge to visit President Jomo Kenyatta. With Cooper at the controls, they landed at Keekerok only 20 min. late, (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/24/65)
Reasons for choosing the moon crater Alphonsus as the target for RANGER IX were given by David Hoffman in an article in the New York Herald Tribune: “First, they are just plain curious. Rangers 7 and 8 photographed two lunar seas and taught scientists that all such ‘maria’ are pretty much the same. Now scientists want pictorial coverage of the moon’s rugged highlands. “Alphonsus’ walls rise 7,000 to 10,000 feet above its crater floor, and in the basin thus formed astronomers have observed reddish gas seeping from the surface. The question, then, is whether Alphonsus is really a lunar equivalent of a live volcano. “Second, some space experts believe Apollo astronauts, as they descend on the moon, may encounter an emergency. That emergency might force them down in the moon mountains instead of onto a flat lunar plain. Accordingly, NASA wants to know surface roughness of the smoothest part of the moon mountains. “Third, there are some who believe the smoothest areas on the moon actually lie within the great craters (Alphonsus’ diameter is 70 miles). If this proves true, astronauts might select a crater floor as their touchdown point, assuming there is no volcanic activity.” (Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/23/65)
President Johnson nominated Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (usn) and John Young (usn) for promotions. Commander Schirra was nominated for captain and Lt. Commander Young for commander. Each had received his current rank in 1961, before the space flights. All the original astronaut team had now been promoted, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/23/65, A12)
At the United Nations, Astronauts James A. McDivitt (L/'Col., usaf) and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) presented Secretary General U Thant a small U.N. flag carried by White on his June 4 walk in space, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/65)
usaf would train about 15 astronauts to operate manned orbiting laboratories, the Washington Post reported. Trainees would be chosen from graduates of the Aerospace Flight School, Edwards afb. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of Western Test Range, suggested that in later Gemini flights the two-man crew might include one USAF astronaut, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/27/65, A7)
In answer to the query “Is a permanent role waiting in space for military astronauts,” Robert Brunn in the Christian Science Monitor quoted an Air Force official as saying: “No strategy is known for space as yet. We can’t use space the way the cowboys and Indians used high ground for advantage, nor the way the Air Force in World War II climbed to altitude and dove out of the sun. “Something with military importance may turn up in the next five years. The Air Force doesn’t know what the usefulness of space will be. . . .” (Brunn, CSM, 10/13/65, 14)
Modest turnout of spectators at the Sept. 14 motorcade in Washington, D.C., for Astronauts Cooper and Conrad received editorial comment in the Washington Evening Star:	. . We think it is an encouraging trend. Just possibly the lack of hoopla and gapers suggests that America has accepted the space program as serious business instead of a circus of stunt men.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/16/65)
A descriptive report on the three generations of Soviet manned spacecraft—vostok i through vostok vi, first generation; voskhod i, second generation; and voskhod II, third generation—was prepared by Space Daily, in collaboration with Soviet space officials and the Novos-ti Press Agency: “The Soviet’s first three generations of manned spacecraft are injected into orbit within a standard cone-cylinder configuration with a maximum length of 30.3 feet and a maximum diameter of 8.7 feet . . . “The launch-to-orbit vehicle is comprised of four major components: the last stage of the rocket; the instrument and service module; the cosmonaut cabin and re-entry capsule; and the nose cone and fairing. . . . “The cabin for the first two generation spacecraft remained in external configuration essentially the same. The major modification . . . was the internal arrangement providing a capability for two astronauts instead of one which included the requirement for an additional hatch. The third generation spacecraft has required not only a major modification for the internal arrangement, for the third cosmonaut, but has forced a configuration addition to the 7.5 foot sphere with the attachment of the airlock. . . . “For the first generation spacecraft the cosmonaut was seated in the center of the sphere with his back to re-entry portion of the sphere. The capsule had three hatches: the egress hatch, the parachute compartment hatch and an equipment access hatch . . . The parachute compartment was located to the left and rear of the cosmonaut . . . Antennas for the radio system of the re-entry capsule were located 180 degrees from the stagnation point of the heat shield. Even in that location it is possible that heat build-up destroyed all protruding systems as evidenced by the landed VOSTOK. . . . “The first generation vehicles weighed about 10,430 pounds, after ejection of the nose cone and fairing and separation of the third stage of the booster. . . . The cabin for the first and second generation missions weighed about 5300 pounds. “In addition, voskhod ii represents an advancement to a more operational type of vehicle with an arrangement indicating its role for extensive Earth-orbital operations. “The airlock for the voskhod ii mission would represent the farthest evolution of the Soviet manned spacecraft program ... a cylindrical projection to the basic vehicle, positioned within the nose cone and fairing above or forward of the cabin in the antenna region. With respect to the cosmonauts the airlock would be above and to the front as they remained in their seats; its position would be 180 degrees from the stagnation point of the heat shield.” (SBD, 5/13/65, 68-70)
Astronaut Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) and David S. Lewis, president of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., launched Operation Zero Defect at the McDonnell plant in St. Louis, Mo., county. They addressed an outdoor gathering of 3,400 employees, asking them to continue doing a good job of producing spacecraft and Phantom F—4 jet fighters for usaf, usn, and the Marines. (St. Louis PostDispatch, 8/2/65)
geminis vii and vi apparently approached within one foot of each other during their rendezvous, Robert Aller, NASA Chief of Mission Planning, told the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., when he narrated films of the rendezvous. Aller also reported that GEMINI vii command pilot Borman appeared to have reentered the earth’s atmosphere without his helmet on. Mission rules ordinarily required astronauts to wear their suits and helmets during launchings, space maneuvers, and reentry. (Clark, NYT, 12/24/65,1)
faa awarded two research contracts to obtain jet operations data on atmospheric turbulence: General Dynamics/Convair Corp. was awarded a $30,100 contract to develop a test program for obtaining highly precise data on the responses of pilot and aircraft to turbulence encountered in regular jet airline service; a $23,700 contract was awarded Eastern Air Lines to conduct a meteorological study of clear air turbulence (Cat), (faa Release 65-118) On Dec. 16, gemini vi Astronaut Schirra reported to Mission Control that an unidentified satellite in a low trajectory in polar orbit was trying to contact him. Before ground officials could respond, he and Stafford played Jingle Bells with a harmonica and bells. GEMINI VI began reentry northeast of Canton Island in the Pacific during its 15th revolution; four retrorockets fired automatically in the correct sequence, each providing 2,500 lbs. thrust. Reentry was normal and was the first controlled reentry to a predetermined landing point in the U.S. manned spaceflight program. Gemini vi splashed down in the Atlantic at 10:29 a.m. est, 700 mi. south of Bermuda—only 14 mi. off target—after a 26-hr., 1-min. flight. Assisted from the spacecraft by Navy frogmen, the astronauts arrived by helicopter at the carrier Wasp at 11:20 a.m. for medical debriefing. Recovery and rendezvous section of the GEMINI VI spacecraft splashed down near the spacecraft itself and was retrieved by another team of swimmers. This was first time the service section—complete with rendezvous radar equipment—had been recovered. Main parachute also was retrieved, (nasa Release 65-362; NASA Proj. Off.; Transcript; NYT, 12/16/65, 1, 28, 29, 30; 12/17/65, 1, 28; 12/18/65, 1, 16; 12/19/65, 1, 68, 69; WSJ, 12/17/65, 1; 12/20/65, 1; Wash. Post, 12/16/65, Al, A14, A15; 12/17/65, Al, A8, A17; 12/18/65, Al, A7; 12/19/65, Al, A16, A17; 12/20/65, Al, A3; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, Al, A14; 12/18/65, Al, A3; 12/19/65, Al, A8, A9; Time, 12/24/65, 32-36; msc GEMINI VII/GEMINI VI Fact Sheet)
The three-orbit flight by Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young was in some ways the most remarkable space trip yet accomplished by this country’s astronauts,” said an editorial in the New York Times. “Particularly impressive was the apparent success of a series of maneuvers to change the Gemini’s orbit—maneuvers that will be required to join two spacecraft in orbit, notably on the return leg of the projected manned flight to the moon.” (NYT, 3/24/65, 44)
Hopper,” a versatile rocket-propelled Lunar Flying Vehicle (Lfv) to transport Apollo astronauts on exploration flights of the moon’s surface, had been designed by Bell Aerosystems Co. as a result of a 12-month study conducted for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Bell announced. The 400-lb., four-legged, rectangular Lfv would be desk size and propelled by a cluster of five 100-lb-thrust rocket engines; it could fly 50 mi. nonstop. Bell also disclosed receipt of a $489,898 follow-on nasa contract to design a Manned Flying System (Mfs) capable of carrying one astronaut-scientist and 300 lbs. of equipment or two astronauts. Intended primarily as an exploratory device, the Mfs would be able to fly 15 mi. round trip without fueling. (Bell Aerosystems Co. Release)
nasa’si gemim hi spacecraft ('’'Molly Brown*1). with Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) as command pilot and Astronaut John W. Young (LCdr., USN I as pilot, was successfully launched from Eastern lest Range on three-orbit GT-3 mission by a two-stage Titan II. Within six minutes alter Jitt-olT. GEMIM ill and its two astronauts were injected into elliptical orbit with apogee. 224 km. (139 mi.lt perigee, 161 km. (100 mi.): period. 83 min. Speed of spacecraft was 16.600 mph. Toward the end of the first orbit. 03 min. after launching, the first maneuver was performed: Grissom fired two small thruster rockets that pushed ‘’backward” on the spacecraft, slow ing it down by about 45 mph. Lessened velocity caused GEMINI III to drop in altitude to a near-circular orbit with apogee, 169 km. (105 mi.): perigee, 153 km. <93 mi.). Second maneuver occurred during second orbit: Astronaut Grissom used the thrusters to turn the spacecraft broadside to its Right path. Then he gave a burst that pushed the craft about 1 50th of a degree from the original course; short hursts, fired rapidly, slowed the craft ami he turned it Into a course nearly parallel to his original one. Third maneuver came in the third orbit: Grissom fired the spacecraft thruster rockets, dropping into an orbit with perigee of 82 km. (52 mi. I. Manually controlling reentry, the astronauts turned the spacecraft's blunt end forward, ejected the section carrying the retrorockets. Four hours and 53 min. after launching, GEMINI in safely landed in the Atlantic Ocean off Grand Turk Island, considerably off target and some 50-60 mi. away from the recovery ship, Intrepid. Navy frogmen from hovering aircraft fastened a float around gemini iii. Original plans had called for the spacecraft, with the astronauts still inside, to be hoisted aboard the recovery ship and immediate medical checks made. When Grissom became seasick the men were picked up by helicopter and landed on the Intrepid; the spacecraft was recovered later. The astronauts helped perform two experiments. One was the irradiation of human blood to test the combined effects on it of weightlessness and irradiation. The other was to squirt small jets of water into the plasma sheath that surrounded the spacecraft as it reentered the earth’s atmosphere, testing a theory that a fluid flowing through the ionized layer of atoms would permit radio signals to penetrate the communications blackout common to reentry. Gemini officials said that, so far as was known, this was the first time a manned spacecraft had maneuvered in orbit, changing its orbital path, (nasa Release 65-81; nasa Transcript; Clark, NYT, 3/24/65, 1, 22; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/24/65; Bishop, WSJ, 3/24/65)
In an article in the New York Times discussing the “marriage” of medicine and electronics, William D. Smith said the monitoring of the astronauts’ health while in flight had produced several electronic medical systems. He added that NASA was expected to spend about $50 million during 1965 on electronic medical equipment. (Smith, NYT, 10/24/65, FI)
Dispatch to Moscow from Tass’ New York correspondent, Leonid Ponomarev: “The flight of the U.S. spaceship Gemini-5 . . . proceeded normally for only two hours, although the flight program was calculated for eight days. “The main reason [was] that a new system for providing electric power. . . was being used in the Gemini-5 spacecraft for the first time. . . . “It is a noteworthy fact that the new system for providing electrical power has never once been tested in spaceflight conditions. From the test stands on earth, the installation was put directly into working conditions in space. “There are several reasons that explain this haste and a certain degree of risk. The program chiefs were given the task of ‘catching up with the Soviet Union’ at any price regarding the length of flight in space. However, the present power of U.S. rockets and the size of the astronauts’ capsule are utterly inadequate for lifting and storing reliably tested battery-powered electrical power installations, which would weigh more than the new system. U.S. scientists were compelled to rapidly create a system, new in principle, in order to provide power for the Gemini-5 spacecraft for eight days so that it could fulfill its tasks.” (Tass, 8/22/65
Vice President Humphrey, in France for the International Air Show at Le Bourget with Astronauts White and McDivitt, met for 80 min. with President de Gaulle. (Tanner, NYT, 6/21/65; Newport News Daily Press, 6/22/65)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. reported that tests conducted for USAF had indicated that a spin in a centrifuge might recondition astronauts living for weeks or months in a state of weightlessness. Previous research had indicated that long stays in the weightless state could have a debilitating effect on the body and cause the heart and circulatory system to lose their tone, (nyt News Service, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 2/9/65)
Principal source of advanced technology in the U.S. had been and would remain the aerospace industry, postulated an article in Aerospace. Only in its programs were technical goals high enough and national requirements urgent enough to move forward in major steps. As these steps were completed and technical goals achieved, the entire economy fell heir to the new technology. Key goals in defense and space programs were listed as: (1) lowering costs; (2) improving the efficiency of motors, generators, and all other energy conversion devices and processes; (3) improving design, that is, reducing the weight and increasing the strength of all machines, by either improved knowledge of the machine or by using lighter, stronger materials; (4) improving the accuracies to which machines could be controlled; (5) improving reliability; (6) improving communications between men, between men and machines, and between machines. (Aerospace, Winter 1965) During 1965: In 1965, NASA attempted 28 missions with 23 successes, a score of 82% mission success. Two spacecraft were launched on a single booster. NASA attempted 30 launches of space boosters and had 26 successes, a score of 87% launch vehicle success. Of the 92 payloads orbited by the U.S., NASA orbited 25—five of which were two-manned spacecraft and four were escape-mission probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 64 payloads, of which one was a manned spacecraft and seven were escape-mission probes. France entered the space age with two satellites, one orbited by France herself (a—i) and one by the U.S. (fr-i ) . Most spectacular of NASA’s space missions were the real-time reception of close-up lunar photographs by ranger ix, first U.S. extravehicular activity by gemini iv Astronaut White, man’s first close look at Mars (including 21 photographs) by mariner iv, and manned rendezvous to within one foot by gemini vi and vn. The Gemini program began 1965 with GT-2 unmanned suborbital flight; this was followed by four two-man orbital flights which logged more than 1,300 manhours in space, gemini v and vn, long-duration missions (8 and 14 days respectively) proved man can withstand extended conditions of spaceflight and validated plans for manned Apollo lunar flights. At the year’s end Gemini spaceflights had set for the U.S. more than 10 records, among them the record for total manhours in space: 1,354 hrs., 38 min., vs. U.S.S.R.’s 507 hrs., 16 min. 1965 was a year of extensive ground tests of the Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn launch vehicles. There were static firings of engines for the various Saturn IB and Saturn V stages, highlighted by full-duration firing of all three Saturn V stages. Saturn I program ended with a record of 10 successes out of 10 attempts, its three 1965 launches orbiting Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites. Fire II provided valuable data for Apollo on reentry from simulated lunar trajectory. In lunar and planetary achievement, rangers viii and IX provided more than 13,000 lunar surface photographs and brought that project to a close. Atlas-Centaur ac-6 launched a dummy Surveyor on a simulated lunar transfer orbit and proved itself capable of operational Surveyor missions. NASA stepped up its interplanetary research with pioneer vi, first of four projected interplanetary satellites. tiros ix became the first weather satellite to provide close to 100% coverage of the earth daily, and tiros x was the first in a series of interim operational satellites for the. U.S. Weather Bureau. Five Explorer scientific satellites, oso n, Canada’s alouette ii, and France’s FR-I were orbited. NASA orbited secor v for the U.S. Army, SOLRAD ix (explorer xxx) for the U.S. Navy, and early bird i communications satellite for the Communications Satellite Corporation. NASA turned over syncoms II and III to dod for operational use at the completion of their r&d function. The five NASA mission failures: vehicle test of Atlas-Centaur ac-5; test of Apollo launch escape system on a Little Joe II booster; failure of OGO ii, which did return good (but incomplete) experiment data; failure to orbit a third Orbiting Solar Observatory; and failure of Gemini 6 because Agena Target Vehicle did not achieve orbit. In 39 successful launches, dod orbited 67 satellites. In addition, there were four unsuccessful DOD space launches, losing five payloads. Decision was made that DOD proceed with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, and launches were begun of the powerful Titan iii-C which would eventually orbit the Mol. Highlighting the U.S.S.R.’s busy space year was man’s first extra-vehicular space activity, by voskhod ii’s Cosmonaut Leonov. Soviet lunar exploration intensified, with apparent soft-landing attempts by lunas v through viii, as well as photographs of the moon’s hidden side by interplanetary probe zond III. U.S.S.R. launched VENUS II and III on the long flight toward the planet Venus. (Western experts speculated that cosmos lx was an unsuccessful lunar soft-landing attempt and cosmos xcvi an unsuccessful Venus probe.) U.S.S.R. orbited 52 Cosmos satellites, two heavyweight Proton spacecraft, and her first communications satellites—two Molniyas I. (nasa Release 65-368; msfc Release 65-312; nasa hhr-8; nasc Staff; nasa A&A 1965; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/12/65) During 1965: Some nasa research highlights of 1965: NASA launched 191 scientific sounding rockets to obtain a variety of scientific data and about 10 for advanced research an d techno!-ogy. By the end of the year, the three x-15 research aircraft had made 156 flights, 32 of them in 1965. Tests proceeded of the modified x—15 (No. 2), expected to exceed 5,000-mph flight speed, nasa supported the National supersonic transport program and evaluated wind tunnel models of the two proposed Sst designs. NASA continued using usaf XB-70 aircraft for research in flight problems of Sst and large supersonic aircraft in general. Feasibility studies of adapting V/Stol concepts to commercial transportation and wind-tunnel studies of several V/Stol designs continued. As part of research toward efficient design of hypersonic aircraft, comparative performance and heat transfer measurements were obtained on a variety of aircraft wings, bodies, and wing-body combinations. Ramjet engine research was in the engine design concept phase. NASA developed and tested a new near-field theory useful in predicting sonic boom characteristics of Sst configurations during transonic climb-out. Flight research of M-l lifting body was advanced, and construction of HL-10 lifting body was being completed. Solid propulsion technology was advanced with static-firing of the 260-in. solid-fuel rocket motor. In nuclear rocket technology, three Nerva reactor experiments were completed and the new Phoebus advanced graphite reactor test program was begun. The success of a 2,600-hr. ion engine test provided evidence that life-times of 10,000 hrs. for electric rocket thrusters may be within reach. Among highlights in electronics and control was reentry communications experiment on GEMINI hi demonstrating feasibility of water injection to overcome communications blackout during reentry. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 25-38; ossa & oart S.Rkt. Proj. Off.; NASA Release 65-368) During 1965: About 90% of NASA’s budget was going to contractors to pay for work being done by nearly 400,000 people of about 20,000 prime and subcontractors. In the university program, NASA was doing business with about 200 universities in every state on space-related projects at the year’s end. NASA’s requirement to transfer its technology to other sectors of the economy had developed into an information system with more than 200,000 technical documents abstracted, indexed, and filed in a computer-based nationwide system. (NASA Release 65-368)
ComSatCorp had filed a contract with fcc for purchase of four satellites from Hughes Aircraft Co. to supply communication services for nasa’s Project Apollo and for other commercial services. Two spacecraft would be placed in synchronous orbits at about 22,300 mi.: one would be located over the Pacific between Hawaii and Midway Island; the other over the Atlantic near the west coast of Africa. Of the other two, one would be used as a reserve for replacement and one as a backup in case of a launch failure. Contract also provided an option for purchase of up to 15 of the satellites. Delivery date of the first satellite would be eight months after ComSatCorp would give Hughes notice to proceed, with one additional spacecraft of the four to be delivered every 21 days thereafter. (ComSatCorp Release) Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa for Manned Space Flight, introducing the symposium, noted three important general conclusions to be drawn from the results. First, data on man himself indicates that astronauts can adapt to the space environment, giving great confidence that manned space flight effort can move according to pian without the necessity of introducing special requirements such as artificial gravity. Second, further substantiation of the Mercury program evidences that man can see things from space which are not programmed on instruments to see. Third, the outstanding quality of photographs of earth from space demonstrates the feasibility of a number of significant applications of manned space flight for improvement of life here on earth, (nasa Release 65-321; nasa Rpt. of Symposium)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at a press conference during the 23rd annual Hampton County (S.C.) Watermelon Festival that the Gemini V manned space flight would be an eight-day mission—the time required to fly to the moon, explore its surface, and return to earth. Webb also disclosed that NASA would announce next week the selection of six scientist astronauts. Speaking at “Mendel Rivers Day” ceremony, Webb pointed out that Congressman Mendel Rivers, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, “has steadily supported the Nation’s effort to build strength in space.” Webb also said: “Thoughtful students of national power and its uses are increasingly aware that America’s security as well as her leadership of the Free World, depends directly upon our progress in mastering and using space. “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration cooperates closely with the Department of Defense, to ensure that the technological progress we make in developing the peaceful uses of space will be drawn upon as needed to help keep the peace—in space and on earth. “As you can readily understand, the development of military space systems follows those basic research fields which provide the scientific understanding and technological capability to make such systems possible. It is NASA’s job, as the space research and development agency, to provide this basic knowledge and know-how.” Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young accompanied Webb to this festival, (nasa Release; Text; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 111-14)
President Johnson commented on the success of the gemini v flight during a news conference at his Texas ranch: “This is a moment of great achievement, not only for astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, but for those whose hopes have ridden with Gemini 5. “I am so happy that Mr. Webb and Mr. Seamans, who had so much to do directing this very successful venture, are here to share with us the pride we all feel today, And I deeply regret that our late, beloved President Kennedy, under whose leadership all of this work was so carefully planned and thought out, can’t be here to enjoy the fruits and success of his planning and his forethought. “The successful completion of the eight-day, 3-million mile flight of the Gemini 5 proves, I think, not only man’s capacity for endurance in space, but it proves that man is in space to stay. “We can be, and we are enormously proud of every member of our space team. That means all the scientists, and the technicians, and the controllers, and the trackers—to everyone who contributed in any way. As President of this country, I want, this afternoon, to extend the thanks of the entire nation for a job well done. To Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, and to their wonderful families, I want to simply repeat again: we are all very deeply proud of you. “The difficulties and disappointments of this flight have served to increase our appreciation, respect and trust for the skill and ability of all the men involved—at all their posts of duty. We can face the challenges and opportunities with far greater confidence and certainty —and this is an unmistakable gain. “Only seven years ago we were neither first nor second in space— we were not in space at all. Today the capacity of this country for leadership in this realm is no longer in valid question or dispute. Openly, proudly, we are proceeding on our course willing always to share our knowledge, our gains with all mankind. I would repeat and renew this country’s invitation to all nations to join together to make this adventure a joint adventure. “This globe seems smaller today than ever before. “Somehow the problems which yesterday seemed large and ominous and insoluble today appear less foreboding. As man increases his knowledge of the heavens, why should he fear the unknown on earth? As man draws nearer to the stars, why should he not also draw nearer to his neighbor? “As we push ever more deeply into the universe—probing its secrets and discovering its way—we must also learn to cooperate across the frontiers that divide earth’s surface. “No national sovereignty rules in outer space. Those who venture there go as envoys of the human race. Their quest must be for all mankind—and what they find belongs to all mankind. That is the basis of the program of which astronauts Cooper and Conrad are a part. . . . “This flight of Gemini 5 was a journey of peace by men of peace. Its successful conclusion is a noble moment for mankind—and a fitting opportunity for us to renew our pledge to continue our search for a world in which peace reigns and justice prevails. “To demonstrate the earnestness of that pledge, and to express our commitment to the peaceful uses of space exploration, I intend to ask as many of our astronauts as possible—when their schedule and program permit—to visit various capitals of the world. Some, I hope, will be able to journey abroad soon. “Gemini is but the beginning. We resolve to have many more such journeys—in space and on earth—until man at last is at peace with himself.” (Transcript, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 170-72)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., arrived in Izmir, Turkey. Only about 5,000 of the city’s 750,000 residents turned out to watch their motorcade drive the 15 mi. into Izmir from the NATO air base at Cigli. Spokesman for the Turkish Foreign Office said the visit was an “unofficial culture visit,” and the governors of three cities on the astronauts’ itinerary were instructed not to welcome the party. Coolness was attributed to U.S. stand on Cyprus in 1964.	(Wash. Post, 9/19/65)
Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. successfully tested a life-support back pack designed to meet requirements of the lunar surface suit for the Apollo lunar-landing mission. System functioned as planned for over three hours inside a vacuum chamber while the test subject walked on a treadmill to simulate the metabolic load of an astronaut on the lurain. The 65-lb. portable life support system supplied oxygen, pressurized to a minimum 3.7 lbs. psi, controlled its temperature and relative humidity, and circulated it through the suit and helmet. The pack pumped cooled water through the tubing of the undergarment for cooling inside the pressure suit. A canister of lithium hydroxide trapped carbon dioxide and other air contaminants to purify the oxygen for reuse. ( upi, NYT, 12/6/65, 42)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara directed usaf to proceed with development of a reconnaissance version of the F-111. New version would be called the HF-IIIa and would be developed by General Dynamics Corp., prime contractor for the USAF F-l1 1a and USN’s F—1 11b tactical aircraft. More than $12,000,000 had been authorized for the initial development program, which would be directed by AFSC. (OOD Release 373-65) orbit with 203-mi. (327.4-km.) apogee; 100-mi. (161.2-km.) perigee; 89-min. period; and 28.9° inclination. Immediately after spacecraft separation, Gemini vii turned blunt end forward and began stationkeeping on Titan n’s second stage at distances from 20 ft. to 50 mi. for 17 min. Several hours later Borman made the first of a series of course corrections to position gemini vii for the scheduled rendezvous with Gemini vi by firing the thruster rockets 1% min. to raise the apogee from 100 mi. to 138 mi. Apparent loss of pressure in spacecraft’s fuel cells during flight’s early stages was later determined to be faulty indicator light. On Dec. 5, the astronauts encountered difficulties at first in sighting the rectangular panels displayed near Laredo, Tex., but later they successfully identified the patterns of panels and provided evidence that their visual acuity was not degraded over the 14-aay period. On Dec. 6, Lovell removed his 16-lb. spacesuit, becoming first U.S, astronaut to fly in undergarment. The astronauts visually tracked Polaris a-3 missile fired from uss Benjamin Franklin, submerged nuclear submarine off Cape Kennedy, and successfully tested onboard radar receiving unit needed for rendezvous. On Dec. 7, Borman fired thruster rockets to achieve a higher orbit for rendezvous attempt: apogee, 197 mi. (301.7 km.); perigee, 145 mi. (233.8 km.). On Dec. 8, clouds over New Mexico caused astronauts to cancel scheduled experiment to communicate with ground by laser beam. On Dec. 9, Borman executed a posigrade maneuver to circularize GEMINI vii’s orbit, firing thruster rockets one minute 18 sec. to raise perigee to 185.8 mi. (299.7 km.); 43 min. later, he fired braking thrusters 15 sec. to lower apogee to 188.3 mi. (103.7 km.) and provide a proper target orbit for Gemini 6. Dr. Berry recommended that Borman apply ointment to ease the nasal dryness caused by the 100%-oxygen atmosphere of his spacesuit. On Dec. 10, when temperatures in gemini vii’s cabin rose to 85°, Flight Director Christopher Kraft ordered Lovell to put on his space-suit to permit Borman to remove his. One astronaut was to wear his spacesuit at all times during the mission. Dr. Berry recommended that Lovell apply antihistamine ointment to ease nasal dryness. On Dec. 11, laser experiment was conducted with partial success: the Hawaiian ground station received signals from the spacecraft when Lovell locked his hand-held laser onto the ground-based one, but contact was not precise or strong enough to carry a human voice. On Dec. 12, the astronauts tried again to establish ground laser communications over White Sands Missile Range, but were able to pick up only two quick flashes from the ground beacon. On Dec. 13, when gemini vii’s fuel cell warning light flashed on, the astronauts flushed excess water from the system by forcing in additional oxygen borrowed from the cabin’s oxygen supply, thereby correcting die difficulty. A taperecorder malfunction prevented the spacecraft from supplying automatic data on performance of its systems between tracking stations. On Dec. 14, Borman observed reentry of a Minuteman missile fired from Vandenberg afb to Eniwetok—first time a missile reentry had been sighted by an astronaut. Both gemini vii astronauts were beginning to feel the strain of their ten days in space: “Jim and I are beginning to notice the days seem to be lengthening a little,” Borman said. “We’re getting a little crummy.” On Dec. 15, gemini vii and Gemini vi achieved their historic rendezvous in orbit (see Dec. 15—16). On Dec. 16, a report from gemini vii Astronauts Borman and Lovell that three of the six fuel cell stacks were not operating aroused apprehension that the flight might end prematurely. Next day gemini vii’s fuel cells began to function satisfactorily, thereby assuring a full-duration mission. Astronauts Borman and Lovell checked out all their spacecraft’s systems and received reentry instructions. On Dec. 18, gemini vii began a normal reentry when its four retrorockets fired automatically in correct sequence above the Pacific southeast of the Philippines. After a controlled reentry to the predetermined landing point, the spacecraft splashed down in the Atlantic at 9:06 a.m. est, 700 mi. southwest of Bermuda—only 7.6 mi. from target. The astronauts, after their record-breaking 330-hr. 35-min. spaceflight, were assisted from the capsule by Navy frogmen and taken to the carrier Wasp for medical debriefing, (nasa Release 65-362; NASA Proj. Off.; Transcript; NYT, 12/5/65, 1, 72; 12/6/65, 1, 43; 12/7/65, 24; 12/13/65, 1, 46; 12/15/65, 23; WSJ, 12/9/65, 1; 12/13/65, 1; 12/14/65, 1; Wash. Post, 12/6/65. A3: 12/7/65. Al, A3; 12/9/65, A9; 12/10/65, Al, A3; 12/12/65, Al, A8; 12/13/65, Al; 12/14/65, A3; Wash. Sun. Star, 12/5/65, Al, A8; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/6/65, Al, A12; 12/7/65, A3; 12/8/65, A3; 12/12/65, A7; 12/15/65, Al, A2, A6; Time, 12/24/65, 32-36; msc Gemini VII/Gemini VI Fact Sheet)
A crowd of two million gathered in Chicago during the parade and motorcade honoring Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf), accompanied by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey. Honorary citizens medals were presented the astronauts at a special City Council meeting. Civil rights leaders postponed a demonstration protesting de facto school segregation in deference to the celebration, (ap, Wash. Post. 6/16/65; Wehrwein, NYT, 6/15/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said during a panel discussion at the Military Electronics Convention in Los Angeles: “I think I can report that our ten-year aeronautical and space effort [beginning in 1961] has been well organized, it has stabilized at the 51/^ billion level, and has retained a well-worked-out balance among its various components. At the end of this ten-year period, we will have received back from our operating spacecraft the basic measurements of the space environment which will give us a much better scientific understanding of this environment and our engineers will have proved out the developmental concepts and engineering designs for effective operations of all kinds in space. Further, we will have a launch capability of six Saturn ib’s and six Saturn V’s per year, meaning that we could put almost two million pounds into orbit per year, if required. We will have logged more than five thousand hours of astronaut spaceflight time and learned a great deal about the relationship between man, equipment, the task assigned, and performance in the space environment. . . .” (Text)
Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James Lovell (Lcdr., usn), primary crew for Gemini vn, said they would attempt to communicate with a ground station via laser beam during their 14-day mission planned for early 1966. The laser—a beam of intense light— can transmit voices or other messages. Ground station at White Sands, N. Mex., aiming by radar, would fire the first laser signal at Gemini 7 as it passed overhead. The Gemini 7 crew would attempt to answer by pointing their capsule downward, aiming, and shooting a 10-lb., hand-held transmitter toward the ground. (Transcript; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/7/65; upi, Wash. Post, 7/7/65; upi, NYT, 7/7/65, 20)
m2-f2 manned lifting body research vehicle was rolled out at Northrop Norair’s Hawthorne, Calif., plant and accepted for nasa by Paul Bikle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center. The craft would be dropped from beneath the wing of a b-52 bomber at high speeds in tests to determine how this configuration would perform in the critical period during reentry if it were carrying astronauts, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/17/65, A3; arc Astrogram, 6/24/65, 1)
Saturn V launch vehicle Is-ic stage) was static-fired for the first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The five F—1 engines were ignited in a test which lasted 6V(> sec. during which they generated a thrust of 7.5 million lbs. (160,000.000 hp.). This was the first full cluster test and was made on a recently completed 400-ft.-tall test stand. The S—ic was the first stage of 364-ft.-tall Saturn V-Apollo combination that would ultimately take astronauts and equipment to the moon. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller congratulated MSFC personnel on the successful test: “. . . As this was one of the key milestones in the whole lunar landing program, its successful performance. 12 weeks ahead of schedule, has a great bearing on our program.” (mfsc Release 65-92; Marshall Star, 5/5/65, 5)
Four Ohio college students ended a six-week isolation test at WrightPatterson afb, Ohio, to study diets, effect of continuous wearing of a spacesuit, and microbiology of the human body. The four, comprising the eighth group to take part in space tests conducted by the Aerospace Research Labs., spent the first three weeks on a balanced but monotonous diet and the last three weeks on a liquid diet with the same nutrients as their earlier meals. All agreed that astronauts would probably be able to wear spacesuits for long missions but that “something would have to be done” about the proposed liquid diet, (ap, NYT, 5/19/65; ap, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 5/19/65)
“U.S. space officials are in no particular hurry to develop a ground landing because water landings have worked so well,” reported the Washington Post. The article said that the “Soviet landing system— partly due to the Russians’ large and sparsely populated land area and their lack of sea forces—required Russian astronauts to parachute out of the descending spaceship.” This put stress on the airman—especially after long periods of weightlessness, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/8/65, A14)
Within an hour after landing on the Lake Champlain, Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn) received a telephone call from President Johnson congratulating them on their courage in the face of disappointments and discouragement: “You have certainly proved once and for all that man has a place in the exploration of the great frontier of space.” (Clark, NYT, 8/30/65, 1)
Gemini astronaut parachute system was successfully tested in drops from a c-130 at 15,000 ft. altitude by USN Chief Warrant Officer Mitch Kanowski and usaf Maj. Dan Fulgham over the Naval Air Facility El Centro. Parachutes deployed at 9,000 ft. as they would on actual Gemini missions. Additional tests would be made in drops from altitudes up to 35,000 ft. (Miles, L.A. Times, 3/9/65)
Pope Paul vi, in a mid-day Pentecostal message to a crowd in St. Peter’s Square, blessed Astronauts McDivitt and White: “Our benediction goes to all on earth and rises also to the skies for those who are exploring astral paths.” {NYT, 6/7/65, 33)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nine fellow aquanauts rose 205 ft. from Sealab II in a pressurized personnel transfer capsule. They would decompress on the support ship Berkone for about 30 hrs. before being exposed to atmospheric pressure. Carpenter had completed a record 29 days and 14 hrs. in the ocean-bottom laboratory; his associates had been below 15 days as had another team before them. A third team of ten men would complete the Navy’s 45-day experiment in underwater living and working. President Johnson phoned congratulations to Carpenter. [Wash. Post, 9/27/65)
A simple, two-door pneumatic tube device for garbage disposal during the two-week Gemini vi manned space flight scheduled for December was being considered by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center officials, the Houston Post reported. The astronauts would open the first door, stuff in the material to be disposed of, close the first door, and open the second door. Space being a nearly perfect vacuum, the material would be forced out of the tube. (Houston Post, 9/17/65)
Man can withstand spaceflights as long as 30 days without suffering serious biological damage, L/Col. Edward C. Knohlock, director of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and member of the medical debriefing team for Project Mercury flights, told the annual convention of the American Association of Clinical Chemists in Chicago. Although gemini v relayed signals on the rate of breathing, body temperature, heart beat, and perspiration, the more sophisticated equipment needed to reflect the astronauts’ body chemistry would be available on the proposed 14-day flight of a larger manned orbital laboratory. (Powers, Chic. Trib., 9/2/65)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) were flown from Mayport, Fla., to Ellington afb near Houston for reunion with their families. (Clark, NYT, 6/10/65, 1,47)
Extravehicular equipment for Gemini vin. underwent two qualification tests in the 20-ft. vacuum chamber at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The Extravehicular Life Support System was combined with the Extravehicular Support Pack (Esp), a 92-lb. backpack in which the astronaut would carry his oxygen and maneuvering gas supply. First test evaluated capability of the oxygen bottle in the pack to supply the extravehicular astronaut with air at a high rate of flow. Second test was a propellant blowdown qualification in which the space gun was fired in 30-sec. bursts to exhaust the freon supply. A vacuum equal to 150,000-ft. altitudes existed in the chamber, and the walls of the thermal box had been cooled to —300° F to simulate the conditions of orbital night for both tests. (MSC Release 65-105)
Philadelphia’s Mayor James H. J. Tate, presenting a bronze medal to Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Cdr., usn), said: “I cannot imagine a more appropriate time to honor a space explorer than on the anniversary of the day back in 1492 when an Italian explorer named Christopher Columbus first set eyes on the New World and made a similar enormous contribution to history.” (NYT, 10/13/65, 47)
NASA announced award of $3,713,400 contract to Raytheon Co. to provide digital systems for Project Apollo. Options for additional displays and consoles, if exercised, could add $400,000 to basic price. The equipment was for use at NASA control centers and critical tracking stations to give instantaneous display of information received by encoded radio signals during Apollo flight permitting immediate decisions concerning welfare of the astronauts and conduct of the mission, (nasa Release 65-79)
Four airmen emerged with high voices and a hunger for meat after five weeks of confinement in a simulated space cabin at the USAF School of Aerospace Medicine. Scientists were studying a helium-oxygen atmosphere for possible future space cabin work because it did not produce decompression sickness in astronauts and was less hazardous in terms of spacecraft fires. (Chic. Trib., 4/8/65; M&R, 4/12/65, 10)
More than 900 representatives of news media had been accredited, making the GT-3 mission of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young the most intensely covered event in the history of space exploration. Nearly 1,200 newsmen had requested credentials from NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/65)
Astronauts McDivitt and White, onboard the carrier Wasp for medical debriefing, received a congratulatory telegram from Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, first man in space: “We send you our congratulations after the success we witnessed of the spaceflight in ship Gemini 4. We express hope that spaceflights will be to serve the world and make progress for humanity.” (ap, Haughland, Wash. Post, 6/10/65, Al, All)
Menu released by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center in a request for bids from industrial firms interested in furnishing the Apollo astronauts with food for the journey to the moon included bacon and eggs, frosted flakes, toast, fruit juice, and a strawberry cereal bar. Food allowance of 8 lbs. would be dehydrated to reduce its weight. Astronauts would add water to the food from their drinking water supply. (Schefter, Houston Chron., 2/5/65)
The 2 million people of Melbourne, Australia, saluted Astronauts McDivitt and White as GEMINI iv passed overhead by turning on all the lights in the city. McDivitt said to the Carnarvon tracking station: “Tell them I thank them for lighting the night for me.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/65, A6; Houston Chron., 6/7/65)
Vice President (and nasc Chairman) Hubert H. Humphrey, visiting Cape Kennedy for the day, congratulated Astronauts Grissom and Young and commended all participants throughout the world for “this tremendous flight of three orbits. . . this step forward commits us to the next project. Once we have completed the Gemini series, we move on to the Apollo Project and we move on even beyond that. . . . Let me say that the American economy is better because of the space program. American education is better because of the space program. American industry is better because of the space program and Americans are better because of the space program. We are emphasizing here one great character of American life—excellence, performance, achievement. . . . These are efforts well made and money well spent. . . .” (Transcript)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded two parallel one-year contracts to two firms to study feasibility of developing a drill for probing some 100 ft. below the moon’s surface: Northrop Space Laboratories received $509,992; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Defense and Space Center, $570,624. Astronauts on post-Apollo lunar missions would use the drill as a geological research tool to bore holes for geophysical measurements, (msfc Release 65-194)
NASA announced Pegasus C meteoroid detection satellite was equipped with small aluminum sub-panels that at some future date an astronaut could, if desired, detach and bring back to earth. The panels would provide the first actual samples of meteoroid impact and would have tested some 43 types of thermal coatings. Pegasus C would be launched July 30, 1965, into 332 mi.-altitude circular orbit at 28.9° inclination—close to a nominal manned flight path—rather than into an elliptical orbit like that of pegasus i and ii. (nasa Release 65-228; msfc Release 65-175)
Bodies of nasa Director of Space Medicine Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, his wife, and pilot were found near the wreckage of their two-engine aircraft about 40 mi. southeast of Aspen, Colo. Aircraft had been missing since Dec. 12. Coroner’s report later said that the cold and not injuries had apparently caused the deaths. A space medicine pioneer, Dr. Lovelace had parachuted from record 44,000-ft. altitude in 1944, had helped determine criteria for selection of Mercury astronauts, and had founded the famous Lovelace Clinic. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, A18; Wash. Post, 12/16/65, A3; NYT, 12/16/65, 50; ap, NYT, 12/18/65,16)
Existing contracts with the Boeing Co. and the Bendix Corp. had been extended to incorporate modification of the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) as a shelter for use with a Local Scientific Survey Module (Lssm) for astronaut surface mobility, msfc announced. Boeing would receive $565,000 and Bendix $570,000 for the new work. Both contracts would run for about nine months. The two firms had completed individual studies of a possible lunar mobile laboratory (Molab) under the original terms of the contracts. The Molab would be much larger than the Lssm now being studied, (msfc Release 65-173)
An explosion two minutes after launch ruined a USAF attempt to send a plastic replica of an astronaut’s body into space aboard an Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb. The dummy was instrumented to measure space radiation at various depths of the body. Cause of the explosion was not immediately determined, (ap, Wash. Post, 5/29/65)
New sunspots heralding the start of a new 11-yr. cycle were discussed at sessions on the International Years of the Quiet Sun held in Washington, D.C., under auspices of the American Geophysical Union and the International Scientific Radio Union. Scientists said the asymmetrical birth of the new cycle suggested it might not reach as intense a maximum as usual. The cycle was of vital interest to planners of a manned moon landing since it had been discovered that some solar eruptions shoot out protons at so close to the speed of light they could kill an astronaut. While astronauts were on the moon, or inside the Lem, they would be poorly protected against such a proton shower. Dr. Herbert Friedman, of the Naval Research Laboratory, said during the symposium they would be comparatively safe if they could return to their orbiting command capsule. The goal, therefore, he said, was to learn enough about these events so that astronauts could have sufficient warning to take refuge in their spacecraft. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/23/65)
NASA had awarded a six-month, $117,175 cost-plus-fixed-fee study contract to Ball Brothers Research Corp. to define and determine engineering requirements for a solar telescope mount to be used on proposed Apollo applications manned missions. System would provide a capability of observing the sun with relatively large astronomical-type telescopes and in having an astronaut available to correct errors in alignment and make other adjustments, (nasa Release 65-302)
Editorial commentary in Washington Post on GEMINI VII-VI flight: “On the crowded globe beneath the soaring astronauts men were still fighting each other, cursing each other, starving each other and maltreating each other. Not yet have mortals risen above man’s inhumanity to man. Not yet have they surmounted the emotions that set at naught the generations of light and learning. Not yet are they wise enough to govern their passions. But hope soars aloft with the astronauts. The creatures who can do this, the beings who can defy gravity, disregard distance, conquer space, circumnavigate the planet and mingle with the stars, may yet make the larger conquests of mind and spirit that are necessary if human beings are to live together in peace.” (Wash. Post, 12/16/65, A20)
Statement made by President Johnson on the death of the NASA Director of Space Medicine: “A day of great achievement in space was marred by news of the death of Dr. William R. Lovelace, II. His life was too short, although his legacy to space medicine will endure and will be a resource of assurance to future astronauts whose names and deeds are yet unknown.” (Pres. Doc., 12/20/65, 593)
Apollo Spacecraft 009, first Apollo flight spacecraft of the type that would carry three U.S. astronauts to the moon and back, was accepted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center during informal ceremonies at North American Aviation, Inc.’s, Downey, Calif., facility. Largest U.S. manned spacecraft built to date, Spacecraft 009 included a command module, service module, launch escape system, and adapter. {Marshall Star, 10/27/65, 1, 10; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/22/65, 1)
Dr. John W. Salisbury and Joel Adler of Cambridge Laboratories reported to 132d meeting of the AAAS in Berkeley, Calif., that American astronauts landing on the moon might encounter lunar dust that would stick like wet snow to their windows, faceplates, and camera lenses. Salisbury and Adler said they had reached those conclusions by two separate experiments. (Wash. Post, 12/30/65, A4) Medical and physical data from the two-week GEMINI vn flight indicated that man could withstand a lunar mission without any serious harm, reported Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for NASA MSC, at the AAAS meeting. Dr. Berry revealed that the astronauts’ heart rates and blood pressures during the flight had remained within normal ranges and that within 10 hrs. after splashdown, Borman had regained 4.8 lbs. of the 9.6 lbs. he had lost; Lovell, who had lost 5.9 lbs., had regained 6.6 lbs. Berry, who doubted the astronauts could have endured 14 days in spacesuits, attributed much of the success of the mission to the freedom of flying in underwear. He reported that the electroencephalogram studies recording brain wave activity had shown no abnormalities during the first two flight days, but that the electrodes on the astronauts’ scalps had come loose before the end of the planned 4-day experiment. As to the radiation dosage hazards on the 14-day flight, Dr. Berry said the measured amounts were “peanuts.” The calcium balance studies which required measurements of calcium loss to sweat, blood, urine, and feces might take “several more months to complete,” he added. Astronaut Edward H. White (L/Col., usaf) accompanied Dr. Berry to the meeting to brief scientists on preparations necessary to plan and execute successful space missions. (Haseltine, Wash. Post, 12/30/65, Al)
The Life Sciences Committee of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board recommended to NASA that American astronauts returning from the moon and planets be kept in quarantine for at least three weeks to prevent possible contamination of the earth by extra-terrestrial organisms, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. Recommendation was in a report entitled “Potential Hazards of Back Contamination from the Planets.” Other recommendations included the need to avoid decontamination of returning equipment until it had been subjected to biological study; the possible need for the astronauts to shed their outer garments on the moon and Mars before returning home; the need to conduct immediate research on any samples of extraterrestrial life brought to earth; and trial runs to acquaint astronauts with methods for minimizing chance of contamination. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/23/65)
Funeral in Washington for late Deputy Administrator of NASA, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, attended by hundreds of friends and high Federal officials. Pallbearers were Gen. James H. Doolittle (Chairman of the naca, 1956-58), Dr. T. Keith Glennan (nasa Administrator, 1958-1961), and Astronauts Scott Carpenter, Gordon Cooper, James McDivitt, and John Glenn, (eph)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey and his party, which included Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.) and Sen. Fred Harris (D-Okla.), visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were briefed on the Gemini program by Charles W. Mathews; on the Apollo program by Dr. Joseph F. Shea; and on the life support systems by Richard Johnston of Crew Systems. Mr. Humphrey—it was his first visit to MSC—took a “ride” in the Gemini docking trainer with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and then he and his party observed a simulated Gemini liftoff at the Mission Control Center and a portion of a mission, (msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1; Houston Post, 7/14/65)
Dr. George Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at a news conference in Cocoa Beach, Fla., that Astronauts McDivitt and White would attempt to steer the Gemini 4 spacecraft to a rendezvous with the spent second stage of its booster rocket. This plan was outlined for the flight: When the Gemini 4 spacecraft separated from the second stage six minutes after launching, Maj. James A. McDivitt, as command pilot, would fire jet thrusters to hold a tight formation with the spent stage, which would trail the astronauts by about 300 ft. Throughout the first orbit, the astronauts would make a complete check of all their systems. At the start of the second orbit they would begin preparing for Maj. White’s emergence by unpacking life support packs, the maneuvering unit, and the 25-ft. lifeline. Sweeping over the Indian Ocean during this orbit, they would begin to depressurize the spacecraft cabin and pressurize their spacesuits. Over Hawaii, Maj. McDivitt would maneuver the spacecraft to within 25 ft. of the second stage. Maj. White would open his hatch and at a point west of Guaymas, Mexico, he would leave the vehicle. That would be about three hours after launching. Using the hand-gun maneuvering unit, Maj. White would slowly rotate toward the second stage, which is 27 ft. long and 10 ft. in dia. and would be equipped with two flashing lights. The astronaut would carry a 35-mm movie camera to take pictures of the earth, star background, the booster, and the spacecraft. After 10 min., over Florida, Maj. White would begin returning to the spacecraft. The cabin would be repressurized and the suits depressurized. Then Maj. McDivitt would fire thrusters so that the spacecraft would move about 16 mi. away from the booster. During the fifth orbit, about three hours later, the Gemini again would be maneuvered so that it would approach the second stage high over Africa. The craft would close to within 10 ft. this time to determine how well they can approach an orbiting craft, sighting on the flashing lights. (Transcript; Appel, NYT, 5/29/65, 1)
Gemini Astronaut John W. Young (LCdr., usn) was presented the Navy’s astronaut wings by Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze. (ap, Wash. Post, 5/4/65)
Scientists at Boeing Co., Seattle, had devised a “trampoline” bed designed to exercise the blood vessels in a weightless environment, it was reported. Compared in effect to a cocktail shaker, the device, by its to-and-fro motion, would send the blood surging from the head to the feet and back again. Some scientists had feared that days of inactivity in a weightless environment without exercising the blood vessels could result in death to an astronaut, (ap, Newport News Daily Press, 2/4/65; ap, Huntsville Times, 2/4/65; Orl. Sen., 2/4/65)
President Johnson announced during an impromptu visit to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center—his first—that he had nominated Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) for the rank of lieutenant colonel. In a speech before nearly 5,000 MSC employees, Mr. Johnson said: “The race in which we of all generations are determined to be first is the race for peace in the world. “In the labors of peace—as in the explorations of space—let no man doubt for the moment that we have the will, and the determination, and the talent, and the resources required to stay the course and see those labors through.” (Text; Stern, Wash. Post, 6/12/65, A3; Semple, NYT, 6/21/65; msg Roundup, 6/25/65, 1)
Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James A. Lowell, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had been assigned as the prime flight crew for the Gemini 7 mission scheduled for the first quarter of 1966, NASA announced. Backup crew for the flight, which would last up to 14 days, would be Astronauts Edward H. White, n (Lt. Col., usaf) and Michael Collins (Maj., usaf). Borman and Lovell had been the backup crew and White the pilot for Gemini iv. (nasa Release 65-218)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to President Johnson and the Cabinet on both the two-man gt—3 flight and the ranger IX photographic mission. Mr. Webb made these points:	“The most significant accomplishment of the GT-3 flight was that ... it provided verification of the basic design, development, test and operations procedures NASA is using to develop manned spacecraft, man-rated launch vehicles and a world-wide operational network. . . . “We now know that at least two spots, and perhaps three, when we look more carefully at the ranger ix pictures, are at least smooth enough for the Lem [manned moon landing], . . .” An American astronaut probably would be able to open his spacecraft and partly emerge from the cabin during the gt-5 flight. Mr. Webb said under questioning that there might be some possibility of achieving this in the next Gemini flight, but that gt-5 was more likely. He regarded a Russian cosmonaut’s leaving a space vehicle briefly as spectacular but said the U.S. was more intent on developing a space suit that would enable American astronauts to work outside on space vehicles and develop or put together space centers. (Text; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/26/65)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young had congratulated Soviet Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Aleksey Leonov on the voskhod II flight, Izvestia disclosed, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/28/65)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), carried two one-dollar bills during the GEMINI v mission to prove on landing that they were the same spacemen who were launched, upi reported. A representative of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale recorded the serial numbers on the bills before the launch and would check them after the landing. The Federation Aeronautique Internationale, with 54 member nations, is the agency that certifies world aviation and space records, (upi, NYT, 8/25/65, 1)
The New York Times editorialized: “. . . The care that has marked every phase of the [Gemini v] flight thus far provides assurance that the decision on whether to call the capsule back to earth before that time will be based solely on the best judgment of the scientific team as to whether any element of needless risk would be involved in keeping the astronauts aloft. Their safety must, of course, take precedence over the fact that the eight-day goal is the most important single objective of the flight. “This is no maiter of oneupmar.ship over the Russians, whose Valery Bykovsky stayed up for five days in 1963. The eight days it is hoped to keep Gemini 5 in space are roughly the time that woud be required for a round trip to the moon. If Colonel Cooper and Commander Conrad can function effectively in a state of weightlessness for that long and then return without injury, they will have given strong support to the hypothesis on which the whole program for a manned moonshot is based. “Whenever that shot is made—and remain convinced that it is foolhardy to chain it to any fixed deadline—it will have to be based on the fullest possible advance knowledge of man’s ability to cope in another environment with challenges his evolution on earth never required him to encounter.” {NYT, 8/26/65, 29N)
The White House announced that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., would leave Sept. 15 on a six-nation goodwill tour to Greece, Turkey, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Kenya, and Nigeria. The astronauts would be accompanied by their wives, Cooper’s daughters, Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts, and President Johnson’s Army aide, Maj. Hugh Robinson. (Pomfret, NYT, 9/12/65, 1, 33)
U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg told the U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee that progress had been made on a start toward a basic international law for space and for the assistance and return of astronauts forced down on foreign soil. He said that an additional topic should be brought under study by the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space: “Within a few years, the need for a treaty governing activities on the moon and other celestial bodies will be real. My government plans to present a definite proposal as to the contents of such a treaty.” (upi, Wash. Post, 12/20/65, A15)
Izvestia, official Soviet newspaper, said that the “walk” in space by Astronaut Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) had given an impetus to U.S. plans for using outer space for military purposes and cited a recommendation by a Congressional committee for an orbital laboratory run by the Pentagon: “These are the evil ‘uses’ of man in space being thought up here by some influential people in Washington where, incidentally, not one official word has been said about the peaceful purposes of the flight of Gemini 4.” (ap, NYT, 6/6/65, 82)
In a newspaper interview, Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin expressed surprise that the U.S. had shown primarily military aviation equipment at the Paris International Air Show. He said he regretted he could not meet longer with American astronauts McDivitt and White. (Tass, Zarya Vostoka, 7/4/65, 3)
U.S. and Soviet astronauts had accumulated 19,610,000 accident-free miles—greatest total in the history of transportation—reported the National Geographic Society. A compilation released by the society showed that U.S. astronauts had traveled 10,692,000 mi. and Soviet astronauts, 8,918,000 mi. (upi, Houston Chron., 9/3/65)
gemini v astronauts Cooper and Conrad flew to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, following a night onboard the aircraft carrier Lake Champlain. Upon their arrival, Florida Governor Haydon Burns presented them with plaques in recognition of the record-setting, eight-day mission. Intensive medical examinations begun on the carrier were continued on Merritt Island. (Toth, Wash. Post, 8/31/65; Clark, NYT, 8/31/65)
The appropriateness of President Johnson’s comments on the achievements of Astronauts Cooper and Conrad during the GEMINI v spaceflight was discussed editorially in the New York Times: “He did not gloat over the evident Soviet discomfiture at the United States forging ahead in the space race. Nor did he follow the repeated Soviet practice of claiming that a particular achievement in the cosmos somehow ‘proved’ the superiority of one political system over another. Instead, he appealed to all nations to join together for the conquest of space, an arena in which cooperation could help ease world tensions. “. . . the President’s statement . . . should help to dispel . . . fears. He has made clearer than ever that this country sincerely wants full cooperation in space. If Gemini 5’s flight helps to bring that objective closer, its immediate political contribution will rival its enormous gains for science and for technology.” (NYT, 8/30/65, 24C)
Lt. Frank K. Ellis (usn), double-amputee pilot whose name was among astronaut candidates submitted to NASA by Chief of Naval Operations Adm. David L. McDonald, had been nominated for “special capacity” work in the space program, unidentified nasa sources revealed. While not nominated to become an actual astronaut, Ellis would be considered for work that would use his aeronautical knowledge. He lost both legs in a jet crash in July 1962. (cns, San Diego Eve. Trib., 12/3/65)
Final approval for the Aug. 19 launch of Gemini V on an eight-day orbital mission was given by Mission Director E. E. Christensen. Astronauts L.	Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (Lcdr., usn) passed a final physical examination, weather conditions were favorable, and the tracking network was in good operating condition. The astronauts and their backup pilots, Neil Armstrong and Elliot See, Jr., went through a complete review of the mission, (ap, NYT, 8/18/65, 12C)
Columbus Association of Genoa, Italy, announced that Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., had been selected to receive the 1965 Columbus Prize, (ap, Wash. Post, 9/25/65)
The Gemini 6 spacecraft underwent final checkout of all systems; its crew, Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas Stafford, received final briefings. NASA announced that Gemini VI would be launched December 12, one day ahead of schedule. (WSJ, 12/10/65, 1; Wilford, NYT, 12/11/65, 1, C54)
PEGASUS ill meteoroid detection satellite was launched into orbit from Eastern Test Range, with a Saturn I booster—last(sA-lO) in a series of ten launch vehicle test flights. Initial orbital data: apogee, 336 mi. (541.9 km.); perigee, 324 mi. (522.6 km.); period, 95.5 min.; inclination, 28.9°. Main assignment of the 3,200-lb. spacecraft with wing-like panels was to add information on the frequency of meteoroids in near-earth environment, for use in the design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft. Eight of its detachable panels carried 352 thermal surface samples collected from the aerospace industry. If NASA should program an astronaut-PEGASUS III rendezvous, the astronaut would detach as many panels as possible and return them to earth for study. Also orbited was Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-9), which served as shroud for PEGASUS III. Apollo launch escape system was jettisoned during launch vehicle’s ascent. PEGASUS ill—expected to return meteoroid data to ground stations for at least one year—was identical to PEGASUS II, in orbit since May 25, 1965. pegasus I was sent into orbit Feb. 16, 1965. (nasa Release 65-232; msfc Release 65-185; msfc Release 65-190)
Former astronaut Col. John Glenn (usmc, Ret.) was suffering no effects from last year’s ear injury, reported the Wilford Hall Air Force Hospital in Houston. (Houston Chron., 7/23/65)
A pressurized suit identical to that worn by Astronaut Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) during his walk in space June 4, was donned by George C. Wiswell, Jr., founder and head of Marine Contracting, Inc., for a repair job 200 ft. below water at the American Electric Power Co.’s Smith Mountain Dam near Roanoke, Va. Wiswell headed a team of divers who lived in a pressurized tank for a week at the bottom of the dam, using a pressurized diving bell while making the necessary repairs. “The job could have been done by conventional methods,” Wiswell asserted, “but the divers would each have been limited at that depth to 20 min. of work a day.” With the David Clark Co.’s “aquanaut” suit, four hours work each day for each man was possible, he said. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/65, 35) During August: Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, announced the assignment of B/Gen. Daniel E. Riley as commander of the USAF Contract Management Div. (afcmd) at Inglewood, Calif. General Riley replaced Col. Fred L. Rennels, who had been commander of AFCMD since its activation in January 1965 and who was named vice commander to General Riley, (afsc Release 132.65)
250 photos taken by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., during the GEMINI v spaceflight were released by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, (ap, NYT, 9/10/65, 17)
Gemini vii Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell flew from the carrier Wasp to KSC where they had a brief reunion with GEMINI VI Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford, who were departing later in the day for msc for further medical debriefing, (ap, NYT, 12/20/65, 10C)
Kenneth Gatland, Vice-President of the British Interplanetary Society, urged U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration in New Scientist article. “. . . it seems we are faced with the ludicrous situation of the world’s two most powerful nations, each with massively expensive rival programmes, heading for a common objective which each proclaims is being pursued in the highest interests of peaceful scientific exploration.” A joint venture would have the advantage of providing for contingencies such as rescue of astronauts possibly stranded on the moon or in lunar orbit—a capability not included in Project Apollo. “This situation can only be satisfactorily resolved by the provision in lunar orbit of a second soft-landing vehicle and back-up crew capable of mounting an emergency rescue operation. To achieve this would require a specially adapted version of the craft already designed to soft-land astronauts. “This is where the merit of US-Soviet cooperation lies for, as an international venture, a project to land men on the Moon would surely not be undertaken as envisaged in project Apollo; and certainly not with such rigid constraints on time. In all probability it would be planned as an operation rather than a solo mission, with logistic support from a second space vehicle placed in lunar orbit ahead of the main expedition. . . . “The essential requirement in terms of the eventual lunar expedition is that launchings should be coordinated so that expedition components arrive in lunar orbit together. By the mid-1970’s, orbital rendezvous techniques should be well established with the ability of men to move between orbiting vehicles. An agreed crew could then descend to the lunar surface while another ship remains in reserve orbiting the Moon in case of need. Alternatively, a reserve vehicle might be landed, unmanned, in advance. . . . “Although at this stage such ... [a combined lunar expedition] would have little influence on overall costs, it could mean a great deal to the safety of initial manned missions. “Such a move would demand concessions on both sides. It would mean America abandoning her 1970 target date for placing men on the Moon, and while allowing Russia to keep her rocket secrets she would have to be prepared to reveal her programme for manned spaceflight. . . .” (New Scientist, 3/25/65, 774^76)
In a letter of explanation to Congress, NASA discussed priorities in the fy 1966 budget: “. . . As the President pointed out when he submitted the budget to the Congress, ‘It is a budget of priorities. It provides for what we must do, but not for all we would like to do.’ In assessing priorities and the most urgent national needs, the 260-inch solid propellant rocket program, the M-l liquid hydrogen-oxygen rocket engine capable of providing l1/^ million pounds of thrust, and the snap-8 nuclear electric power generating system to provide 35 kilowatts of electrical power in space could not be supported in the Fiscal Year 1966 budget. “. . . [nasa] is, therefore, preparing plans for reprogramming Fiscal Year 1965 funds so as to logically phase out these program activities in such a way as to obtain as much technical information as is possible for future use. . . . Every effort is being made to achieve the greatest possible benefit from the funds already invested.” (Text) *	Prof. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, discussing RANGER viii photographs in an interview with John Lear, World Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc., suggested that long, narrow rills and irregular depressions could be caused by moon’s surface collapsing into crevasses opened by the movement of a glacier hidden beneath lunar dust. He attributed gently rounded shapes to a shifting of small particles by electrical forces which, on earth, were inhibited by atmosphere. Concerning the manned expedition, Gold indicated: “The presence of ice oceans could give rise to many problems. But once these were solved, the ice itself could be mined and used to make hydrogen for fuel for rockets returning to Earth.” Referring to the electrically-charged particles: “Many particles would be dislodged mechanically by the landing of a spacecraft or the footstep of a man. Once loose, the dust would jump in response to electrical attraction or repulsion. If particles landed on the astronaut’s visor, brushing wouldn’t remove them but would instead intensify the electrical charges affecting their behavior.” Dr. Gold recommended more research on possible control of these electrical forces. (Lear, Houston Chron., 3/2/65; Ind. Star, 3/7/65; wbe Sci. Serv.)
A blotting material to absorb excess moisture, which might have caused the eye and nose irritation of Astronauts Edward White (L/Col., usaf) and James McDivitt (L/Col., usaf) during the June 3 Gemini IV flight had been eliminated from the Gemini v spacecraft, msc spokesmen said. (Houston Chron., 8/11/65)
Among the aerospace pioneers selected for San Diego’s new International Aerospace Hall of Fame were Scott Crossfield, Charles A. Lindbergh, Gen. James H. Doolittle, Astronauts John Glenn and Alan Shepard, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Orville and Wilbur Wright, Robert H. Goddard, Jacqueline Cochran, and Amelia Earhart. Representatives of 287 organizations from throughout the world were on the nominating committee. Oil paintings of the honorees were unveiled at a dinner given in conjunction with San Diego’s Space Fair 65 observance. (naa S&ID Skywriter, 3/19/65, 1)
Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham suffered a simple compression fracture of a neck vertebra during exercise unrelated to astronaut training. Cunningham would be grounded during the three months he would wear a neck brace but would continue other phases of astronaut training. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/65)
At a meeting of the American Chemical Society in Atlantic City, Dr. Emmanuel Roth of the Lovelace Foundation proposed neon as a gas that astronauts might breathe during spaceflights: “Its permeation coefficient is lowest. That is, neon does not go into solution or diffuse through tissue as readily as other gases do. As a result, the deadly bubbles form at a much slower rate.” No tests of neon with human subjects had been run. (Newsweek, 9/27/65)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden told the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C., that NASA planned to select 10 to 20 scientists to begin astronaut flight training this summer from over 900 applicants. Dr. Dryden said the Mercury astronauts had demonstrated man’s ability as a sensor and manipulator, and to some extent as an evaluator, in orbit. “Early Gemini and Apollo flights will further examine these capabilities so that, in the future, man’s full potential can be exploited.” (ap, NYT, 3/19/65)
Hamilton Standard delivered to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center a prototype portable life support system (Piss) to be used by Project Apollo astronauts. Weighing about 60 lbs., unit was designed for use with water-cooled undergarment astronauts would wear beneath a spacesuit during lunar surface exploration. Water-cooled undergarment would cool the astronaut by conducting the metabolic heat generated by his motions into water which would circulate through a web of plastic tubing in contact with the skin. Water would carry the heat into the portable life support system which would recool and recirculate it. Contract called for delivery of 52 packs. Testing of the undergarment and the Piss would be conducted at msc. (Houston Post, 8/3/65)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief physician for the astronauts, said in an interview with the New York Times that spaceflights had caused subtle, temporary changes in the human body that must be watched with care for possible importance to longer future flights. Measurements of the apparent density of heel and finger bones of the GEMINI IV astronauts, who flew for four days, and the GEMINI v astronauts, after an eight-day flight, had indicated that calcium was being lost, or at least shifted to some other part of the body. “We have really found no gross changes,” he said. “In my opinion, we are going to see the body adapt to space flight. You are never going to have the guy’s bones turn to jelly so that when he stands on his leg it just goes ‘pfft.’ ” (Clark, NYT, 10/23/65, 58)
A dummy model of the Gemini spacecraft, dropped from 11,000 ft. altitude by a c-119 aircraft, parachuted into the Atlantic Ocean and was recovered by three usaf pararescue men. This was a practice mission in case Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and John W. Young (usn) had to abort their gt-3 flight during the launching phase, (ap, Orl. Sent., 3/11/65)
Maj. Virgil I. Grissom and LCdr. John W. Young, the Gemini astronauts, returned home to Houston and to an enthusiastic welcome by a crowd of some 12,000 persons. The astronauts walked by much of the crowd, shaking hands. “We’ve had a pretty tough week, then came a couple of days of debriefing, then three parades, but today is the best of all—when we get to come back home,” Major Grissom said. Commander Young said, “We’re sure happy to see all you smiling Texans.” (upi, NYT, 4/2/65, 12)
Eleven of America’s 34 astronauts left NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for a 10-day field trip into the volcanic regions of Iceland. Making the expedition were Edwin Aldrin, William Anders, Charles Bassett, Alan Bean, Eugene Cernan, Roger Chaffee, R. Walter Cunningham, Donn Eisele, Russell Schweickart, David Scott, and C. C. Williams. The trip would be part of the astronauts’ training in the type of geological formations they might find on the moon, (upi, Orl. Sent., 7/7/65)
Dr. Roman Smoluchowski of Princeton Univ. said at the American Physical Society’s meeting in Washington, D.C., that there was no life on Mars. All seasonal changes in the color of the planet could be traced to bombardment of minerals with energetic radiation under varying temperatures. Dr. Jane Blizard of Boulder, Colo., also speaking at the APS meeting, suggested that any astronaut braving a 400-day journey to Mars would be likely to get a fatal dose of radiation. Maybe, she said, long range forecasting of solar storms can be perfected in time. Or maybe “superconductive magnetic doughnuts” could be devised to shield spacecraft from barrages of protons spewed out in solar storms. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/65)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., had demonstrated during their August 21-29 GEMINI v flight that a manned weather satellite could become a valuable part of Weather Bureau forecasting, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. U.S. weather forecasters needed information on tropical storm Doreen moving through the Pacific. Cooper and Conrad observed the storm and fixed its position, acquiring the information earlier than tiros x meteorological satellite and more precisely than a ship 150 mi. from the storm. The San Francisco Weather Bureau Office had been able to combine GEMINI v data with that from tiros X to prepare an advisory on Doreen. (Simons, Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A3)
Gemini GT-3 Astronauts Grissom and Young were feted as heroes in Chicago, where they motorcaded from O’Hara International Airport through the city to City Hall. An estimated one million thronged the streets shouting joyous ovations and flinging a deluge of tickertape and confetti. At luncheon with city officials the astronauts were given honorary Chicago citizenship medallions, and later a reception was given in their honor. Accompanying the astronauts were members of their families and NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Mrs. Dryden. (Wiedrich, Chic. Trib., 3/31/65)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff discussed future manned aerospace flight before the American Astronautical Society meeting in Chicago: “A great deal of lifting-body research is being performed by NASA and the usaf. In the not too distant future we will enter into the truly second generation manned spacecraft era by relying more on a higher l/d (lift-drag ratio) such as a hypersonic l/d of about 1.3. . . . The lifting body second generation manned spacecraft gives operational versatility for reentry from a number of orbit planes and gives a recovery capability at a number of landing sites within the United States. This versatility also increases the margin of safety for the astronauts. . . .” (Text)
The Christian Science Monitor asked Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of the Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and editor of Science magazine, to present elements of the debate on the question “Man in space: is it worth $40 billion?” Dr. Newell presented the case for manned space flight: “The manned space flight effort serves to round out the total program. Its primary aim is to develop a broad space capability that will secure to this nation strength, security, flexibility, and freedom of choice in space. Landing men on the moon and returning them to earth has been chosen as the means to this broader, more substantive end, and it is not to be considered as the only justification for our manned space effort.” Dr. Abelson, speaking for the critics, said: “The unmanned program has been a substantial contributor to our international prestige. Moreover, prestige based on science and technology tends to be enduring. ... “Our Apollo program was launched for reasons of international prestige. The yield has not been very good or very lasting. How many citizens can now recall the names of the astronauts and of their capsules? We can expect much the same reaction when we finally accomplish a moon landing.” (CSM, 4/9/65)
iTT-designed portable transmitter onboard the Wasp sent pictures of splash-down and recovery of Gemini vi Astronauts Schir-ra and Stafford to early bird i comsat which relayed them to the Andover, Me., ground station from which they were transmitted to major television networks in U.S. and Canada. It was the first time recovery of astronauts had been shown in real-time on television. (Gould, NYT, 12/17/65, 28)
In a Cabinet report for President Johnson, NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden said: “The primary objective of the Gemini V mission to demonstrate man’s ability to function in the space environment for 8 days and to qualify the spacecraft systems under these conditions was met. This milestone duplicated the period required for the manned lunar exploration mission. “Gemini V also demonstrated the capability of man to withstand prolonged periods of weightlessness. The adaptability of the human body was indicated by the performance of the astronauts. For example, their heartbeat rates gradually dropped to a level significantly lower than their preflight normal rates, but by the fourth day, adapted to the weightless condition and leveled off. Upon return to Earth, the heartbeat rates were slightly higher than normal, as expected, but returned to normal rates during the second day. This has assured us of man’s capability to travel to the Moon and return.” (Pres. Doc., 9/20/65, 258)
GEMINI VI Astronauts Schirra and Stafford were made honorary members of the American Federation of Musicians for their rendition of Jingle Bells during the Gemini vii-vi mission, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/21/65, A2)
On arrival at KSC, Astronauts Schirra and Stafford personally thanked the 400 men responsible for the successful GEMINI VI launching. The astronauts would undergo medical examinations and debriefings for three days and then fly to MSC for a reunion with their families, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/18/65, Al; upi, NYT, 12/18/65,16)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young gave the official name “Gemini 3” and the nickname “Molly Brown” to the spacecraft they would ride into orbit Mar. 23. (msc Historian; AP, Miami Her., 3/17/65)
During the planned 4-day flight June 3, Astronaut Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would leave the Gemini 4 spacecraft for 12 min. “if conditions are favorable,” msc officials announced at press conference. He would be secured to the craft by a 25-ft. safety line. NASA said the decision had been delayed “so final qualification tests could be completed on the spacecraft, spacesuit, secondary life support pack and umbilical.” The 12-layer protective suit that Astronaut White would wear had been worn for more than 200 hrs. and White himself had worn it during more than 60 hrs. of tests. Among other things, it had had pellets fired at it at a speed of 30,000 fps to simulate the impact of small meteoroids. The flight’s command pilot, Astronaut James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) would not open his hatch but would take movies of White through a spacecraft window. Astronaut White would take a 35-mm. still camera loaded with color film on his “walk” in space. Although he had practiced acrobatics, White had no planned program and would “use his own judgment as to what to do while outside the ship.” Exit from the spacecraft was planned for the second orbit. (Transcript; Clark, NYT, 5/26/65, 1, 11; upi, Wash. Post, 5/26/65, A3)
In an article in Foreign Affairs entitled “Slowdown in the Pentagon,” Hanson W. Baldwin said: “The sprawling bureaucracy of big government; the control of major military or paramilitary projects by agencies over which the Defense Department has no direct authority, including the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Bureau of the Budget; congressional legislation and executive regulation—social, political and economic; the tremendous size and complexity of the Armed Forces; overcentralization and overregulation in the Pentagon; too much service rivalry and not anough service competition—all these and other factors have become builtin roadblocks in defense development and contracting. “The creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has provided another type of problem. NASA stemmed from the same kind of political philosophy that nurtured the AEC. Atom bombs were too powerful to allow the generals to play with them; ergo, a civilian agency must control nuclear power—and it must be channeled away from nasty military purposes. The same scientific-political pressure groups that advocated this concept helped (with President Eisenhower’s approval) to establish NASA, again on the theory that space efforts must be controlled by civilians and that space must not be used for military purposes. . . . “But in the case of NASA, the problem has been compounded. For while the aec is essentially a research and production agency, NASA is an operating agency as well. From a small highly efficient aeronautical research agency, it has now expanded into a gargantuan multibil-lion-dollar empire, with tentacles all over the country, managing the biggest program on which the United States has ever embarked—to place a man on the moon. “In its early years, NASA was sluggishly if at all responsive to military needs, and the Pentagon itself was inhibited from any effective space developments (though, curiously, the only effective space boosters available were military ballistic missiles). Gradually the liaison, due to Dr. [Edward C.] Welsh and others, has been greatly improved. Numerous military officers, active and retired, now hold some of the most important positions in NASA, and in addition the Armed Forces have furnished most of the astronauts and by far the most important part of the facilities and services used by the agency. The two-headed control still offers difficulties, but today the main stumbling blocks to the rapid development of military space projects are Secretary McNamara and his Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. Harold Brown, who in his new political role in the Pentagon has become a remarkably unadventurous scientist. “Often the President’s Scientific Adviser, whose contacts with Pentagon and other Government scientists cut squarely across organizational lines, has also acted as roadblock to new developments. He exercises tremendous power without either specific responsibility or specific authority; therefore, his intervention often not only delays but confuses. The Adviser’s great power stems largely from his White House status; unfortunately around him has grown up a small but important office manned by men more impressive as bureaucrats than as scientists, who represent, in effect, another echelon of delay. . . .” {Foreign Affairs, 1/65; CR, 2/4/65, 2007) During January: Committee assignments for both parties were made in both Houses of Congress. New members on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Joseph Tydings (D-Md.), Len B. Jordan (R-Ida.), and George D. Aiken (R-Vt) •	.	. New members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Roy A. Taylor (D-N.C.), George E. Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), Walter H. Moeller (D-Ohio), William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.), Brock Adams (D-Wash.), Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.), Weston E. Vivian (D-Mich.), Gale Schisler (D—111.), and Barber B. Conable, Jr. (R-N.Y.). (Comm. Off.) During January: Marvin L. White. AFCRL’s Space Physics Laboratory, predicted the sun was encircled by “rings” of electric current totaling nearly 200 billion amps. Although total current was high, White postulated that the current density was low because the current was spread over a large area; he predicted current density to be about three trillionths of an ampere per square centimeter, the same order of magnitude as in the earth’s atmosphere. White’s calculations were based on particle flux data from mariner ii. (oar Research Review, 1/65, 1-2) With launch of two balloons to 87,000-ft. altitudes from Chico, Calif., AFCRL began one-year series of high-altitude balloon flights to measure moisture in the stratosphere. Series would consist of vertical soundings—25 in all, at the rate of two per month—in which all data would be obtained in recoverable instrumented payload parachuted to earth when balloon descended to 30,000 ft., and horizontal soundings—five 11-day flights at float altitudes averaging 75,000 ft.—in which data gathered over thousands of miles would be telemetered every two hours to ground stations, (oar Research Review, 5/65,15—16) In an article on detecting extraterrestrial life, William R. Corliss in International Science and Technology described some of the plans for collecting data on possible life-forms elsewhere and some of the factors making the search for extraterrestrial life so challenging. He noted the complications for Martian life-detection if retrorockets were necessary to brake the landing of a scientific package: “First, of course, they add weight to the landing package, right where it hurts the most. Also, their control adds complexity and increases the chance of failure. Finally and perhaps most importantly, they would make the problem of life-detection more difficult and any results more ambiguous; the rocket exhaust would tend both to fuse the surface of the landing area (maybe even killing any existing organisms), and to add combustion contaminants of its own in the most crucial area—around the lander.” He listed the variety of experimental instruments proposed for detecting extraterrestrial life (or clues of life) and explained why the dependability of these instruments—based on different physical and chemical principles—varied widely. (Int. Sci. & Tech., 1/65, 28-34)
Pravda described Lt. Col. Leonov’s exit and return to VOSKHOD II in giving the first detailed description of the inside of the spacecraft. The airlock was apparently built into the place occupied by a third astronaut during the voskhod i flight Oct. 12. After Col. Leonov moved into the airlock, his companion, Col. Belyayev pressed a button that closed the inside door and created a vacuum inside the lock chamber. At the prescribed moment, Col. Belyayev pressed a second button that opened the hatch between the airlock and space, allowing Col. Leonov to climb out. The procedure was apparently reversed for the astronaut’s return, (ap, NYT, 3/30/65)
Four were honored with aiaa awards for achievements in manned flight at the aiaa 4th Manned Space Flight Meeting in St. Louis: the 1965 Astronautics Award to b/g Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of the Western Test Range, for “exceptional direction to Titan III space booster R&D program”; the Octave Chanute Award to Alvin S. White, Chief Engineering Test Pilot/xB-70 Project Pilot, North American Aviation, for “continued significant contributions to the aerospace sciences in the development of flying skills and techniques necessary to flight of an advanced aircraft at unprecedented speeds, altitudes, and weights”; the John Jeffries Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Director of Bioastronautics, usaf National Range Div., for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics, his writings, lectures, and research, and his continued dedication to the study of medical problems relating to the aeronaut and astronaut”; and the Robert M. Losey Award to George P. Cressman, Director of the Office of National Meteorological Services, Weather Bureau, for “his rapid and effective application of numerical weather analysis and forecasting techniques to aeronautical operations.” (A&A, 11/65)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) and four aquanauts began a 45-day, USN-sponsored experiment in 12 x 58-ft. Sealab II to test how well man can function at 205-ft. depth in the Pacific under pressure six times that at the surface. Carpenter would try to stay down 30 days to set a record; the other aquanauts would remain below for varying periods. The group would collect and study marine specimens, map the ocean floor, and explore a deep marine canyon. (Wash. Post, 8/29/65)	•
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), in Western Europe on a three-week goodwill tour at the request of President Johnson, saw the Berlin wall during a helicopter sightseeing trip. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 10/4/65)
Charles W. Mathews, manager of the Gemini program, and Astronauts James McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward White II (Maj., usaf) received NASA’s Exceptional Service Award from President Johnson in a special White House ceremony. Introducing the President, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “. . . we . . . should never forget that at the beginning of the space age, in 1957, the challenge of this new frontier which was laid down to us was first met by the man who is now the President of the United States and who has so graciously invited us here today to indicate again his interest in, and the importance he attaches to, the new systems we have developed for building our national competence in space and using the science and technologies acquired to work toward a peaceful world and a better world. “This great leader of our nation, and of the Free World, is still pioneering, this time on an even more difficult frontier where we must learn to master the restrained but decisive use of the powers which technology gives our nation. Those of us who are responsible for the build-up of our new base of technology believe that power, based on advanced technology, can provide new means to hold back those ruthless forces which answer not to the need of all men for security, freedom, dignity, and opportunity. The pioneering which President Johnson is engaged in today on this new frontier is, if anything, more important than his pioneering actions in 1958 to create our national program in aeronautics and space. “Seldom in the history of the world has one man had to play so vital a role in developing the tools of modern science and technology and then in the development of a national capability to use them to achieve cooperation toward a world consistent with our own ideals and those we have sought for others as well as ourselves.” Accompanying citations noted “outstanding contributions” and singled out Major White as “the first man to engage in self-propelled extra-vehicular activity.” Terming the three “the Christopher Columbuses of the 20th century,” Mr. Johnson said their work had nudged the world toward greater international cooperation. “Men who have worked together to reach the stars are not likely to descend together into the depths of war and desolation,” he said. Later, the recipients were guests at a luncheon held by Vice President Humphrey and received accolades in both the House and Senate. A crowd estimated at 50,000	applauded the motorcade as Mathews and the astronauts rode to the Capitol. In the evening, Majors White (usaf) and McDivitt (usaf) narrated a 20-min. film of the GEMINI IV flight for the chiefs of foreign diplomatic missions. President Johnson, in a surprise appearance, told the astronauts to “take the Presidential plane and travel outside this country again.” He said: “Many people in many lands were thrilled by what you have done. I want you to join our delegation in Paris and go out among the friendly peoples of the earth to share with them the excitement and thrills of your experience.” Astronauts White and McDivitt then returned to the White House where provisions had been made for them and their families to remain overnight. (Text; Clopton, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al, A3; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/18/65; Semple, NYT, 6/18/65, 1, 13; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/18/65)
Parallel problems facing astronauts and aquanauts were noted by Assistant Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. Bioastronautics Div., Dr. J. A. Kraft. “These problems are both biomedical and mechanical. Because of their similarity, we have in the ocean a readily available laboratory environment. In it we can investigate the more significant problems common to both. . . .” One parallel is the changed pressure of the environment: for the aquanaut, pressure problems involve return from extremely heavy pressure to normal pressure at earth’s surface; for the astronaut, pressure problems involve functioning in lower pressure of spacecraft and vacuum of space itself. Other shared biomedical problems: dysbarism, oxygen toxicity, trace contamination, and anoxia. (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 9/19/65) During week of September 19: Medical checkup indicated that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard (Capt., usn) still suffered from labyrinthitis—an inner ear infection. Because of the illness, Shepard had not been selected for any of six Gemini flight crews. He also could not fly aircraft alone, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/28/65, A10)
gemim m Astronauts John W. Young (foreground) and Virgil 1. Grissom in spacecraft immediately prior to launch.
Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of the Fels Planetarium, said in the Philadelphia Inquirer: “As of this moment, the Soviets have tentatively determined that the maximum ‘safe’ period of weightlessness is 24 hr. They hold that after this period, ‘irreversible physiological changes begin to occur in the human system which, if not corrected, will eventually lead to death’. . . . “The Soviets have also discovered a correlation between high accelerations and weightlessness. They believe that when an astronaut is subjected to high accelerations on launch he tends to overestimate or to overcompensate for his movements. Once the astronaut is weightless, then a radical reversal takes place in which the astronaut undercompensates and may suffer disorientation. . . . “The Soviets appear to have concluded that flight crews of the future will be selected as medical teams, and they will further be selected on the basis of biological and bacteriological compatibility. The crew will be concerned with developing means for forecasting their own health during the entire trip so as to preserve it.” (Phil. Inq., 1/17/65)
A Benedictine nun, Sister M. Margaret Bealmear, said she had declined an invitation to apply for astronaut training and that she assumed the letter from NASA Manned Spacecraft Center had been a mistake. Sister Bealmear, a candidate for a doctorate in biology from the Univ. of Notre Dame, said she had received the invitation in December 1964. Invitations had been extended by NASA to select names appearing on a list provided by the National Academy of Sciences. (ap, NYT, 3/16/65, 5; msc Historian)
President Johnson approved the following policy on the promotion and decoration of astronauts: “1. Each military astronaut will receive a one grade promotion as a direct result of the first successful space flight, but not beyond the grade of colonel in the Air Force and Marine Corps or captain in the Navy. Promotions to general officer rank will be accomplished through usual military selection board process. “2. Each Gemini astronaut will be awarded the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service (or Cluster) after completion of a successful space flight. The NASA Medal for Distinguished Service, the highest award which can be given by that agency, will be awarded for exceptional accomplishments in the Gemini program, including but not limited to accomplishments in actual flight. “3. Military decorations associated with space flights, such as awards for exceptional heroism or other distinguished service, will be determined on an individual basis consistent with general policy governing the award of traditional military decorations.” (Text, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 183-84) During August: Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn., wrote in Aerospace: “Almost every aspect of our national life has begun to show a positive and beneficial impact of this nation’s decision to be a major participant in man’s greatest adventure. “There has been the direct economic impact on the communities and regions where the major parts of this large national event are centered. There has been introduced into our national economy a wide variety of radically new industrial techniques. There have evolved new standards of excellence in engineering, testing, design, reliability, environment, control, and the skill and dedication of personnel . . . “In space research, development and exploration, the identity becomes . . . more imperative. Aerospace companies go many routes attempting to achieve that goal. Leading aerospace companies, for example, developed a ‘Zero Defects’ program aimed at reminding, rewinding, and emphasizing to the worker that rejects are expensive and, if undetected, would contribute to tragedy. Other companies have instituted variations of the zero defects promotional program. “A second motivation campaign called ‘The Critical Parts Program,’ to insure that all 98 subsystem assemblies that go into a major space booster system will work, precisely in sequence, has been sold as an industry wide concept. “Another company reports that employes were amused and, more importantly, impressed, when a sign was tacked above the door of its main assembly room that reads: ‘In NASA we trust. Everything else we check . . .’” (Aerospace, Summer 1965, 25)
President Johnson signed into law the High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 (pl 89—220) in White House ceremony. He said: “. . . In recent decades, we have achieved technological miracles in our transportation. But there is one great exception. “We have airplanes which fly three times faster than sound. We have television cameras that are orbiting Mars. But we have the same tired and inadequate mass transportation between our towns and cities that we had 30 years ago. “Today ... an astronaut can orbit the earth faster than a man on the ground can get from New York to Washington. Yet, the same science and technology which gave us our airplanes and our space probes, I believe, could also give us better and faster and more economical transportation on the ground. And a lot of us need it more on the ground than we need it orbiting the earth. . . . “The High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 really gives us, for the first time in history, a coordinated program for improving the transportation system that we have today, and making it a better servant to our people. . . .”	( Text, Pres. Doc., 10/4/65, 329-30)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and his wife left for Europe on a goodwill tour ordered by President Johnson. Cities on the schedule included London, Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Genoa, Rome, Naples, Florence or Venice, Madrid, and Lisbon. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/29/65)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
Gemini astronaut parachute system for use in launch emergency failed to function properly during test at El Centro, Calif. When the jumper stepped from a c-130 aircraft at 23,000-ft. altitude, a “ballute” (combination balloon and parachute) device for stabilizing the fall failed to deploy; the chute was opened manually at 12,000 ft. (upi, Minneapolis Trib., 3/10/65)
The Gemini 4 manned spaceflight had been scheduled for June 3, NASA announced. The four-day flight would last about 97 hrs. 50 min., and would increase the U.S.’s hours of manned space flight to about 257 hrs. No decision had been made about opening the two-man spacecraft and letting one astronaut stand exposed to space. (Clark, Ayr, 5/22/65, 8)
President Johnson telephoned the Nation’s thanks to Gemini Astronauts James McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) and told them that they had written their names “in history and in our hearts.” He concluded: “What you’ve done will never be forgotten. We can hope and pray that the time will come when all men of all nations will join together to explore space together and walk side by side toward peace. And you two outstanding men have taken a long stride forward in mankind’s progress, and everyone in this nation, and I think in the free world, feels in your debt.” The astronauts, aboard the carrier Wasp in the Atlantic for medical tests, were invited to spend the week-end with the President at his Texas ranch. (Kilpatrick, Wash. Post, 6/8/65, A14)
Rep. Joseph Karth (D-Minn.) told the House that the flight of GEMINI V had successfully tested not only the high qualities of Astronauts Gordon Cooper, Jr., and Charles Conrad, but the reliability and suitability of many items involved in America’s space program, including food. He inserted into the Congressional Record: “The Pillsbury items scheduled by NASA for the Cooper-Conrad mission—each ready to eat and requiring no reconstitution—were brownies, gingerbread, pineapple fruitcake, date fruitcake, apricot cereal bars, strawberry cereal bars, toasted bread cubes and cinnamon toast. “Cooper and Conrad were programed to eat 4 meals each day, providing a daily average of approximately 2,500 calories. The selected menu . . . was designed to maintain body weight at zero gravity under light physical activity. The 8 Pillsbury items were designed to provide a high energy source that supplemented the rehydratable foods in the menu for each meal. They required no preparation time and provided solid food consistency. . . .” {CR, 9/9/65, A5095)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young were honored in a White House ceremony where President Johnson conferred NASA Exceptional Service Medals on both men and pinned a cluster on the NASA Distinguished Service Medal awarded Major Grisson for his July Zl, lyoi, suDormtai mercury night. first man to ma!c€ two space flights. NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his direction of space efforts. Harris M. Schurmeier received an Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for his direction of the Ranger program. President Johnson said: “A sense of history is present strongly here today. All of us are conscious that we have crossed over the threshold of man’s first tentative and experimental ventures in space. . . . “Since we gave our program direction and purpose seven years ago, many successes have been achieved through the efforts of a great American team, which now numbers 400 thousand men and women in industry, on campuses, and in government. And this team is inspired and stimulated and led by a former Marine and a great public servant —Jim Webb.” Following the ceremony, a motorcade bearing Vice President Humphrey, the astronauts, and their party took the Pennsylvania Ave. parade route, where thousands had gathered to cheer them, to the Capitol; a luncheon in their honor was jointly sponsored by Sen. Clinton Anderson (D-N.Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller f D—Calif.), chairmen of the Senate and House space committees. At 5 p.m. the group returned to Capitol Hill for a Congressional reception hosted by House Speaker John McCormack (D-Mass.). (NASA Release 65-98; Text; Carmody, Wash. Post, 3/26/65; NYT, 3/27/65, 1)
The radar set that would guide Gemini astronauts on rendezvous missions in space, beginning with the August 19 Gemini v flight, was demonstrated by Westinghouse Corp.—working under an $18 million contract with	NASA—at	Friendship International Airport, Baltimore. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Charles Conrad (Lcdr., usn) would carry a self-contained Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) into orbit on the back end of their spacecraft. An Agena rendezvous radar transponder and flashing beacons would be packaged in the Rep along with batteries and antenna. Midway through the second revolution, at 2 hrs. 25 min. after liftoff, command pilot Cooper would yaw the Gemini 5 spacecraft 90° to the right. Explosive charges would eject the Rep from its canister northward at 5 fps. Gemini 5 would then maneuver away from the Rep to attain a position six miles below and 14 mi. behind the Rep. Subsequent phase adjustment would place Gemini 5 in a co-elliptical orbit—that is, the spacecraft would be at constant altitude below the Rep but reducing the trailing distance, since the spacecraft in its lowest orbit would be traveling faster than the Rep. Range and range-rate data would be displayed to the Gemini 5 crew by the rendezvous radar system. The radar system would continuously compute distance and angles from the spacecraft to the Pod, and calculate the maneuvers necessary to effect rendezvous. At five hours and 36 min. after liftoff, if the mission went as planned, Gemini 5 should be closing in on the Rep just north of the Carnarvon, Australia, tracking station. Gemini 5 would not physically dock with Rep; the experiment would simply provide training for Gemini VI and other rendezvous missions and evaluate the rendezvous radar hardware to be used on the Agena target vehicle in later missions. (Clark, NYT, 7/8/65, 12; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/8/65; Msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1, 2)
gemini vii Astronauts Lovell and Borman completed the medical phase of their debriefing at ksc. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for MSC, said that “a quick look at data available . . . indicates man has fared extremely well in two weeks of space environment.” A detailed medical analysis would be available later, nasa released several terrain photographs taken by Astronaut Lovell during gemini vii’s spaceflight Dec. 4—18. (ap, NYT, 12/22/65, 14; ap, Wash. Post, 12/22/65, A3)
NASA released a photograph of the gemini iv spacecraft taken by Astronaut Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) during his walk in space. The picture was one of an unannounced number that Major White recorded with a 35 mm. camera mounted atop a space gun that he used for maneuverability. Films of Astronaut White floating in space would be made available for public showing “sometime within the next month.” (ap, NYT, 6/11/65, 12)
A home-made U.S. flag, carried by astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John W. Young (LCdr., usn) on the March 23 Gemini iii flight, was hoisted at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center the moment Astronauts James A. McDivitt, (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White ii (Maj., usaf) went into orbit. Flag w'ould be flown only while astronauts were in spaceflight, (ap, Knoxville News Sentinel, 6/3/65)
The world applauded the success of the GEMINI v mission: many leaders in Western Europe sent congratulatory cables to President Johnson, and newspapers in Great Britain, Malaysia, India, and Japan were among those giving the flight front-page coverage. The Soviet Union televised pictures of the astronauts and broadcast news reports of their landing. Only a few dissenting voices were heard— among them the Cuban newspaper Revolucion which described the flight as “cosmic espionage.” Communist China remained silent. {Wash. Post, 8/31/65, A3)
An instrumented experiment package capable of recording lunar phenomena and relaying information to earth, would be installed on the moon by astronauts before their return to earth, reported Howard Simons in the Washington Post. Simons said that NASA officials explained that the package would contain “combination of instruments to measure the moon’s gravity and atmosphere, heat flow and solar wind, proton activity and micrometeorite impacts for as long as a year.” Such information would be helpful in planning the establishment of permanent lunar bases and in studying the history of the earth and the solar system. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/14/65, A9)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., visited Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie in the royal palace in Addis Ababa, then made the fourth stop of their goodwill tour—after Greece, Turkey, and Ethiopia—the Malagasy Republic. They were received cordially. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/65; upi, Miami Her., 9/22/65)
Honorary Doctor of Astronautical Science degrees were conferred on Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) by their alma mater, the Univ. of Michigan where Maj. White received his bs degree in 1959 and Maj. McDivitt, his ms degree in 1959. The astronauts then attended a ceremony dedicating the University’s new $1.7 million space research building and rode in a motorcade through downtown Ann Arbor. NASA’s official representative at the festivities was Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of the nasa Langley Research Center, also a Michigan alumnus. (LaRC Release; ap, Balt. Sun. 6/16/65)
Italy’s Order of Merit was awarded former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), during his visit to Rome. He and his wife were also received by Prime Minister Aldo Moro. (Reuters, NYT, 10/16/65, 54)
Gemini spacecraft, scheduled for a four-day manned flight this summer, was delivered to Cape Kennedy. It was flown by cargo plane from McDonnell Aircraft Corp., prime contractor for manufacture of the craft, where it had undergone simulated flights. Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White II, who would pilot the Gemini 4, also had made simulated flights at McDonnell, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/5/65)
Prospecting for high-grade silver could be done, according to Thor H. Kiilsgaard, Chief of the Resources Research Branch of the U.S. Geological Survey, by using an infrared system mounted on aircraft. He explained that deposits of silver in the earth were associated with hot water and that areas of heat flow could be detected by the infrared devices. If the heat zones conformed with mineral zones or faults, silver might be present. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 2/28/65, 64) During February: The prime and backup crews for the upcoming GT-3 three-orbital mission underwent parachute and egress training exercises. Parachute training, with the astronauts in space suits, was conducted in Galveston Bay, Tex. Egress training from a submerged Gemini boilerplate spacecraft was conducted in a large tank at Ellington, afb. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 2)
Gemini vii Astronauts Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf) and James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), passed their 5-hr. preflight physical examination at ksc. Dr. Charles Berry, Gemini medical director, said he could find no medical problem that might interfere with the scheduled launch of Gemini vii Dec. 4. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/65, A3; Wilford, NYT, 12/2/65, 22)
Gemini vi, scheduled to be launched from Eastern Test Range, with Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf), was canceled by failure of the Agena rocket, vehicle with which Gemini spacecraft was to rendezvous and dock. The mission was to have been the fourth manned flight and the first rendezvous and docking mission in the Gemini program. Simultaneous countdown of both the Titan n-Gemini 6 and the Atlas-Agena had been developed to maximize launch reliability for a “same day” launch. Atlas-Agena liftoff was at 10:00:04 est. The Agena Target Vehicle separated from the Atlas at 10:05:12 with all sequences and parameters nominal at separation. Following a nominal Agena coast period, loss of Agena telemetry and radar beacon track occurred at 10:06:20 after initiation of primary propulsion system burn. Attempt to establish radar or telemetry track by the Canary Islands tracking station and subsequently by the Carnarvon station was unsuccessful. A hold was called at t-42 in the Gemini 6 countdown to determine the status of the Agena Target Vehicle. Mission was terminated at 10:54 a.m. because the Agena Target Vehicle had failed to achieve orbit. Formal Gemini vi mission failure investigation was immediately initiated, (nasa Release 65-237; Marshall Star, 11/3/65, 1; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/25/65, 1; Clark, NYT, 10/26/65, 1)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., received a warm welcome in Ankara, Turkey, in contrast to cool receptions in Izmir and Istanbul. President Cemal Gursel told the astronauts their flight of nearly eight days had demonstrated “great courage ... to your nation and to the whole world.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/20/65)
In a Missiles and Rockets editorial, William J. Coughlin questioned NASA’s wisdom in drawing up mission requirements for lunar exploration. The article said:	“Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA associate administrator, told Congress last year:	‘Ranger will play an important role in the support of Project Apollo.’ . . . “Not a single change has been made in any part of the Apollo system or in the program’s operational plan as a result of the Ranger findings. None is contemplated. The reason for this is simple. The Block in Rangers were incapable of producing any such data. . . . “The case for Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter as supports for the Apollo program ... is not a very strong one. . . . “Dr. Newell sees them as part of what he calls the ‘total program for exploring the Moon.’ . . . [He said] in the following statement to Congress:	‘You will have a lunar landing. That lunar landing will involve a few hours of stay on the Moon, a look that the astronauts can make, a few collections of samples, maybe some simple tests, and maybe the implacement by the astronauts of monitors to be left on the lunar surface.’ “After their departure, Dr. Newell sees the instruments carrying on. Lunar Orbiter wheels overhead. Surveyor explores areas on the moon which Man would have difficulty in reaching. . . . “We suggest that if anyone proposed exploring the Antarctic in such a manner, he would he clapped in the pokey as a nut. Man is going to the Moon and he is going to explore it. Expenditure of billions of dollars on instruments remotely controlled from Earth to do the same job is folly.” (M&R, 4/12/65, 46)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former NASA astronaut and first American to orbit the earth, retired from the Marine Corps after 22 yrs. in the service. Glenn said he would spend much of his time as a consultant to nasa. He would also be a director of Royal Crown Cola Co. ( dod Release 912-64; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/4/65; Wash. Post, 1/5/65; Balt. Sun, 1/5/65; Chic. Trib., 1/5/65)
A temporary injunction was issued banning a steel fabricating firm from running internal combustion engines while GEMINI vu orbited over the Corpus Christi, Tex., area. The Government, in asking for the injunction, said machinery at Safety Steel Services, Inc., interfered with radio signals to the spacecraft and “threatened the safety of the astronauts.” (ap, Wash. Post, 12/9/65)
In what he termed “Coming of Age in Houston,” William Hines wrote in the Washington Evening Star of “a new, mature outlook on the part of NASA.” He said: “There was a conscious effort to deglamorize (but not depersonalize) the [Gemini 4] astronauts, and to' focus attention on the mission rather than on celebrities who would subsequently tell their stories in Life. The decision not to give the spacecraft a name and to use the radio call sign ‘Gemini 4’ was a step in this direction. “The determination of NASA to rid itself of what has been called the ‘Hollywood syndrome’ and handle space flights as transcendental news events instead of tawdry theatrical productions did not come easily, or without prodding from the outside. But once the decision had been made not to try any longer to fool all the people all the time, a new era in public understanding of space dawned.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/65)
Dr. Donald Young and Dr. Ralph Pelligra of nasa Ames Research Center had been studying “the use of high caloric diets for prolonged space flights on the theory that it may be possible for astronauts to use their own fatty deposits as a source of energy.” It might be possible that future astronauts would prepare for spaceflight by eating “certain types of fats that would build up in their bodies,” thus providing them with “storage depots of their own fat” that could serve “as a backup if food supplies were limited.” (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/26/65)
Soviet claim that the Gemini v spaceflight was undertaken with “haste and definite risk” received editorial comment in the Washington Evening Star: “Tass, the official Soviet news agency, should feel a little bit embarrassed at the moment. It has given a big play to a story by Leonid Ponomariov [sic], its New York correspondent. The story has charged that American space officials have been ordered by the Johnson administration to ‘beat the Soviet Union at any price with regard to the duration of orbital flight.’ “. . . our country may indeed be forging ahead. But nothing could be more ridiculous than Ponomariov’s [sic] studied suggestion that Gemini 5 has been put into orbit in a slapdash manner, with callous disregard for the safety of the astronauts aboard, just to steal a space scene from the Soviets. The fuel system and everything else aboard the Cooper-Conrad vehicle are not whimsical improvisations. That has been made dramatically clear by the way in which Gemini’s initial power failure has been eliminated with help from ground control, by the craft’s built-in means of self-correction. “As a result, it seems fairly certain right now that Astronauts Cooper and Conrad will be able to complete their eight-day mission. . . . “God willing, the Gemini flight will succeed to a degree that may persuade the men of the Kremlin to pay serious attention to our country’s standing proposal for a joint Soviet-American effort to promote a manned landing on the moon.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/24/65)
The successful Gemini vii-vi mission received extensive editorial comment. New York Times: “The exploits of astronauts Borman, Lovell, Schirra and Stafford and the extraordinary pictures they brought back from space have thrilled men everywhere. Admiration for their high achievements has—if only for the moment—overcome most of the usual division of this quarrelsome world. . . . “Borman and Lovell in Gemini 7 took the longest journey in history —more than five million miles. They showed that creatures of the earth’s surface can live and work effectively for fourteen days in a weightless environment, in which men must encapsulate themselves as in the womb and bring their own air, food and water to survive . . . they proved that a human organism is up to the task of staying in space long enough to fly to the moon, to do work there for several days, and then to return to this planet. “The unprecedented precision navigation feat of Schirra and Stafford in Gemini 6 was important primarily because, for the first time, it brought two spaceships close enough together to be joined. Their demonstration opens the way for construction in space and vastly expands the potentialities for human activity in that realm. . . .” (NYT, 12/19/65, 8E) Washington Sunday Star: “Now it is all over, but it will be remembered in history as one of man’s finer achievements. . . .” (Wash. Sun. Star, 12/19/65, C2)
Attempt to launch Gemini vi from etr was unsuccessful when an electric plug connecting the Titan II booster to the launch pad fell loose 2}4 sec. early, causing the automatic sequencer to shut down the engine booster 1.2 sec. after ignition. Inside the Titan II a wire extended from the tail plug to tap a circuit which carried current from the batteries to an intervalometer—electric clock—which controls the first 21/% min. of powered flight. When the plug shook loose prematurely and started the clock, signals that liftoff had occurred were sent to the Titan ii’s automatic pilot, local guidance stations, and an automatic sequencing device at KSC Launch Control Center. The sequencer registered the mishap and shut down Titan Ii’s engines. Astronauts Stafford and Schirra remained calm throughout the misfire with Command Pilot Schirra rejecting the option to actuate the ejection seats. The astronauts were removed 99 min. later from the spacecraft and the launch rescheduled for Dec. 15. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/13/65, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/13/65, Al; MSC GEMINI V11/GEMIN1 VI Fact Sheet)
King Constantine of Greece invited Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), their wives, and other U.S. officials in Athens for the 16th International Astronautical Congress, to a royal palace banquet, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and JPL Director Dr. William H.	Pickering were among the guests, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/17/65)
An equipment modification to permit opening of the hatch on Gemini 4 had been successfully tested, William Normyle reported in Aviation Week & Space Technology. Hoses connecting the spacesuits to the spacecraft’s environmental control system were lengthened to permit the astronaut to stand and partially emerge through the hatch. NASA had not yet approved a spacecraft-depressurization and hatchopening exercise for the two-man spaceflight. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 4/5/65, 27)
C. Leo De Orsey, financial advisor and attorney for the seven original astronauts and acting president of the Washington Redskins football team, died, (upi, Houston Chron., 5/1/65; ap, NYT, 5/2/65, 89)
In a report presented at the 55th national meeting of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers in Houston, NASA Lewis Research Center engineer E. W. Ott said that moisture in an astronaut’s breath could escape into his space capsule, accumulate and float at zero gravity, and short out electrical systems it might come into contact with. He said something like this was believed to have happened when Astronaut Gordon Cooper had had to bring his space capsule in under manual control in May 1963. “There is good evidence that water found its way into automatic control equipment and caused malfunctioning.” (Justice, Houston Post, 2/10/65)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief of medical operations at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, had said that new body sensor equipment developed for astronauts had “stretched the doctor’s stethoscope to reach 100 miles,” reported Norm Spray in an article in the Houston Chronicle: “This could open the door for new types of medical research and treatment potentially as important to the family physician as to space scientists, Dr. Berry believes.
Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “A strong smell of sour grapes is beginning to emanate from the Soviet propaganda machine with its waspish comments on recent U.S. space achievements. . . . “This . . . was evident in the Soviet propaganda barrage aimed at the Gemini 5 flight when it became apparent that Astronauts Cooper and Conrad would surpass the world space flight endurance record set by Soviet Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky in June 1963. Tass . . . charged that U.S. space officials were endangering the lives of the two Gemini Astronauts by keeping them in flight after the initial fuel cell problems in a supposedly rash effort to surpass the Soviet mark. Red Star, the official Defense Ministry newspaper, joined in by ‘exposing’ the Gemini 5 flight as a Pentagon plot to develop better space reconnaissance techniques and charged the peaceful scientific aims of space exploration were being subverted in Gemini by its military experiments. . . . “What is really significant about these Soviet sour grapes is that they reflect a realization that the USSR has been overtaken and is being passed in the space race by the U.S. program. The U.S. superiority in unmanned space probes has become clearly recognized by the world with the Ranger lunar pictures and the Mars data from Mariner 4. Gemini 4 and 5 finally erased the Soviet lead in the manned space flight. The solid operational foundation of the Gemini program has made possible the swift and sure pace which promises to eclipse significantly the Voskhod flights in the immediate future. . . .” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 21)
Indonesian Air Vice Admiral Budiardjo, deputy air force chief for logistics, claimed that Indonesia had begun surveys for space flights and would be able to launch its first astronaut by 1968. (ap, Wash. Post, 1/7/65, A13)
Astronaut Walter Schirra said that he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had maneuvered the GEMINI VI spacecraft to within one foot of Gemini VII during their Dec. 15 rendezvous and that although they were backed up by an advanced type of computer, they probably could have effected rendezvous without it. Schirra and the three other astronauts involved in the GEMINI VII-VI flights gave reports on their missions at an msc news conference, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/31/65, Al; msc Gemini VII/Gemini VI Fact Sheet)
Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff reported to the Medical Society of the State of New York at its annual convention that the semicircular canals of the inner ear had been demonstrated to play a key role in motion sickness that astronauts might experience in a rotating, orbiting spacecraft. Capt. Ashton Graybiel at the usn School of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola, expressed optimism that astronauts could be taught to overcome the effects of motion sickness. One way, he said, was to precondition selected persons by teaching them how to avoid movements that would invariably upset them. Another promising development, Dr. Graybiel said, was drug research. (Simons, Wash. Post, 2/16/65)
It was reported that President Johnson was disappointed that the twoman Gemini-Titan 4 spacecraft scheduled for June 3 launching, had no cameras aboard for simultaneous TV transmission of the space walk. The President had hoped that at completion of the four-day flight by Astronauts McDivitt and White, the U.S. would have pictures similar to those released by the Soviet Union after VOSKHOD II flight. TV cameras had been sacrificed for experimental instruments. (Humphrey, Phil. Eve. Bull., 5/27/65)
NASA selected three firms to design the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Packages (Alsep) under separate and concurrent $500,000, six-month, fixed-price contracts. The firms were Bendix Systems Div., Bendix Corp.; Space-General Corp.; and TRW Systems Group, Thomp-son-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc. Packages would contain scientific instruments to measure the moon’s structure and surface characteristics, atmosphere, heat flow, solar wind, radiation, and micrometeorite impacts. They would be carried to the moon on the initial Apollo spaceflights and placed on the surface by astronauts. Instruments would transmit data back to earth for six months to one year. (NASA Release 65-260)
“I certainly have seen nothing in the eight-day data that would lead me to be worried about a 14-day flight,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief physician for the astronauts, told reporters at a news briefing in Cocoa Beach. He said that the GEMINI V astronauts were in good physical condition and were returning to normal as quickly as had the pilots of the four-day Gemini GT-4 flight in June. Changes in such indicators as the heart rate and blood pressure characteristics seemed to reflect adaptation to the weightless space environment and, later, to the stress of returning to normal gravity of earth, Dr. Berry explained. Heart rates became lower in space and rose above normal on returning to earth. At first, on return to earth, blood pressure did not respond as promptly as normal to tilt-table tests designed to show how well the circulatory system copes with sudden changes from horizontal to nearly-vertical posture. Cooper and Conrad lost about TV2 and 8Y2 lbs. respectively, but had gained most of it back. This loss might have been a response to the space environment but was believed to be partly water loss after reentry while waiting in the sun to be rescued, Berry said. Both seemed to be less tired than their predecessors. (Schmeck, NYT, 9/1/65, 1, 15)
