nasa released its 1,000th Tech Brief, one which described development of improved titanium alloy of possible value in field of medicine. Potential industrial uses of inorganic fibers developed as reinforcements in materials for spacecraft were discussed in Non-Glassy Inorganic Fibers and Composites, issued by NASA Office of Technology Utilization. Techniques used to monitor astronauts’ blood pressure could be adapted to prolong the lives of persons with certain types of heart disease, concluded Westinghouse Research Laboratories engineers William J. Jones and Wyatt C. Simpson in monograph entitled NASA Contributions to Cardiovascular Monitoring. Study was conducted for nasa’s Office of Technology Utilization, (nasa Releases 66-238, 66-246, 66-250) During September: usaf had begun evaluation studies of Adam (Air Deflection and Modulation) II—a revolutionary type of aircraft with engines located inside the wings—at Wright-Patterson afb. A full-span, powered model of the propulsive-wing V/Stol aircraft would be designed, built, and tested by ltv Aerospace Corp. under a 15-mo., $439,000 contract jointly funded by usaf and usa. Wind-tunnel tests would be made at LaHC. Aircraft could be used in both military tactical and commercial passenger versions, (afsc Release 154.66)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was appointed chairman of the board of Royal Crown Cola International, Ltd. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/25/66, C8)
During White House meeting with President Johnson, NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed current status of national space program and showed President two previously unreleased color photographs—one of southern Texas, the other of Baja California— taken from 180-mi. altitude during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Following meeting, Webb announced that Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong would leave Oct. 7 for three-week tour of 10 Latin American nations: Venezuela, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/66, A4)
Gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space, told AP that the most important word of advice he had given Astronaut David Scott, scheduled for extravehicular activity during the March 15 Gemini VIII mission, was: "Don’t get in a hurry. "Take things slow and try not to hurry and rush, because you can’t do things in a real rapid manner up tliere. It’s better to go on the slow, deliberate approach.” (AP, Chic.Trib., 3/11/66)
Astronauts returning to earth after long space flights in sterile environment might have to take bacteria pills, suggested Dr. T. D. Luckey, Univ. of Missouri Medical School, at American Society for Microbiology convention in Los Angeles. Dr. Luckey suggested that astronauts’ sterile air, food, and water eventually could dangerously reduce the amount of bacteria in their systems, resulting in bacterial illness when they returned to earth. Pills could restore normal degree of immunity to terrestrial bacteria. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A12)
Possibility that U.S. astronauts might land on moon in 1968 rather than 1969	"should serve to hasten agreement on international treaty aimed at making outer space exclusively a dimension of man’s peaceful activity,” postulated editorial in New York Times. "Hard decisions” about post-Apollo research should be made soon, especially since there were "far more possibilities for fruitful activities in space than even the United States can afford to carry on simultaneously.” (NYT., 11/16/66, 42M)
gemini xii pilot Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., told msc news conference that with proper equipment, like the waist straps and foot restraints he used during Eva, a man could work outside with no fear of fatigue—if he were well trained. Following press conference, Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Aldrin together with a group of msc, ksc, nasa Hq., and industry Gemini program participants flew to lbj Ranch for visit with President Johnson, who said: "The splendid performance of man and machine in Gemini has been a product of the American system at its best. "The months ahead will not be easy as we reach toward the moon.... But with Gemini as the forerunner, I am confident that we will overcome the difficulties and achieve another success.” Group returned to MSC for formal awards ceremony. Receiving NASA Exceptional Service Medal were Gemini xii crewmen James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Col. John G. Albert (usaf), etr; Osro H. Covington, gsfc; and John D. Hodge, MSC. NASA Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. George E. Mueller, omsf; and Charles W. Mathews, MSC. Outstanding Leadership Medal: Robert F. Thompson, msc; John J. Williams, ksc; and M/G Vincent G. Houston (usaf), etr. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: James A. Chamberlin, MSC. NASA Public Service Award: John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; Bastian Hello, Martin Co.; Bernhard A. Hohmann, Aerospace Corp.; Walter D. Smith, Martin Co.; Walter F. Burke, McDonnell; Louis D. Wilson, Aerojet-General; Lawrence A. Smith, Lockheed; William B. Bergen, Martin Co.; George M. Bunker, Martin Marietta; B/G Paul T. Cooper, afsc Space Systems Div.; Daniel J. Haughton, Lockheed; Roger Lewis, General Dynamics; James S. McDonnell, McDonnell Aircraft; R. I. McKenzie, Aerojet-General; L. Eugene Root, Lockheed; David S. Lewis, McDonnell; and Jack A. Bowers, Martin Marietta. NASA Superior Achievement Award: Arthur W. Vogeley, Richard J. Allen, LeRoy E. Day, John A. Edwards, Eldon W. Hall, Vearl N. Huff, and William A. Summerfelt, NASA Hq.; and Anthony L. Liccardi. NASA Group Achievement Award: Gemini Astronaut Team, Manned Spaceflight Network Team, Gemini Spacecraft Launch Team, Gemini Program Office at MSC, Gemini Program Office at NASA Hq., and Gemini Support Team at msc. (msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 8; Sheehan, NYT, 11/24/66, 36; Pres. Doc., 11/28/66, 1718-9)
Prototype unfolding tool box containing 16 geological tools for astronauts to examine and obtain samples of lunar rock was delivered to msc by Martin Co. Box would also provide storage area for rock samples. Tools included battery-powered drill; dust scoop; sample-weighing device; hand-held magnifier designed for use through spacesuit visor; surveying instruments and rangefinder; and retriever to pick up small specimens of rock which pressure-suited astronaut could not reach, (msc Release 66-9)
Astronaut Scott Carpenter decided not to attend Second International Congress on Oceanography in Moscow after learning that the U.S. ocean research vessel U.S.S. Silas Bent had been denied permission to dock at Leningrad in connection with the conference. Carpenter, who had participated in the Sealab II experiment in living and working underwater, would have attended as an aquanaut and would have been the first astronaut to visit Moscow, nas had designated Silas Bent to respond to Soviet invitation for oceanographic ships to visit Soviet ports during Congress so delegates could visit them but Soviet Foreign Ministry had refused permission. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/24/66)
Of 351 astronaut applicants, 192, including all 6 female candidates, failed to meet minimum requirements, an MSC spokesman reported. The successful 15 would be announced in May. (msc Roundup, 1/21/66, 3; AP, New Haven Register, 1/7/66)
In msc ceremony, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Gemini x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins nasa Exceptional Service Medals for "outstanding contribution to space flight and engineering,” and the astronauts reviewed their July 18-21 mission for the press. Pilot Collins revealed that maneuvering difficulties during his walk in space had forced him to approach Gatv vm three times before successfully retrieving a micrometeoroid experiment. He felt the "basic problem” in Eva was that "without some sort of handholds or restraining devices, a large percentage of the astronaut’s time is going to be devoted to torquing his body around until it is in the proper position to do some useful work.” Command Pilot Young said mission’s fuel shortage had been caused by large out-of-plane error, not human error as previously believed: "We had to use a brute force method of rendezvous [with gatv x]. That takes quite a lot of fuel.” (Transcript)
Discussing the urgency of nasa’s deciding "what to do in space after the first Apollo astronauts return from the moon about 1970,” William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is hard to forget a hint, dropped ... by a leading Russian space official several years ago. The Soviet Union, this functionary suggested, might very well celebrate the 50th anniversary of its great revolution by having cosmonauts plant a flag on the lunar surface. That deadline—if it is a deadline—is now less than 20 months away. "But suppose the Soviet Union is not racing us to the moon, or for that matter suppose that she is. In the present state of planning, the U.S. with the moon in its grasp would be very much like a dog chasing an automobile—what does he do with it if he catches it?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66)
Gemini IX-A was officially cleared for launching June 1 on three-day mission that would include rendezvous, docking, and extravehicular activity. After hearing reports from the astronauts, launching pad crews, and the worldwide tracking network, William C. Schneider, mission director, declared Gemini IX-A "ready to go.” (NYT, 5/29/66, 58; upi, Wash. Post, 5/28/66, Al)
Delays at major U.S. airports totaling 20 million minutes cost aircraft operators $63.6 million in 1965, faa reported in a staff study. One third of total delays was caused by air traffic controls, and the remainder by airport limitations such as weather conditions, ground congestion, and construction, (faa Release 66-68) Maneuvers were executed as planned, with docking of gemini x and gatv x occurring at 5:58 get. Only about 380 lbs. maneuvering fuel of 940 lbs. at liftoff were left, whereas a 680-lb. remainder had been expected. An out-of-plane error had necessitated a major correction, with excessive fuel consumption. Mated spacecraft, using gatv x’s primary propulsion system, attained 476-mi. (766-km.) record altitude for manned flight. Burn of gatv x’s secondary propulsion system at 22:38 get brought docked configuration into same orbit as gatv viii—launched March 16 for gemini viii mission—preparatory to later rendezvous. Standup Eva began at 23:27 get with Collins photographing stellar ultraviolet radiation through open hatch. Young orderea termination of Eva when both he and Collins experienced severe watering and irritation of eyes from an unidentified source. Separation of Gemini x-gatv x— which had remained docked 38 min. 42 sec.—occurred at 44:40 get. Series of maneuvers brought gemini x within 50 ft. of gatv viii. Umbilical Eva began at 48:08 get: Collins removed fairing from gatv viii and retrieved micrometeoroid detection experiment—completing first productive work ever accomplished on Eva mission. Collins lost Eva camera; photographic coverage was limited to pictures taken by Young from spacecraft. Eva was terminated after 28 min. to conserve maneuvering fuel; 50 lbs. had been used, as against 35 lbs. estimated consumption for planned 55 min. Third hatch opening of mission occurred when astronauts, cramped by unstowed equipment, jettisoned 12 items. Reentry July 21 after 70 hrs. 47 min. in space and 43 revolutions was normal. At 5:07 p.m. edt, gemini x splashed down in Atlantic Ocean 544 mi. east of Cape Kennedy—less than three miles off target and five miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Within minutes, usn pararescue team dropped from helicopters had attached flotation collar to spacecraft, and Young and Collins were transported by helicopter to recovery ship. gemini x had accomplished (1) two rendezvous, one involving longest docking yet achieved, the other a close approach to a passive satellite from which an object was retrieved; (2) two Eva exercises; (3) successful maneuvering by astronaut from one spacecraft to another and back; and (4) use of powered, fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary propulsion for docked spacecraft. (NASA Release 66-179; NASA Proj. Off.; Wilford, NYT, 7/19/66, 1; Hines, Wdfch. Eve. Star, 7/19/66, Al, A3; 7/20/66, Al, A6; Wilford, NYT, 7/20/66, 1; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 7/22/66, Al, A4; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 26-30)	_
U.S.S.R. was entering second phase of space medicine research, seeking the "why” of physiological changes, V. V. Parin, a Soviet physician-scientist with a major role in selecting and training cosmonauts, told Technology Week in a Moscow interview. In phase one "we merely made objective observations of animals ... we were interested in just keeping them alive, in generating the atmosphere, maintaining thermal control, humidity, pressure, and the rest,” Parin said. "Now we want to know the intimate details of animal adaptation” to space, because lower animals could be more intensively studied in space flights than man. Parin cited four areas in which improved medical technology could aid the study of physiology: measuring calcium loss in astronauts; analyzing process of water loss in astronauts; measuring muscle tone; and devising better telemetry. Parin said he was satisfied with the interchange of space-medical data between U.S.S.R. and U.S. (Beller, Tech. Wk., 7/4/66, 12, 13)
Endorsement of suggestion in Jan. 9 open letter to President Johnson that he invite "a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut for a space ride in a two-man capsule” was reported by letter’s author, Parade editor Jess Gorkin. Newspapers throughout the world had publicized the idea and written favorable editorials. Le Figaro (Paris) had given it front page coverage. Melbourne (Australia) Herald had said the idea had "great merit.” Asahi Shimbun (Tokyo): "As long as America and Russia accelerate space development separately, there will be much money wasted. Both countries will probably suspect that the other party is engaged in space development for military purposes. ... If the United States and the Soviet Union cooperate and 'all the families of the earth’ pitch in to further space development, war on earth will gradually become absurd.” New York World Telegram: "What do we have to lose? If we succeed and the two men orbit the earth together the psychological effect will be tremendous. If Russia turns down the idea, we will be on sounder moral grounds.” (Gorkin, Parade, 3/20/66) During week of March 20: Several hundred sightings of unidentified flying objects (Ufo’s) near Ann Arbor, Mich., were reported. Rep. Weston Vivian (D-Mich.) said he would ask dod to make an investigation. (upi, NYT, 3/22/66, 19; dm, NYT, 3/23/66, 22; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, Al; upi, Wash. Post, 3/25/66, A20; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/66, Al)
U.S. domestic airlines flew 25 per cent more revenue passenger miles during first six months of 1966 than during comparable 1965 period, according to Air Transport Assn, report. Nearly 30.2 billion revenue passenger miles were flown during first half of 1966 by scheduled trunk, local service, and helicopter carriers compared with 24.1 billion revenue passenger miles during first half of 1965. (Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 40) During week of July 25: Patent was granted to Wolfgang G. Offik, senior staff engineer for Chrysler Corp., for escape system to rescue workers from booster-launch gantry in case of explosion or fire. Equipment included series of rescue cabins, each suspended in its own cable at a different level in front of gantry. In emergency, workers and astronauts still outside spacecraft would enter cabins and drop in them into underground shelter, protecting them from flames on gantry and on ground. (Jones, NYT, 7/30/66, 29)
NASA reported that smudgy spacecraft windows and exposure problems had compromised quality of most of movie film taken by Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Still pictures were all "of good quality” and showed earth’s curvature more clearly than on any other manmade photographs. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A8)
Fifth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-5) was successfully captive-fired by Chrysler Corp. for 2k£ min.—longest duration firing—at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Stage would be shipped to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static-test checks and would be used in checking out the Apollo spacecraft, perfecting rendezvous and docking techniques, and training astronauts in preparation for manned lunar landing, (msfc Release 66-69)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in Washington, D.C., to gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman for achieving first rendezvous in space by two separately launched maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. After the ceremony, the Vice President told newsmen he was one of those "manning the ramparts” against those who failed to see any direct public benefit from space exploration. He thought the space program had resulted in a superior educational system, increased industrial competence, new products, "and if it hasn’t done anything else it has taught us to manage” vast undertakings. (Clark, NYT, 12/16/66, 21)
nasa’s lunar orbiter ii (Lunar Orbiter B) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in second U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Nov. 10-30]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 14-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft on 94-hr., 232,000-mi. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule lunar orbiter ii deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s star-tracker lost its fix on Canopus, delaying critical midcourse maneuver eight hours. Correction was accomplished at 44:09 get and jpl predicted spacecraft would come very close to original aiming point. Primary objectives of nasa’s lunar orbiter ii mission, second in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) to obtain high-resolution photos on various lunar surface areas to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft, and to improve our knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 13 primary target sites, located generally within northern half of the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. It would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment and refine definition of moon’s gravitational field. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of nasa’s ossa. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-286; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 11/7/66, Al, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/7/66, A3; upi, NYT, 11/9/66, 77; AP, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, A2)
President Johnson issued statement after gemini vm carrying Neil Armstrong and David Scott had splashed down safely following difficulties encountered in flight: "They are disappointed that their mission could not continue, but Gemini 8 accomplished the first docking in space—a major step on the course we have set. The information they have acquired will help us to perfect the spacecrafts that will carry us even further. "From their skill and strength we all take heart, knowing that the personal qualities of the astronauts and their colleagues will ultimately prevail in the conquest of space. We are very proud of them.” (Pres. Doc., 3/21/66, 400)
Optimism about man’s ability to perform useful work in space was expressed by Dr. Charles Berry, msc Director of Flight Research and Operations, in telephone interview with Washington Post writer J. V. Reistrup. Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., had demonstrated problems involved when he had left gemini xi spacecraft Sept. 13 to perform seemingly simple tasks and had exerted enough energy to raise his heart rate to peak 180 beats a minute. Berry said there was a "tremendous amount of effort involved in getting into position for performing basic tasks”; once "positioning” was solved, jobs could be done. The problem was to set up each activity to require minimum effort. (Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/18/66, A4)
Possible explanation of astronaut’s inability to see stars on earth’s daylight side was presented by physics professors Edward P. Ney and W. F. Hugh in Science: a "spacecraft corona”—cloud of particles formed by waste materials shed from spacecraft—might produce glow that would hide stars dimmer than fourth magnitude. Corona had been discovered by former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., who reported during his Feb. 20, 1962, orbital mission in friendship 7 that he was being accompanied by a cloud of "fireflies.” (Science, 1/15/66, 297-9)
New York Times editorial: "Space historians will have to invent new superlatives to describe the contributions of Gemini 11 and astronauts Conrad and Gordon to man’s entry into the cosmos. From the link-up with the Agena in the very first orbit to the incredibly accurate automatic return to earth, the three-day flight demonstrated a new level of capability far surpassing that shown in any previous flight by any nation.” (NYT, 9/16/66, 34M)
Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman told a British television audience in London that the space vehicle, not man, was limiting the length of manned space flight. "We are finding that man is very adaptable and that if you provide him with the normal comforts he expects on earth, he can function as well at zero gravity as he can on earth.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/9/66, A2)
NASA, to "allow a better time and motion evaluation of the workloads and stresses” experienced by an astronaut during extravehicular activity, had canceled plans to test usaf Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu) on Gemini XII mission. NASA and dod would study plans to reschedule experiment on later manned spaceflight, (nasa Release 66-258)
gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas Stafford and Eugene Cernan were greeted by their families on their arrival in Houston after four days of debriefing at ksc. (upi, NYT, 6/11/66, 62)
Astronaut David R. Scott would attempt—during about 90 min. outside earth-orbiting Gemini 8 spacecraft—to crawl about using hand holds, move through space using a maneuvering gun with nine times the capability of that used by Astronaut Edward H. White II, and unscrew bolts at small mechanic’s station on the spacecraft, NASA announced at msc news conference. Gemini VIII mission, designed to test man’s ability to maneuver in space and the first rendezvous and docking mission, would take place before the end of the first quarter of 1966. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager, said "the main significance of the mechanical work is that he [Scott] will be evaluating a tool that is specifically designed for space.” The special tool contained a motor to eliminate need for twisting motion by the astronaut that would swing his body around when he was weightless. Target for the rendezvous and docking—Gatv or Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda)—had not been chosen. (AP, NYT, 1/17/66, 12) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Office, said in an interview in Houston that the U.S. would achieve its goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth before the end of this decade: "No new inventions are needed. No breakthrough is needed. This certainly doesn’t mean that it is going to be easy. It is not going to be, but the technology needed to do the job is known now.” He stressed that the pace that had been set would have to be maintained until the goal was achieved. (Maloney, Houston Post, 1/16/66)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and Astronaut Donald K. Slayton (msc Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations) received gold medallions from Gov. Warren P. Knowles in Madison, Wis., after two-day homecoming celebration. Lovell, who had attended high school in Milwaukee, in turn presented state with Wisconsin flag he had carried for 14 days in space during Gemini vii flight Dec. 4-18, 1965. Slayton was born in Sparta, Wis. (AP, Chic. Trib., 2/25/66)
Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, chief adviser on geology for Interior Dept.’s Geological Survey, proposed 10-yr. lunar exploration program following first Apollo astronaut landings late in this decade that "would have nothing to do with exploiting natural resources of the moon.” He explained: "We are using our mineral resources at a fantastic rate. What we really need to sustain our economic needs in the years ahead is a . . . theory about how the earth was formed. A good way to develop this theory would be by comparison with another celestial body—and the moon is just such a body.” Cost would be some $1.5 billion a year. Proposal was made during interview with William Hines, Washington Evening Star. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9121/66, A9)
Astronaut James Lovell and nuclear submarine U.S.S. Benjamin Franklin’s crew exchanged mementos of a joint experiment conducted during Dec. 4-18 gemini vn mission. Benjamin Franklin, with two seconds to fire a Polaris missile so it could be seen by gemini vii Astronauts Lovell and Borman as they passed over Cape Kennedy, fired perfectly, enabling the astronauts to track the missile visually. In a ceremony aboard the submarine docked in Newport News, Va., Lovell was presented gas generator plate from the Polaris missile and crew received the NASA patch from Lovell’s gemini vii spacesuit. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/6/66)
Gemini v spacecraft in which Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., orbited the earth Aug. 21-29, 1965, went on display at Buenos Aires (Argentina) Municipal Airport as part of a U.S.-sponsored exhibit on U.S. advances in space. (ITsia; Reuters, Wash. Post, 2/21/66, A6)	„	.	.
15-lb. pigtailed monkey, connected to intricate battery of miniaturized instruments, would be launched into earth orbit in 1967 to provide U.S. scientists with 30-day study of his health, jpl announced. Monkey—an astronaut stand-in—would be part of the Biosatellite series projected by NASA. Particularly meaningful to NASA’s space biology program would be urinalysis tests, showing changes in calcium and other primate urine constituents, which should indicate how astronaut’s metabolism might vary during prolonged space flights. ARC was in charge of the program, (jpl Release)
Tass told the Soviet people that gemini viii had achieved history’s first docking in space, and added: "But its program was carried out only partly. Its main elements—more practice in linking up, a lengthy stay by an astronaut outside his ship and the maneuvering of the ship and astronaut—remained unsolved.” (upi, NYT, 3/19/66, 41)
Dr. Seibert Dudley of the Univ. of California’s Visibility Lab., San Diego, said test equipment on the ground and in the gemini v spacecraft had definitely demonstrated that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., had seen what they claimed they had seen below on earth during their Aug. 21-29, 1965, mission. On a one-man Project Mercury spaceflight May 15-16, 1963 (MA-9), Cooper had drawn skepticism for reporting he could see dust clouds, roads, and other small features. (AP, Houston Post, 1/6/66)
NASA awarded Philco Corp. $3.5-million contract for four tri-axis magnetometers and supporting equipment to be left on moon by Apollo astronauts. One of seven geophysical instruments to be carried in Alsep (Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package), 14.5-lb. magnetometer would determine presence or absence of lunar magnetic field, measure magnetic penetrability of moon, study interplanetary magnetic field and its diffusion to moon, and detect electrical currents in solar wind above lunar surface, (arc Release 66-9)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in interview with Look, rejected report that U.S.S.R. had lost men in space: "Every bit of information we have shows that they have been as careful with the lives of cosmonauts as we have been with astronauts. As far as I know, they have not lost a single man in flight. They have lost them on the ground, they have lost them in airplanes, just like we have.” {Look, 10/18/66)
Gemini Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong were received in Bogota by Colombian President Carlos Lleras Restrepo during their three-week tour of Latin America, (upi, Wash. Post, 10/11/66, B2)
gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan, resting aboard U.S.S. Wasp, received tributes from around the world. President Johnson, telephoning from his Texas ranch, said: "We are very proud of both of you. I have been watching off and on over the weekend and saw your return this morning. "You have made all of us more aware of what performance under pressure is all about and that includes courage. . . .” Tass science commentator said the Soviet people "give their due” to the courage of the astronauts and congratulate them on their safe return to earth. He praised the flight as an "achievement of American astronautics.” Jodrell Bank Experimental Station director Sir Bernard Lovell said the success of surveyor i and gemini ix-a had made the week one of the greatest for American science. "It seems that the Russians will have to stage a spectacular development in order to recapture the lead which they apparently possessed a week ago.” (Kilpatrick, Wash. Post, 6/7/66, A8; Balt. Sun, 6/7/66)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
U.S. did not have women astronauts because "we have not yet been able to find an applicant sufficiently qualified in both scientific and engineering background, who also possesses the required test pilot experience,” said nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller at dedication of Cedar Crest College’s science center in Allentown, Pa. He said NASA has always had the same requirements for both men and women; "there had never been any discrimination with regard to sex or on any other basis.” (Text)
Comparing earth to a "manned spaceship hurtling through the infinity of space,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address at San Fernando State College that exploration of space would bring home the fact that "earth is a mere speck in the universe.” He said it would seem increasingly absurd we had not better organized our living together on this planet: "Our experience in space can be a powerful stimulus to all of us, wherever we live, to move towards a world of law, a world without war. And may we find also in the space effort that 'moral equivalent of war’ for which philosophers have been searching over many centuries. Like war, it stretches our human capabilities to the utmost. It demands all that we possess of ingenuity, determination, persistence, and intelligence—and, on the part of our gallant astronauts, the highest degree of courage and resourcefulness in the face of danger. Space activities —even competition in space—can be a substitute for aggression, a bridge for mutual understanding and the identification of common interests with other nations, and a major tool of arms control and disarmament.” (Text)
gemini xi Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., arrived at ksc from recovery ship U.S.S. Guam to undergo physical examination and to begin debriefing. (Wilford, NYT, 9/17/66, 11)
Astronaut Bruce McCandless II, discussing role of manned space flight in science in address before Washington, D.C., Junior Academy of Sciences’ annual meeting, concluded: "Man is flexible; he is capable of responding to unforeseen situations intelligently and effectively. He has a limited and on-the-spot redesign capability built in and contributes to mission success through improved reliability. He is capable of evaluating and screening information and making decisions accordingly and independently. As long as these elements are required, man’s participation will be beneficial.” (Text)
President Johnson’s waning interest in space was postponing NASA’s decision on a post-Apollo program, William Hines suggested in the Washington Evening Star, "nasa ... is more to be pitied than censured for this silence. The agency has been led down the primrose path by . . . [President Johnson] who suddenly lost interest in the now shopworn ingenue. "nasa has no plans because . . . [he] has permitted it to make none; aspirations yes, but plans no. ...” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, A23) *	nasa would negotiate $ 15-million fixed-price incentive contract with Douglas Aircraft Co. for 14 improved 2nd stages for Delta launch vehicle. GSFC would manage contract, (nasa Release 66-321) *	afsc announced awards to four aerospace companies: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $2-million initial increment to a $14-million fixed-price contract for production of Agena launch vehicles; Douglas Aircraft Co., $2.5-million initial increment to a $17.5-million fixed-price letter contract for production of Thor launch vehicles; and Aerojet-General Corp., $2.9-million initial increment to a $54.5-million contract, and TRW Inc., $2.9-million initial increment to a $50-million contract, both for r&d in an unmanned space technology program, (dod Release 1048-66; WSJ, 12/16/66, 4) *	News briefing on Project Apollo was held at msc. Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, said nasa hoped to launch three manned Apollo missions in 1967 involving "essentially every test that needs to get done in order to insure that the lunar operation is proper.” He outlined the flights: (1) AS-204—three-man, earth-orbital mission of up to 14 days to check out crew, spacecraft, and ground equipment; (2) AS-205/208—10- to 12-day flight in which Uprated Saturn I boosters would launch an Apollo spacecraft with three-man crew and an unmanned Lunar Module (Lm) on successive days for rendezvous mission; and (3) AS-503—full-duration lunar mission rehearsal in earth orbit in which single Saturn V would launch manned Apollo spacecraft and Lm. Shea warned against undue optimism about a manned lunar landing in 1968. "It is literally true that there is no planned date at the present time for the lunar operation . . . and I don’t see how there can be until we have had hardware in orbit to understand what vestigial problems still remain.” Donald Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, said that third, nonflying crew had been added to each Apollo mission for additional ground support. He also revealed that training for astronauts selected for Apollo lunar missions would be 40 weeks—14 weeks longer than Gemini training course. Comparing Mercury and Apollo training programs, AS-204 Command Pilot Virgil I. Grissom said: "When we started training for Mercury, we didn’t know what to train for. So we did everything. .. . Training for Apollo has been pretty straight forward. We know what we need to know and we know that we have to learn about the spacecraft, how to operate it and get our flight plan and our mission rules squared away. Back early in Mercury ... we were worried about whether a man could live and survive ... so we did a lot of things like spinning around in 3 axis machines that we don’t feel you really need anymore. . . .” Grissom confirmed that AS-204 mission would carry camera for live television coverage. (Text; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/7/66, A3)
In summary of nasa-usaf X-15 flight operations, frc revealed that the three rocket-powered aircraft had completed 253 flight operations since first glide flight June 8, 1959: 156 were actual flights, eight were planned captive flights, and 89 were canceled because of weather or mechanical problems. The three aircraft had flown over 24 hrs. of free flight; 6 hrs. 29 min. faster than mach 3; 4 hrs. 13 min. above mach 4; 56 min. above mach 5; and 11 sec. above mach 6. On nine separate occasions, five different pilots had flown over the 50-mi. astronaut qualifying altitude: L/Col. Robert M. White, L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth, and Capt. Joseph H. Engle, all usaf; and Joseph A. Walker and John B. McKay, both nasa civilians. Four flights terminated in emergency landings, two of which seriously damaged the aircraft, but all three aircraft were still being flown. One flight had been made with modified X-15 No. 2 using external propellant tanks. Six current X-15 pilots included: L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth, Maj. William J. Knight, and Capt. Joseph H. Engle, all usaf; and William H. Dana, John B. McKay, and Milton 0. Thompson, all NASA civilians, (frc Release 2-66)
Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of nasa’s Inventions and Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to become a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College, (nasa Ann.) Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-gradient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2) Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could propel a 7,000-lb. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3) Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1) Richard Johnston, Chief of msc Crew Systems Div., said that to work effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more streamlined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device such as "stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investigation of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, overheated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks. (Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s Gemini program and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoietic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Results of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclusive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being examined as possible causes. (Tech. Wk, 10/17/66, 16) Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and G. D. Glod reported "significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R. used drugs in manned spaceflight both for "therapeutic purposes or to increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.” Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants; cardiovascular preparations; and antiradiation medications. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13) Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most important problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had developed a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver into working position, which included raising one hand over the head and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body reaction and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Av. Wk., 10/17/66, 30-31) Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of gemini v-Titan II booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a "near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage” to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IVB). (Av. Wk, 10/24/66, 32) H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13-14) Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966, in cosmos cx. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they emerged from capsule, but fihn sequence taken four months later showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neurological regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13) Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of iaf. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
nasa announced selection of 19 pilots, to join 31-member nasa astronaut team in early May: Vance D. Brand, civilian; Lt. John S. Bull (usn); Maj. Gerald P. Carr (usmc); Capt. Charles M. Duke, Jr. (usaf); Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf); LCdr. Ronald E. Evans (usn); Maj. Edward G. Givens, Jr. (usaf); Fred W. Haise, Jr., civilian; Maj. James B. Irwin (usaf); Dr. Don L. Lind, civilian; Capt. Jack R. Lousma (usmc); Lt. Thomas K. Mattingly (usn); Lt. Bruce McCandless II (usn); LCdr. Edgar D. Mitchell (usn) ; Maj. William R. Pogue (usaf) ; Capt. Stuart A. Roosa (usaf); John L. Swigert, Jr., civilian; LCdr. Paul J. Weitz (usn); and Capt. Alfred M. Worden (usaf). During recruitment, which began Sept. 10, 1965, nasa received 351 applications of which 159 met basic requirements, (nasa Release 66-67)
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
usaf School of Aerospace Medicine had concluded 15-day test to evaluate effects of increased carbon dioxide on four airmen in spacecraft cabin simulator. One of a series of such experiments, the latest took the level of experience up to the 4% C02 mark, compared with normal ground level conditions of 0.033% C02. Aim was to assess problems astronauts might have to face with a partial failure of their life support system. (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 4)
In scheduling manned space flights, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., crew safety was the principal consideration, followed by accomplishment of program goals. He pointed out the "open-ended” aspect of Apollo mission scheduling and expressed confidence that lunar landing would be achieved before the end of the decade based on present program posture. During question and answer session, Dr. Mueller said that while NASA and its contractors had studied possible methods of rescuing astronauts in space and would continue to do so, the cost, complexities, and uncertainties made it appear to date that the money and effort would be better spent in making flights safer in the first place. He added: "We don’t exactly have instant rescue for people flying around in airliners and this is a large segment of the population.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/17/66, 16)
Dirty windows which obscured astronauts’ vision moderately to severely in many of nasa’s Gemini missions had been caused by volatile vapors produced by silicones used in window seals, Gemini program director Charles W. Mathews told news briefing at msc. Problem would be corrected by curing silicone seals in a vacuum. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66, A4)
Referring to President Kennedy’s challenge five years ago "to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth,” William Hines commented in the Washington Evening Star on the progress made:"Of course, Kennedy did not 'invent’ space. Nor did he, in a single 1,100-word exhortation to Congress, create all the conditions needed to make a lunar program possible. The United States had quite a respectable space effort going for several years before Kennedy spoke, and indeed the first American astronaut had flown a brief suborbital mission three weeks earlier. "The foundations on which Kennedy could build a moon program were there. What he did—with advice and urging from many advisers including the then Vice President Johnson and the late 'grand old man of space,’ Hugh L. Dryden—was set a goal. . . . "The call to leadership in space came at a particularly troublous time in the new Kennedy administration’s development. In the month just past, April 1961, the United States had suffered two tremendous setbacks in what had been called 'the battle for men’s minds.’ On April 12 Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth—a full 10 months, as it turned out, before Astronaut John Glenn would match his feat. And on April 19 the bottom fell out of the ill-conceived Bay of Pigs adventure to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/25/66, Al, A5)
Astronauts David Scott and Neil Armstrong awaiting recovery in the Pacific Ocean after their gemini vm space Bight.
Prince Philip of U.K. toured msc for three hours, accompanied by department heads explaining the apparatus used in spaceflight. With assistance of Astronaut James A. McDivitt, the Prince spent 30 minutes in an astronaut training craft, twice steering it into simulated orbital rendezvous with an Agena rocket. "It was all a fascinating experience,” he said later. "When you are inside, everything seems to be out of context.” Dr. Robert Gilruth, msc Director, presented Philip a British flag which had been carried aboard Gemini vii during its Dec. 4-18 space mission with the intention of presenting it to the Prince during his tour, (msc Roundup, 3/18/66, 8; Waldron, NYT, 3/12/66, 8)
At msc, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented NASA Exceptional Service Medals to Gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan and to Richard E. Dineen (Col., usaf) who had helped solve problems in the Titan II booster that had launched the spacecraft. Referring to difficulties that occurred during the June 3-6 Gemini ix-a flight, Seamans said: "We know that if we had been a little sharper, if we had worked a little harder, that this would not have happened. ... We are . . . dissatisfied with ourselves when technical and procedural failures keep us from our goals.” He added he had requested review of plans for Gemini X, XI, and XII missions for "tightening up” of procedures. Summarizing Project Gemini’s results to date—"at the three quarter mark”—and forecasting its probable total impact on the space effort, Seamans said: "I am convinced that this program will be completed with far greater return to the nation in scientific information, technology, and operational experience than we had originally set out to accomplish when we began the program in 1961.” {Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; Waldron, NYT, 6/18/66, 10; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/20/66, A10)
Gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and Gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman were named joint winners of the 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for achieving the first rendezvous in space by two separately launched, maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. Award, established by late pioneer aviator and balloonist Col. Clifford B. Harmon (usaf) "for exceptional feats of pilotry,” would be conferred in fall 1966. (NYT, 8/7/66, 4; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/7/66, A18)
msfc awarded Emerson Electric Co. a 10-wk., $34,990 study contract to determine feasibility of recovering small metallic coupons from wings of pegasus ill meteoroid-detection satellite, orbited by NASA July 30, 1965.	Using sample wing with attached coupons, Emerson would analyze possible approaches an astronaut could make to satellite and types of equipment he would need to perform coupon-retrieving mission, (msfc Release 66-162)
NASA msc announced that Astronaut John Young would be command pilot of Gemini 10; pilot would be Astronaut Michael Collins. No date had been set for the Gemini X mission, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 1/25/66)
usaf’s OV3-IV research satellite was launched by NASA from Wallops Station by Scout booster. Orbital parameters: 2,933 mi. (4,720 km.); perigee, 398 mi. (640 km.); period, 142 min.; inclination, 41°. The 173-lb. satellite carried plastic spheres of simulated human tissue containing linear energy transfer spectrometers to record effects of space radiation and determine how much radiation damage an astronaut’s body could undergo in similar manned flight, how long man could stay in space at one time, and how often he could safely return to space environment. Satellite would also give measurements on Van Allen radiation belts and gauge decay of residual radiation in man-made Starfish Belt. Equipment, expected to relay data for one year, was functioning normally. (Wallops Release 66-35; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 152)
Twelve astronauts were selected for future NASA missions and two others assigned earlier were shifted to a different mission. Prime crewmen for the Apollo earth-orbital mission scheduled in the first quarter of 1967 were Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee; backup crew was James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart, NASA civilian employee. Prime crewmen for the Gemini XI mission scheduled in the last quarter of 1966 were command pilot Charles Conrad, Jr., and pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr.; backup crew was Neil A. Armstrong, command pilot, and William A. Anders, pilot. James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup crew for the Gemini XI mission, were reassigned as backup crew for Gemini IX, Original Gemini IX backups Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan became prime crewmen for that mission after the Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II. (nasa Release 66-67)
All participants in the Gemini X mission rehearsed their parts in preparation for July 18 flight. Astronauts John Young and Michael Collins went over flight plan from liftoff to splashdown and conducted review of all spacecraft systems. (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/66, 11)
Scientists were considering "capturing an asteroid” and, through nuclear propulsion, placing it in earth orbit where it could be analyzed, reported John Wilford in the New York Times. He said "experts” believed "capture of an asteroid will be possible as soon as it is possible to send manned expeditions to the surface of Mars or Jupiter.” Astronauts would take with them a separate rocket engine which they would anchor to asteroid’s surface. Rocket would have to "produce long-duration burn but because of asteroid’s low gravity would not have to be very powerful to push the asteroid toward a new orbit.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, E7)
At Pentagon ceremony, Chief of Naval Operations Adm. David L. McDonald presented astronaut wings to Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan (LCdr., usn) who set a world record for length of "walk in space” during June 3-6 Gemini ix-a mission. McDonald suggested to NASA officials that "you get your own Navy” for astronaut recovery operations. usn felt smaller ships not needed in the Vietnam war could be used as effectively for this task as the aircraft carrier and dozen ships assigned to NASA. Speaking later at NASA Hq., Cernan said that what a man needed in space to do useful work was a "three-point restraint system”— three points of contact with the spacecraft for stabilization. (Norris, Wash. Post, 1/21/66, Al, A6)
Astronaut Frank Borman, a 1950 graduate of West Point, gave Academy cadets a souvenir from space—the flag of the cadet company he had commanded—carried on his Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini vii mission, (upi, NYT, 6/2/66, 4) Landing sequence began 2,000 mi. above moon when, traveling at 6,000	mph, surveyor i shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar ejected at 52-mi. altitude, main retrorocket burned until 37,000-ft. altitude, slowing craft to 400 mph. After retrorocket burnout, smaller guidance rockets ignited, slowing surveyor i to 3Yi mph at 14-ft. altitude. Craft then free-fell to lunar surface at 8 mph. Landing—so precise that spacecraft’s three footpads touched lunar surface within 19 millisec. of each other—confirmed that lunar surface could support Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and proved concept of automatically decelerating a spacecraft from 6,000-mph speed to touchdown speed of 3H mph. Photos transmitted by surveyor i before its camera was secured after sunset of first lunar day (June 14) revealed nearly level lunar surface littered with rock fragments [see During June]. "Rubble scattered over the surface is probably a fairly general characteristic all over the moon,” NASA Surveyor Project Scientist Dr. Leonard Jaffe told jpl press conference. Pictures taken June 4 during seven two-second firings of nitrogen gas from spacecraft’s attitude control jets showed no disturbance of the lunar surface. In addition to wide- and narrow-angle lurain photographs, surveyor i obtained pictures of the stars Sirius and Canopus to determine spacecraft’s exact location. Halting communication with surveyor i June 14 to allow spacecraft to conserve battery energy throughout lunar night (June 14-29), JPL announced: "It is very difficult to predict if Surveyor’s batteries will withstand the —260°F cold. If Surveyor survives, the engineers estimate it will be several days after sunrise before the batteries thaw out” [see June 28-29]. Considerably more complex than Soviet luna IX which softlanded on the moon Feb. 3, surveyor i apparatus remained a closed intact system up until touchdown. A tripod-legged arrangement of cameras, antennas, and other equipment which used solar cells to convert sun’s energy into electric power for operation on lunar surface, surveyor i June- 2-14; surveyor i returned this photograph of its footpad resting on the surface of the moou. had a landing system which used radars, a computer, and four rocket engines to adjust its own speed, attitude, and flight path, luna ix was crash-proof, uncontrolled photographic instrument package jettisoned by its carrier rocket immediately before impact, which free-fell under pull of lunar gravity. It had transmitted only 12 photos. The near-flawless performance of SURVEYOR i, an engineering model, far exceeded jfl officials’ expectations. "This, in my opinion, puts the Surveyor program ahead a year,” Robert F. Garbarini, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications for Engineering, told JPL press conference. "We thought it would take three or four flights to get the craft operational.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-127; JPL Transcript; Spivak, WSJ, 6/3/66, 2; WSJ, 6/15/66, 1; Shreveport Times, 6/3/66, 12A; Clark, NYT, 6/3/66, 1, 22; 6/4/66, 12; 6/5/66, 1; 6/6/66, 40M; AP, NYT, 17; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/66, C3; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/6/66, A9; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/15/66, A6; Berman, Wash. Post, 6/5/66, A14; AP, Wash. Post, 6/15/66, A10)
First simulated exploration of the moon had shown that two astronauts could live and intelligently perform tasks for at least 18 days in cabin with 117 cu. ft. of living-working space. Test was performed in support of Apollo Applications program by two msfc engineers in Minneapolis [see Feb. 20, March 10]. (msfc Release 66-80)
Immediate need for an emergency space rescue squad was underlined by the curtailed March 16 Gemini viii mission and by electrical malfunction aboard oao i successfully orbited April 8, William Hines asserted in the Washington Evening Star. "Without such capability,” Hines suggested, "large sums of money and vast amounts of scientific-technological effort are being dissipated, and it is only a matter of time before lives will be placed in jeopardy. . . . Where manned missions are concerned, a rescue capability is not merely desirable but imperative. ... In the next five years somewhere between 25 and 30 missions involving about 75 astronauts will he flown. Durations will range from three to 45 days, and mission objectives will reach as far as the moon’s surface. At the most conservative estimate there are probably a dozen chances for something to go seriously wrong on a typical mission. To put it another way, there are somewhere between 300 and 500 accidents waiting to happen in the next five years-—any one of them potentially tragic.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/66, A14)
Gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan held their first post-mission press conference. Cernan said that during his space walk he could not keep his feet from floating, was unable to use both hands while trying to don backpack containing maneuvering unit, and "had to work continually against the pressure suit. ... I was devoting 50 per cent of my work load just to maintain position.” This extra effort saturated the environmental control system and led to fogging of his faceplate so that he could not test the maneuvering unit. About the same time, he felt his back becoming "extremely hot.” It was later revealed some of the insulation had been ripped from his spacesuit. After recounting his adventures, Cernan said: "I found no new voodoo out there.... You’re at home out there ... I’m convinced we can do just about anything we want to do.” {Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; NYT, 6/18/66, A10)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), speaking at national convention of Naval Reserve Officers Assn, in Denver, described his astronaut-aquanaut occupation as a liaison between space and undersea exploration. He said there were plans to train astronauts under water to better withstand the tiring work of maneuvering outside spacecraft—a major problem of recent space flights. Models of spacecraft would be used; astronauts would wear spacesuits and would work without swim fins. Carpenter, who had volunteered in May 1964 for usn’s Project Sea Lab, said aquanauts could work in water until they became tired or hungry. (Denver Post, 10/9/66)
afsc had awarded Bell Aerospace Corp. a one-year study contract to develop Dual-purpose Maneuvering Unit (Dmu) that could be worn by astronaut or operated by remote radio and TV signals. Dmu would combine "best features” of Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)— which Astronaut Eugene Cernan was unable to test during Gemini ix-A flight—and Remote Maneuvering Unit (Rmu)—which had been tested in laboratory, (afsc Release 116.66)
Oklahoma City welcomed home a favorite son, Gemini ix Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, and conferred honorary state citizenship on his crewmate Eugene A. Cernan. Both astronauts were inducted into the National Cowboy Hall of Fame, dedicated to the memory of Western frontiersmen. (AP, NYT, 7/9/66, 29)
Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Defense and Space Center had developed a 7M-lb. TV camera that could be carried inside Apollo spacecraft and by astronauts as they explored the lurain. Prototype had been delivered to NASA and a commitment obtained for live TV coverage. (Gibbons, WSJ, 1/21/66, 1)
Survival of 17 chimpanzees without permanent damage after 3Vi min. in simulated space environment offered hope that an astronaut outside his spacecraft could be rescued if his spacesuit were to spring a leak. In 18 tests conducted at Holloman afb during one year, chimps placed in a decompression chamber for time periods that were gradually increased from 5 sec. to 314 min. suffered only temporary abnormalities. L/Col. C. H. Kratochvil, commander of Holloman’s aeromedical research laboratory, said close relationship between chimps and humans made it possible to assume that findings would be applicable to astronauts. (Nelson, Wash. Post, 11/2/66, A4)
Proposal for fleet of 25 stand-by spacecraft which could be launched within three hours of a distress signal to rescue astronauts stranded in orbit was submitted to NASA by MIT aeronautics students. Each 13,000-lb., four-man Nero (Near Earth Rescue Operation) spacecraft, designed with wing-like lift similar to M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, would be launched with Titan III-C booster to rendezvous with target; it would glide to a landing at a jet airport. Vehicles could also repair crippled satellites, resupply manned orbiting laboratories, inspect unidentified satellites, and remove orbiting debris. System could be implemented with current technology and be in operation by early 1970’s at total cost of $2 billion. (Wilford, NYT, 12/6/66, 60C)
U.S. would land a man on the moon before 1970 and before the Russians, predicted Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., at a news conference held with Astronaut Frank Borman in Sydney, Australia. Schirra said U.S. space program had completed three basic requirements for a manned lunar landing: 14-day spaceflight, ability to rendezvous in space, and controlled reentry into earth’s atmosphere. Astronauts Schirra and Borman were visiting Australia on their eight-nation good-will tour of Asia. (Reuters, NYT, 3/14/66, 6)
NASA Astronaut Michael Collins presented U.S. flag carried on July 18-21 gemini x mission to St. Albans School in Washington, D.C., as "a token of my appreciation for getting me started on this road.” Collins and three other alumni were honored by St. Albans at a banquet and reception. (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/66, Bl)
France had requested that Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., photograph sodium vapor trail of Centaure sounding rocket during NASA’s Gemini XII mission scheduled for launch Nov. 9. Sounding rocket—to study winds up to 400 mph at high altitudes— would be launched from Hammaguir Range on signal from Gemini Mission Control at MSC. Experiment would be first by foreign government to be part of a U.S. manned space flight. {Wash. Post, 10/23/66, A10; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 10/23/66, A7)
Gemini x spacecraft, its heatshield forward, aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. tions and drawings” for vehicles being proposed to transport astronauts on lunar surface, (msfc Release 66-157)
Soviet cosmonauts had not been troubled by perspiration, breathing difficulties, or high heartbeat rates as was Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Gemini xi mission, Soviet physician-cosmonaut Dr. Boris Yegorov said at press conference in Geneva. Probable reason was that cosmonauts worked in "completely normal” atmospheric conditions and breathed ordinary air, while astronauts used artificial air mixture containing more oxygen than normal, he said. Yegorov, one of three crew members in Oct. 12, 1964, voskhod i mission, was attending congress on space biology. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/22/66, A3)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received Great Silver Medal of Paris from Mayor Albert Chavanac for being "one of the pioneers of space, who was able to give a human aspect to the experiment he attempted so successfully.” (AP, NYT, 5/25/66, 33) AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, in luncheon address, cited three factors which could restrain full advancement of technology: "The first of these constraints is the relative silence of our opponents. A few years ago the headlines were full of Soviet threats of orbital bombs, missiles that could 'hit a fly in the sky,’ and similar weapons. Today, by contrast, the Soviets are not boasting about their new weapon developments. . . . The second constraint is the argument made in some quarters that U.S. military research and development could be 'provocative’ to our opponents. This argument overlooks the fact that our very existence as a free society is 'provocative’ to our opponents, because it contradicts their theory of history. . . . The third constraint is the immediate need for large funds to support our forces in Vietnam. . . .” To overcome these constraints, General Schriever said, "we must harness our management experience and technological knowledge to serve the national purpose,” in an effort involving every "segment of our national life. . . .” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed implications of 1968 space budget decisions. He said U.S. today was "not ahead in this deadly serious competition,” and "strong and increasing effort” would be required "to prevent the Soviets from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space.” (Text) Nike X system had been improved so that it could not only destroy hostile satellites but also provide defensive cover for the entire Nation, reported Dr. Oswald H. Lange, chief scientist for the Nike X project office at Redstone Arsenal, Ala. He described the Nike X system as employing two interceptors—the long-range Zeus and short-range, high acceleration Sprint. (NYT, 5/26/66, 4) R. I. Mitchell, vice-president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s JetStar program, said that Lockheed would produce advanced version of four-engine JetStar business aircraft capable of taking off on shorter runways and carrying more cargo and passengers than previous models. New Dash 8 JetStar, powered by Pratt & Whitney JT12A-8 engine, would reduce runway requirements from 6,425 ft. to 5,550 ft. and would have 1,000 fpm faster rate of climb. (Lockheed Release) Two space rescue systems being tested for possible use by usaf were discussed by Harold L. Bloom of General Electric Co.’s Re-Entry Systems Dept.: (1) "Emergency cocoon”—an inflatable shelter to maintain astronaut in a "livable environment” while awaiting rescue— would use thin silicone rubber membrane in dacron and Mylar skin to provide C02 and water vapor control; (2) one-man reentry vehicle for self-rescue—"Manned Orbital Operations Safety Equipment (moose)” —would consist of foldable heat shield bonded to Mylar bag. Astronaut would zip himself into moose bag, leave spacecraft, and initiate polyurethane foaming process; foam would insulate and support him during reentry oriented with small rocket in an attitude/de-orbit package. Form-fitting couch, designed to be traveling at less than 30 feet per second at the time of impact, would also double as a life raft. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 5/8/66, 66)
Gemini xii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., arrived at ksc to begin debriefing. Addressing some 700 workmen, Lovell said "everyone here has done an outstanding job to get us into space”; Aldrin described the four-day mission as a "treat to me as an individual that I would like to have shared with every person in the world.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 11/17/66)
Mrs. James A. McDivitt gave birth in Houston to a daughter—first child conceived by an American astronaut’s wife after her husband had returned from space. Astronaut McDivitt was command pilot on the June fane 16: usaf Titan III-C launch vehicle in preparation for multiple-satellite payload mission from Eastern Test Range. 4-7, 1965, Gemini rv mission during which Astronaut Edward H. White II made his 21-min. Eva. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/66, A2)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., met with Japanese space scientists in Tokyo and presented Japanese Premier Eisaku Sato with a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph of their gemini vii/vi rendezvous in space. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/25/66, Al; Wash. Post, 2/25/66)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman and their wives met with Chinese Nationalist President Chiang Kai-shek in Taipei, and gave him a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph taken in space. Chiang gave each astronaut wings of the Chinese National Air Force. Astronauts then flew to Bangkok, Thailand, to begin a three-day visit during which they would give a series of lectures and be received by the King and Queen of Thailand. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/28/66, A2; NYT, 3/1/66, 19)	...
nasa released first 140 ft. of more than 1,500 ft. of color movies taken by Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., during their Nov. 11-15 space flight. Photography was of high quality. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/17/66, A4)
Astronauts had made more than 1,000 "flights” in the Rendezvous Docking Simulator and other facilities at LaRC to help develop techniques for the operation of vehicles in space. Developed by LaRC scientists to explore, under controlled laboratory conditions, man’s ability to complete a rendezvous in earth or lunar orbit during final 200 ft. of the space-docking maneuver, the simulator had been used extensively by Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott, who performed world’s first space docking March 16. (Lane Release)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said surgeons would have to remove a callus, formed on his left forearm after he broke it in a July 1964 motorcycle accident in Bermuda, before he could be considered for another spaceflight. Ability to rotate the arm properly was hampered. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/66, A2; AP, Chic, Trib., 1/25/66)
"Moonwalker”—device developed by Space General Corp. for astronauts to travel on the moon—had been adapted for crippled children. Built under fiew grant, 90-lb. machine, which walked on eight mechanical legs, could negotiate sand or mud, climb and descend stairs, step up a normal street curb, and climb grades of 15° or more. (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/13/66, Al; Brevard Sentinel, 5/13/66)
gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II and Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman received National Aviation Club’s Award for Achievement in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/66)
V/Adm. H. G. Rickover (usn), in speech at Athens meeting of Royal National Foundation, noted benefits to humanity in science and warned of dangers inherent in misuse of technology. He urged that technological capability be applied selectively to enhance human welfare and conserve natural resources, rather than to "submit meekly to whatever is technically feasible.” (Text, CR, 6/21/66, 13114-17) At 49 min. get Stafford executed first course correction to position gemini ix for rendezvous, firing thruster rockets to raise perigee to 134 mi. After two more orbital maneuvers, spacecraft was within 25 ft. of target. Stafford, sighting atda, confirmed suspicions that its shroud had not jettisoned, and docking would be impossible. He radioed ground control: "It looks like an angry alligator out there.” nasa later revealed that shroud had not jettisoned because technicians, following "insufficiently detailed” written instructions, had installed lanyards improperly. Complying with modified flight plan, astronauts photographed atda, executed re-rendezvous maneuver, and executed rendezvous-from-above simulating Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) abort from the moon. After this maneuver, which depleted fuel supply to 11%—only 6% more than minimum reserve—Stafford and Cernan were fatigued and recommended 24-hr. postponement of Cernan’s walk in space. At 11:02 a.m. est June 5, Cernan opened hatch of depressurized spacecraft, climbed out, and retrieved micrometeoroid impact detector attached to side. He moved to full length of 25-ft. tether to take photos. After one hour, Cernan returned to Adapter Section to don Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)—a task which required "four or five times more work than anticipated.” His faceplate visor began clouding over, presumably because environmental control system was not absorbing moisture quickly enough. Ceman’s limited visibility and discovery that Amu’s radio transmissions were garbled forced Stafford to recall him to spacecraft. He had been scheduled to disconnect from gemini ix’s oxygen supply and maneuver in Amu to 150 ft. from spacecraft. Reentry on June 6 was normal. At 10:00 a.m. est, in the 46th revolution, gemini ix impacted 345 mi. east of Cape Kennedy—less than two miles from target—in the mo3t accurate landing to date, after total mission duration of 72 hrs. 21 min. Splashdown and recovery were carried on live television via EARLY bird I comsat. Within minutes, USN pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, placed flotation collar around spacecraft. At 10:45 a.m. EST, spacecraft carrying astronauts was hoisted onboard U.S.S. Wasp. Accomplishments of gemini ix-a mission were summarized by. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at msc news conference: (1) demonstration of three new rendezvous procedures—catching target in only three revolutions, locating it without radar, and approaching it from above rather than below; (2) accurately controlled reentry; (3) longest period of extravehicular activities—over two hours; (4) new information on man’s ability to work in space necessary for manned lunar landing and for assembling stations in space; and (5) new information on manned observation of another spacecraft in orbit. Five experiments were successfully performed in accordance with modified flight plan. Concerning mission’s disappointments, he said: "We will try to do as much as we can on each of our Gemini flights. We won’t always succeed in meeting all of the objectives. But we learned a great deal about the problems that do occur during the course of one of these very difficult space missions.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-97; Wilford, NYT, 6/4/66, 1, 10; 6/5/66, 1, 80 ; 6/6/66, 1, 40 ; 6/7/66, 1, 34; 6/8/66, 1,29; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/66, Al, A2; 6/5/66, Al, A6; 6/6/66, Al, A4; 6/7/66, A3; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/4/66, Al, A8; 6/5/66, Al, A14; 6/6/66, Al, A3; 6/7/66, Al, A7, A21; 6/8/66, A3; WSJ, 6/7/66, 2; 6/8/66, 1; Tech. Wk, 6/13/66, 14-15; Av. Wk, 6/13/66, 31-34)
Gemini VIII rendezvous and docking mission—world’s first space docking—began at etr with launch of 7,000-lb. Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv) by Adas booster at 10:00 a.m. est, followed 100 min. later by launch of Gemini viii by two-stage Titan II booster with Astronauts Neil A.	Armstrong, command pilot, and David R. Scott, pilot. Primary objectives of the mission—sixth manned flight in the Gemini series—were rendezvous and docking of gemini viii spacecraft with gatv and performance of extravehicular activity (Eva) for one orbit. gatv was injected into near-circular orbit with 186-mi. (299.5-km.) apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee; gemini viii entered initial orbit with 128.8-mi. (206.4-km.) apogee and 74.9-mi. (119.5-km.) perigee. Near third apogee, Armstrong fired aft thrusters, circularizing spacecraft’s orbit at 168-mi. (270-km.) altitude. Trailing gatv by 139 mi., Armstrong received intermittent lock-on between gemini viii radar and gatv’s companion transponder. After sighting gatv at 66-mi. range at 04:12 get, Armstrong fired thrusters and Scott read out computer data until 05:15 get, when they switched from catch-up to rendezvous mode. At 150 ft. from gatv, Armstrong reported he had matched velocity for brief station-keeping exercise. Conditions at that point were so favorable that Armstrong passed under gatv and came up 80 ft. in front of it, where he was able to read some data on gatv’s status display. Successful docking was confirmed at 6:33 get. Plan had been to remain docked with gatv through 7M-hr. sleep period until beginning Eva, but at approximately 7:00 get spacecraft-GATV combination began to roll and yaw violently. Unable to stabilize joined spacecraft, Armstrong fired gemini vm’s thrusters to undock and maneuvered away from the gatv. Once freed, however, gemini viii began to roll even more rapidly; roll, pitch, and yaw rates increased, approaching one revolution per min. For three minutes, the astronauts fought to control gemini viii; finally, with oams turned off, Armstrong fired his Reentry Control System (Res) rockets in final attempt to counteract violent roll. This maneuver was successful and eight minutes later, at 7:25:30 get, the spacecraft was stabilized. Within a matter of minutes, the problem was isolated to the spacecraft’s No. 8 thruster, which had fired intermittently while gemini viii was docked with gatv and stuck open until Armstrong managed to turn off oams. It was later determined that a short circuit was probable cause of thruster’s malfunction. Premature use of reentry rockets forced Gemini flight director John D. Hodge to order an emergency landing, with recovery planned in the western Pacific during seventh revolution. (Safety rules of the Gemini program required immediate landing of any spacecraft once its Res squibs were blown; if the flight were allowed to continue, danger of Res fuel depletion would jeopardize firing of Res rockets, vital to safe return of spacecraft and crew.) Spacecraft landed 500 mi. west of Okinawa in regular emergency recovery area at approximately 10:23 p.m. est—10 hrs. 42 min. after launch. Landing was only three miles from intended impact point. Within minutes usaf frogmen parachuted from usaf C-54 rescue aircraft and placed flotation collar around capsule. At 1:30 a.m. est capsule and astronauts were hoisted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard Despite early termination, gemini viii mission accomplished one of two primary objectives—rendezvous and docking. Original flight plan had specified four gemini viii-gatv dockings and two hrs. 15 min. of extravehicular activity by Astronaut Scott. Five scientific, four technological, and one medical experiment were to have been conducted. Flight had been scheduled to last 44 revolutions—approximately 73 hrs. (NASAProj. Off,; nasa Release 66-52 ;Wilford, NYT, 3/17/66,1;Waldron, NYT, 3/17/66, 20; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/17/66, 1; Av. Wk., 3/31/66, 30-32)
President Johnson announced he would send Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman, command pilots of the Dec. 4-18 GEMINI vii/vi mission, on a three-week, eight-country tour of the Far East to demonstrate scientific, technological, and educational values of U.S. space program and to visit Far Eastern countries which had cooperated with U.S. in space programs. Astronauts would leave Feb. 21, and visit Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand. The President had sent Gemini iv Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White II, to the Paris Air Show in June 1965; gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on an African tour in September 1965; and John Glenn, first American to achieve orbit, on a European tour in October 1965. (Pres. Doc., 2/21/66, 221; NYT, 2/16/66, 54)
usns Kingsport, first ocean link in U.S. research in satellite communications, was retired from nasa’s networks and returned to dod. In July 1963 Kingsport had participated in world’s first demonstration of communications by satellite in synchronous orbit when a message was sent in 45,000-mi. loop from Kingsport anchored in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, to syncom ii comsat and back. Several days later, she was part of first direct exchange of radio message via satellite, linking Lakehurst, N.J., terminal station with land circuits at Lagos. On Aug. 4, Kingsport and Lakehurst transmitted and received via syncom ii first satellite exchange of news copy and photo facsimile. Several days later, caught in a squall 40 mi. offshore, she became first terminal station to establish satellite communications from the open sea. Two months later, she participated in first trans-ocean press conference by satellite: stationed at Rota, Spain, she connected syncom ii communications between United Nations in New York City and NASA Hq. in Washington, D.C., with the International Telecommunications Union Conference in Geneva. Kingsport first demonstrated the practicality of communications by satellite during manned space missions March 16, 1966, by relaying voice reports from Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott via syncom ii to Hawaii ground station, (nasa Release 66-79)
A ten-year lunar exploration program emphasizing manned missions was recommended in reports released by six working groups of scientists who had attended NASA 1965 Summer Conference on Lunar Exploration and Science in Falmouth, Mass., July 19-31, 1965. Program, which would utilize capabilities already under development by NASA, would gradually include scientific experiments in geology, geochemistry, geophysics, and bioscience. One or two manned lunar missions and one manned lunar orbital mission would be conducted annually through 1979, with astronauts remaining on the moon’s surface for longer periods after 1974. Reports recommended four requirements for period through 1974: (1) assurance of overlapping operation of instruments placed on moon by astronauts; (2) sufficient frequency of missions to provide continuity in experiments; (3) scheduling of adequate time between missions to permit necessary modification of experiments; and (4) gradually increasing staytimes of astronauts on moon. Top priority for early Apollo landing missions would be return of lunar material samples; second priority, emplacing Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (Alsep); third, traversing lunar surface to describe topographic and geological features, supplemented by stereoscopic photography. Report urged immediate testing to determine amounts and effects of atmosphere escaping from Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and outgassing of astronaut suits. One Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar Orbiter mission (Aa-mlo) was recommended prior to first Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar Surface mission (Aa-mls), with minimum of three manned spacecraft missions in polar orbit to make complete lunar survey; five or six Aa-mls missions through 1974 were suggested, with larger scientific payloads and stays for the astronauts of up to 14 days. Reports listed basic types of equipment necessary for exploration program: automatic position-recording systems to relay to earth or Lem movements of astronauts and roving vehicles; roving vehicles to carry one or two astronauts and scientific payload of at least 600 lbs.; manned lunar flying vehicle able to carry 300-lb. scientific payload about 10 mi. to study features not accessible with roving vehicle; one-inch drill capable of penetrating at least 10 ft. in rubble or solid rock to assist heat-flow studies and provide samples of possible biological interest. Scientific training for astronauts in specific rather than general areas was recommended, with emphasis on geology. For post-1974 period, the scientists recommended surface travel by astronauts up to 500 mi. from landing point and fixed-site investigations lasting from two months to a year for measuring geophysical phenomena that could vary with time; studying lunar surface processes; deep-drilling studies to obtain information on early moon history and crustal composition; construction and manning of large radio and optical telescopes. Roving vehicles for the post-Apollo Applications phase should have 500-mi. range, shelter for three-man crew, two-month mission capability, and no requirement to return to starting point. (nasa Release 66-4; Conference Rpt., NASA SP-88)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received rousing welcome on arrival at Seoul, South Korea. Many flag-waving schoolchildren had to be restrained by policemen during welcoming ceremonies at City Hall. (NYT, 2/27/66, 14; N.Y. J/Amer., 2/27/66, 28)
usaf Aerospace Medical Div. chief scientist Dr. Hubertus Strughold stated in telephone interview with Washington Sunday Star’s William Hines that NASA had not given adequate attention to keeping astronaut’s vision unimpaired during Eva. He said that in normal earth gravity, man could orient himself by means of sight sense (eyes); balance sense (otoliths of inner ear); and pressure sense (Meissner corpuscles concentrated primarily in palms of hands and soles of feet). In space there was no gravity, so otoliths and Meissner corpuscles could not function. When vision was also lost or impaired, orientation was impossible. Strughold pointed out that vision impairment had been a factor in curtailment of three of four Eva missions to date. He said advances in training and in spacesuit design were urgently needed, usaf had been "working on the problem” but had not been asked by NASA for advice or assistance. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A7)
Speaking in Denver at Colorado Women’s College, Dr. Nancy G. Roman, NASA Chief of Astronomy Programs, ossa, said a primary reason for lack of women in space was that few had the scientific training. Even NASA’s 300 women professionals were few compared to their number in other agencies, she said. Young women interested in a career in space science were advised to concentrate first on the basics of their preferred area "because the fundamentals of the science used in space study are no different from those in more traditional fields. Equally important is to learn how to think, to face and solve problems and how to find the facts we need, not just remember them .... Space as a career depends on the individual who’s considering it. It is glamorous— and it’s also dirty work.” Dr. Roman said she was sure there would be women astronauts "if manned space flights continue as we expect them to.” (von Ende, Denver Post, 3/19/66)
Sociological repercussions of the space age might be most important to historians, suggested Robert Toth in the Washington Post: "In just nine years since the first man-made moon went aloft, the fact that man can escape his Earth has become so accepted Americans are almost blase about new manned flights. "It is too early for anyone to guess how such developments may affect the deeper thoughts of self and one’s place in the world and in the universe. But it is not too much to say that, even before man reaches the moon, he has begun to get a new perspective of himself and his place in the universe from the space adventure.” (Toth, Wash. Post, 11/10/ 66, P6) A total of 211 medium- and high-resolution photos of 13 potential Apollo landing sites were taken during mission’s photo acquisition phase. Readout would be completed Dec. 13. Among photos transmitted, described as "consistently high in quality,” was a picture of the crater Copernicus taken from an angle inaccessible to earth cameras. Dr. Martin J. Swetnick, NASA Hq., describing the closeup as "one of the great pictures of the century,” said: "It provides new information, which certainly will lead to better understanding of the processes and structures on the moon.” (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 11/16/66, A18; Sullivan, NYT, 12/1/66, 1, 36) Docking of spacecraft with gatv was in 2.3 revolutions—4:14 get. After plans to use gatv propulsion system to place gemini xii into higher orbit had to be abandoned because of gatv malfunction, gemini xii rendezvoused with Nov. 12 total solar eclipse over South America and made motion and still pictures of eclipse through spacecraft windows. Aldrin then began first of two standup Evas: hatch opening was at 19:29:01 get with closure 2 hrs. 29 min. later. Nov. 13’s activities revolved around Aldrin’s umbilical Eva: hatch opening was at 42:46 get with closing 2 hrs. 8 min. later. While on 30-ft. umbilical, Aldrin performed measured work tasks at Agena docking adapter and at work station in spacecraft adapter section. He also attached 100-ft. tether stowed in Agena adapter to Gemini docking bar in preparation for tethered operations, gemini xii backed out of Agena docking collar about 47:37 get and gravity gradient appeared to be established by one revolution later. Tether exercise lasted 4 hrs. 17 min. After failing twice to sight sodium vapor clouds released in upper atmosphere by French sounding rocket launched from Hammaguir Range and performing experiments with a space sextant, crew began experiencing problems with maneuvering thrusters on spacecraft. In second standup Eva, Aldrin jettisoned unused equipment and conducted additional experiments and photography. Hatch-open time was 66:04 get for 51-min. duration. Total Eva time for gemini xii mission was 5 hrs. 28 min. Retrofire took place Nov. 15 at 94:00:01 get; reentry in 59th revolution after 94 hrs. 34 min. in space was normal. Splashdown in the Atlantic was at 94:34:31 get. gemini xii landed about three miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Wasp and about four miles from aiming point. Astronauts were picked up hy helicopter within 20 min. Naucmher 10-30: Two historic lunar photographs returned by NASA's lunar ohbiter if. one, the first close-up photograph of the crater Copernicus, taken Nov. 23, is an oblique view from 28-mi. altitude; the other, the first detailed view of lunar domes, taken Nov, 25, confirms the moon's long history of volcanic activity. The domes range from 2 to 10 mi. in diameter and from 1,000 to 1,500 ft. high; they are best seen to the south and west of the crater Marius (upper right). White House announced promotion of Aldrin from usaf major to lieutenant colonel. Lovell had been promoted to usn captain after cemini vn mission. A Presidential statement read by Press Secretary Bill Moyers said the flight was "the culmination of a great team effort, stretching back to 1961, and directly involving more than 25,000 people in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, and other Government agencies; in the universities and other research centers; and in American industry.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-272; Msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 2; Wilford, NYT, 11/12/66, 1, 14; 11/13/66, 1, 34; 11/14/66, 1, 2; 11/15/66, 1, 17; 11/16/66,1,30; O’Toole, {Fash. Post, 11/12/66, Al, A4; 11/13/66, Al, A4; 11/14/66, Al; 11/15/66, Al, A10; Pres. Doc., 11/21/66, 1701-2) November 12: Total solar eclipse which moved across South America at 2,000	mph for 2 hrs. 42 min. received extraordinary scientific scrutiny: 800 scientists from 12 nations utilized $90 million of equipment, nasa’s activities were conducted in cooperation with Argentine and Brazilian scientists as part of an international program. Eclipse formed 55-mi. strip of total blackout beginning in Pacific Ocean west of Peru, crossing southern Peru, Bolivia, northern Argentina, southern tip of Brazil, and extending into South Atlantic. NASA-Ames Convair 990A jet aircraft "Galileo,” a flying research laboratory carrying 26 scientists, successfully rendezvoused with four other instrument-equipped aircraft and raced the eclipse at 575 mph as it moved out over the South Atlantic. Other NASA activities included: five NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched within two hours from Cassino, Brazil, in Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to measure D and E region electron densities and temperatures, absorption profiles 1216 A and 1450 A, and collision frequencies. First rocket ejected trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud for comparison of electron density profile with wind profile; however, no photographs of vapor cloud were obtained. Third rocket carried Brazilian experiment to study extreme ultraviolet. All rockets and instrumentation, except for mass spectrometer on third flight, performed satisfactorily. Specially constructed launch and tracking site was manned and operated by personnel of Wallops Station and the Brazilian Space Commission. Photographs were taken by nimbus ii meteorological satellite and by Astronauts James Lovell, Jr., and Edwin Aldrin, Jr., orbiting in Gemini xii spacecraft. AFCRL launched three Nike-Hydac sounding rockets from a site near Rio Grande, Brazil. Instrumented payloads, which reached 71-mi. (115-km.) altitudes, measured positive-ion mass composition, solar radiation, electron density and temperature, and positive-ion density. Data were telemetered to ground receivers. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Japan, the Netherlands, U.K., New Zealand, and France participated in observations which would increase knowledge of the solar forces and their effects on earth’s atmosphere and provide data for use in space travel, radio communications, and weather prediction, (nasa Release 66-285; Wallops Release 66-55; De Onis, NYT, 11/13/66, 35; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/13/66, A16; AP, Wash. Post, 11/12/66, A16; oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8; nasa Rpt. srl)
Soviet physicians, according to Tass, had reported that highlanders or people who had lived for a long time in mountain areas made the best astronaut candidates since they "spend the energy of their organism much more economically.” They used less oxygen when doing physical work; had approximately 30 per cent greater resistance to oxygen shortage; and possessed "heightened resistance to infrared, ultraviolet, and cosmic radiations.” (Tass, 9/29/66)
Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, in Toronto to address the Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute, said at a news conference that although computers predicted that only one of the first three manned U.S. attempts to land on the moon would be successful, human judgment would perhaps prove them wrong. He said computers had predicted the loss of two of seven astronauts on the Mercury program but none was killed. (AP, Denver Post, 3/13/66)
Gemini Astronauts Charles A. Bassett II and Elliot M. See, Jr., were killed when their T-38 aircraft overran St. Louis Municipal Airport in rain and fog and crashed into the McDonnell Aircraft Corp. building which housed Gemini 9 and 10 spacecraft. The jet, cleared for an instrument landing, was left of center in its approach to the runway when it turned toward the McDonnell complex 1,000 ft. from instrumented landing strip. It struck the roof of Building 101, bounced into an adjacent courtyard, and exploded. Several McDonnell employees in Building 101 were treated for minor injuries. See and Bassett, enroute to McDonnell for two weeks training in space simulator, were followed later by Gemini IX backup crew Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan, who landed safely. NASA Hq. officials announced that the backup crew would fly the Gemini IX mission on schedule. (Wagner, Wash. Post, 3/1/66, Al, A4)
France exploded an atomic bomb, air-dropped over her test site at Mururoa Atoll in the Pacific, almost directly under flight path of Gemini x one hour before the spacecraft passed, nasa, advised of the impending test, had warned Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins to "keep your heads down” and "not to look at the earth while flying over the atoll.” (WSJ, 7/22/66, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 7/20/66, 22)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, attended dinner in Rangoon, Burma, given in his honor by Burma’s Foreign Minister U Thi Han. In Burma on a good-will tour, Glenn earlier had given an illustrated lecture on U.S. space program. (AP, NYT, 2/22/66, 4)
Decisions on the direction of post-Apollo activities in space would require a "two-pronged effort by the part of our economy interested in the evolution of space products,” suggested Boeing Co. vice president George H. Stoner before aiaa Forum on "After Apollo, What Next?” in Washington, D.C.: ". . . industry must assist NASA and the federal government in formulating succeeding national space goals for the research that will produce fruitful progress toward understanding our universe and toward building a store of knowledge about specialized space techniques. . . . Industry and government agencies other than NASA must explore and continue to find ways to compete successfully in the world market place and in the international technological race on the large scale development projects that characterize our modern society. . . .” Stoner offered several specific suggestions for post-Apollo activities: (1) communications satellites that would take advantage of the natural access to anywhere on earth provided by spacecraft; (2) applications of space-based activities to ballistic missile defense; (3) expansion and refinement of equipment for survey of earth affairs from space; (4) dramatic reduction of launch costs; and (5) continuing exploration of space and its technologies by NASA astronauts and scientists to learn more about our universe. (Text)
nasa’s first manned Apollo flight might be made in 1966 instead of 1967, as originally scheduled, predicted Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, in a speech at naa’s plant in Downey, Calif., to press group touring manufacturing and test sites for Apollo spacecraft and Saturn boosters. "The Apollo program is about on schedule in time, cost and performance. We have found the performance of the hardware some better than we had expected, on the basis of tests. All testing for the first manned flight probably will be completed by the end of June. "I hope we can make the first manned flight this year, although it is not scheduled until next year. I think that the first lunar excursion module will be sent up next year. "I am sure personally that our first lunar landing will be done comfortably before the end of the decade.” C. R. Able, group vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div., outlined to the group plan for converting empty hydrogen tank from Saturn V’s 3rd stage into manned space capsule. For conversion, series of metal balloons containing liquid oxygen would be added to original orbited payload, to serve later for breathing and for combination with hydrogen to operate fuel cells for producing electricity. An Apollo or Gemini spacecraft would dock with empty 3rd stage, and astronauts would emerge to remove end cover plate in end of the tank, after purging it of any hydrogen remaining from launch. An airlock, carried aloft as part of original payload or launched later, would be attached to opening left by removal of cover plate and tank would be repressurized with oxygen from metal balloons to provide astronauts with "shirtsleeve environment.” Tank walls would have about 100 shallow threaded holes for mounting work benches, furniture, or other convenient items, presumably launched separately. Able emphasized that purpose of stage conversion—to offer astronauts relief from cramped quarters and extended weightlessness—did not duplicate function of USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Douglas Aircraft Co., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. each had $50,000 NASA contracts to study use of booster cases. (Wallin, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66; upi, Miami Her., 5/6/66)
nasa’s 31 veteran astronauts would lose over $6,000 annually from sale of their personal stories if 19 new astronauts joined them in contract with Time, Inc., and Field Enterprises Educational Corp., AP reported. Under terms of contract, Time, Inc., and Field paid $520,000 annually for equal division among "participating astronauts,” in return for exclusive rights to all unofficial personal stories and photos. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/1/66, N8)
Gemini IX Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan passed their final major physical examinations at ksc. Mission review board confirmed May 17 launch date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/15/66, Al)
gemini viii Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and his family were honored with a gala parade on their arrival in Armstrong’s hometown of Wapa-koneta, Ohio. Ohio’s Governor James A. Rhodes announced plans for the construction of a $200,000 airport near Wapakoneta to be named for Armstrong. Sen. Frank J. Lausche (D-Ohio) and Rep. William M. McCulloch (R-Ohio) announced a congressional resolution of tribute to Armstrong and his fellow gemini viii Astronaut David R. Scott. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/14/66; Wash. Post, 4/14/66, D16)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., gemini vi command pilot, received a tiny gold harmonica from the Italian National Union of Mouth Organists and Harmonica Musicians for being "the first mouth organist in outer space.” (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/26/66)
Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr. (Cdr., usnr), and Charles A. Bassett II (Maj., usaf), killed-Feb. 28 when their T-38 jet training plane crashed in St. Louis, were buried in Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors in two separate ceremonies. Fifteen astronauts attended, 12 of whom served as pallbearers. See and Bassett had been selected as prime crew for the Gemini IX mission scheduled for spring 1966. (Hoagland, Wash. Post, 3/5/66, Bl; AP, NYT, 3/5/66, 9)
Press commented on the gemini viii mission. New York Times: "The docking maneuver thus successfully pioneered is of the utmost importance. It is through combining the loads brought into space by individual rockets that the great structures can be built that will be necessary for man’s activities in the cosmos in the years ahead. Tomorrow’s stations in space will serve as laboratories for astronomers and other scientists, as terminals for transshipment of passengers and freight between short-range and long-range rockets, and unfortunately—if the future resembles the past—also as military bases reflecting in the sky the tensions and hostilities of earth. But whatever purpose they serve, these islands in space will have been made possible by repeated use of the same maneuver that Astronauts Armstrong and Scott performed for the first time last night.” Washington Post: "Space feats have become so commonplace and have been carried out with such precision that we tend to forget about the hazards. The abrupt but fortunately safe return of Gemini 8 is a timely reminder that space is still a frontier and that the exploration remains at best an inexact science. "That Astronauts Armstrong and Scott emerged unharmed from their awesome experience with their space capsule out of control is a tribute not only to their own cool judgment but also to the extraordinary competence of Space Agency officials. Americans listening to reports of the emergency must have applauded collectively when the crewmen made a successful reentry. They survived a predicament in space which, had it been on a highway, would have meant disaster.” Washington Evening Star: "In addition to its docking achievement, the mission was a success in the sense of demonstrating the care with which emergency devices were built into the space ship and the thoroughness of the planning for rescue operations in event of a forced landing. It is possible, indeed, that more can be learned from a mission that goes wrong than from one which is successful all the way. "Incidentally, there is a commentary on our times in the fact that while the suspense-filled space story was unfolding, Batman was being shown on television. The abc network interrupted the program with special news announcements, and was rewarded with more than 1,000 phone calls from complaining viewers.” (NYT, 3/17/66, 36M; Wash. Post, 3/18/66, A20; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, A16)
Circular insignia of Project Apollo astronauts was displayed for first time at ksc. Capital letter "A” was in center with its crossbar formed by part of a curving track joining earth (at right) and moon (at left) of the "A.” Centered on the crossbar were three twinkling stars— symbolic of the three-astronaut crew of each Apollo mission. Earth symbol was dominated by North American continent; moon was represented in third quarter phase with dark part dominated by a man’s profile. Moon, earth, and letter "A” were displayed against dark blue background studded with stars—representing outer space. Entire design was ringed by a circle with "Apollo” at top and "nasa” at bottom. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/16/66, Al)
Potential of manned space flight in Apollo Applications program was examined by Peter Chew in National Observer. He suggested "... earth-orbiting astronauts .. . may be able to locate and track icebergs . . . spot fish-feeding grounds . . . support oceanography . . . produce agricultural, mineral, and fresh water surveys.” Manned satellites could provide "worldwide television coverage” and serve as "relay points for deep-space communications.” (Nat,l. Obs., 1/11/66; CR, 2/8/66, A609-10)
"Space Maintenance and Extravehicular Activities” meeting sponsored by usaf Aero Propulsion Laboratory and Martin Co. was held in Orlando. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. engineer Charles Brownell, together with three usaf space engineers, told the meeting that construction in space would cost approximately $100,000 per hour, but added: "These costs will be reduced drastically in the next few years.” Brownell said that because space labor would be so expensive, efforts were being made to automate as much repair work as possible. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A4) Man must learn how to rescue orbiting astronauts stranded in a disabled spacecraft because "it is a problem we all know will one day confront us,” Col. Emil G. Beaudry, vice commander of usaf Air Rescue Service, told the conference. He said one expert had concluded there was a 62 per cent probability of at least seven emergency situations in space involving 22 men in the next 20 yrs., and a 58 per cent probability of two or three emergencies within 10 yrs. Beaudry continued: "There is no reason today-—or certainly in the near future—why an operational rescue spacecraft could not be ready and standing by in the event of distress or tragedy during manned flights. "For example, a launch vehicle such as the Titan 3 with its great weight-lifting capability and mission versatility could easily carry a rescue crew, medical facilities, and technicians aloft to assist in any way required.. . .” (AP, New Haven Register, 3/7/66) NASA engineer David F. Thomas reported on his "jet shoes” to aid astronauts during extravehicular activity: "This device may be thought of as a pair of shoes with jets attached to the shoe soles in such a manner as to produce a thrust vector along the subject’s leg when the jets are activated.” Projecting from the front of each shoe would be hinged toe-plate which astronaut could depress or release at will to operate an electrical switch which controlled gas jets. Thomas said shoes, which would be slipped on over space boots, had been tested successfully on counterbalanced harness device at LaRC. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66, A18) Douglas Aircraft Co. engineers Thorne L. Runyan and John M. Dick reported that intensity of sunlight and blackness of shadows would cause astronauts working in space to "confuse spheres with points of light, cones with wedges, and pipes with strange shapes that appear and disappear.” To counteract these distortions, they recommended a bracket of strong lights "looking over the shoulder” of a working astronaut to fill in shadows and lessen contrast with sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, A5) Bell Aerosystems Co. test pilot Robert F. Courter reported that Bell had developed a rocket propellant "flying pogo stick” for transporting men and equipment on earth or over the surface of the moon. Pogo stick would be powered by hydrogen peroxide jets and its two rocket nozzles would be controlled directly by pilot’s hand, arm, and shoulder movements, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66) The space tool kit to be used by Astronaut David R. Scott during Gemini VIII mission was exhibited for the first time. Developed by Martin Co. and Black & Decker Tool Co. at a cost of $124,000, kit’s power tool used impact instead of torque as its motive principle because man in space, with neither friction nor gravity to give him a firm footing, would be sent spinning counterclockwise by the action of a handheld tool that rotated clockwise. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, Al) In a luncheon address, Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasc staff, warned that U.S.S.R. might soon recapture the lead in manned spaceflight: "They don’t lead now in manned spaceflight. They may again in the near future, but they don’t now.” Konecci said space experts expected Russia to launch a "major manned program in the near future,” possibly a manned laboratory, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., passed their medical examinations for the Gemini XII mission, scheduled for launch from etr Nov. 9. (Wash. Post, 11/6/66, A17)
Press briefing was held at LaRC on results of nasa’s lunar orbiter i mission, launched Aug. 10 from etr to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. The more than 200 photos transmitted by the spacecraft revealed a rugged lunar landscape covered with thousands of craters. Ridges and hills were more gently sloped near moon’s center and became progressively smoother in the west. Presence of large rocks, or "blocks,” proved that surface was firm enough to support manned spacecraft. Of the nine sites photographed, the Ocean of Storms where surveyor i was resting appeared safest for manned landing. Classified as a dark mare— flat, waterless plain with relatively few craters—it had 20 per cent fewer craters than any of the other sites. U.S. Geological Survey scientists Dr. Harold Masursky and Dr. Lawrence Rowan suggested that the photos showed evidence of volcanic activity. Citing a small cone-shaped hill on line of a geologic rift near surveyor i ana a large crater on the back of the moon, apparently filled with congealed lava, Dr. Masursky said: "The moon is not a cold, dead, lifeless planet. It looks close to being as dynamic as the earth.” Dr. Rowan noted that major faults on the lunar surface seemed to run in two general directions—northeast-southwest and southeast-northwest —and concluded that much of the volcanic activity probably occurred along these lines. LaRC scientist William Michael said nonphotographic data on the satellite’s orbit indicated moon might turn flat side toward earth, not bulgy side as generally believed. He said displacement of moon’s center of mass toward earth could explain both a flat face and moon’s slight wobble, which had been accounted for previously by the "bulge” theory. Micrometeoroid detection experiment had not recorded any "hits” during satellite’s eight weeks in lunar orbit in contrast to earth-orbiting satellites which often registered a hit every two weeks. Project Manager Clifford H. Nelson announced that Lunar Orbiter B—second of five satellites in series—would be launched between Nov. 6 and 11 to photograph area slightly north of that scanned by lunar orbiter i. (Clark, NYT, 10/7/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/66, A3; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 10/7/66, Al)
Astronauts Armstrong and Scott landed safely in Honolulu after KC-135 jet aircraft carrying them from Okinawa to ksc lost oil pressure in its number two engine about 800 mi. east of Hawaii. Armstrong and Scott had earlier received an enthusiastic reception—-with brass band— when they disembarked at Okinawa from recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard F.	Mason for flight to Honolulu, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/19/66, A4; AP, NYT, 3/18/66, 21)
usaf and NASA signed agreement to establish procedures for joint space program accident investigation. Ad hoc joint boards, consisting of at least three voting members appointed by usaf Director of Aerospace Safety and three by NASA Safety Director, would study particular launch vehicle accidents. Chairman would be from agency with "primary responsibility at time of accident,” determined by circumstances of each case. (Text; nasa nmi 1052.74, 4/27/66) "As it turns out, even the most fantastic thinking 30 years ago has proved to be very conservative. We have already flown planes like the SR-71 at speeds greater than mach 3 for extended periods. The experimental X-15 has flown at mach 6 and reached altitudes of over 50 miles. Our long-range ballistic missiles have ranges of from 5,000 to 9,000 miles. And our Mercury and Gemini astronauts have sped through space for extended periods at speeds better than 17,000 miles per hour. With the Apollo program we are not too many years away from landing a man on the moon.” (Text) Entertainer Bob Hope presented General Schriever the inaugural award of Arnold Air Society’s Eugene M. Zuckert Trophy "to recognize and stimulate the growth of professionalism in the United States Air Force.” General Schriever was cited for his "outstanding dedication to the task of insuring the development of vitally needed modern weaponry for national defense” and the gathering of "highly qualified technological management teams required to perform this task.” (afsc Release 74.66)
Use of personal radar units by astronauts to counteract optical illusions which they might encounter while assembling a space station or exploring the moon was recommended by Cambridge Univ. Prof. Richard L. Gregory, author of Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing, in a New York press interview. Gregory believed astronauts might experience spatial distortion when seeing spacecraft’s structural elements gleaming luminously in sunlight or sharply etched against a jet black background. In addition, he thought they might experience reversed depth perception which would cause distorted images. Gregory recommended aiding astronauts with tones, heard through earphones, of a variable pitch which would be determined by a beam from radar unit each man would wear. Variations in pitch would indicate distance to different objects and astronaut’s rate of approach or retreat from them. Gregory was conducting his research at New York Univ. on a senior foreign scientist fellowship financed in part by NASA. (Osmundsen, NYT,	31; Houston Chron., 2/16/66)
NASA selected Warrier Constructors, Inc., for final negotiations of a $3.5-million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to complete construction and equip a lunar receiving laboratory at msc by end of 1967. A central complex where samples of lunar surface material collected by Apollo astronauts could be received, examined, and processed, laboratory would also be equipped to quarantine spacecraft and crew after flight to moon, (nasa Release 66-200)
A 40-ft. strip of 16-mm. film "of excellent quality” shot by Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., during Sept. 12-15 gemini xi mission was released at msc. One sequence showed Gordon straddling Agena to tie tether from gatv to gemini xi. Movie revealed Conrad had described scene accurately when he had radioed to earth: "He’s riding it like a cowboy.” In Washington, D.C., White House announced Gordon would be promoted from usn lieutenant commander to full commander. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/17/66, FI; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/17/66, A5; upi, NYT, 9/18/66, 1, 82)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., began eight-nation good-will tour of Asia with four-day visit to Japan. (NYT, 2/23/66)
NASA might not in future be able to order aircraft carriers and large ships for recovery of astronauts, Chicago Tribune sources reported, usn felt vessels could be put to better use to support or relieve forces in Vietnam, usaf had proposed to NASA use of new long-range helicopters. (Chic. Trib., 7/1/66)
U.S. Astronaut Alan Shepard and Soviet Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov had same positive response to Parade editor Jess Gorkin’s suggestion that an American and a Russian fly together in the same spacecraft. Shepard, contacted at Msc, said it would be of "enormous value.” Yegorov indicated that U.S.S.R. might already be preparing for joint space exploration, saying: "If the Americans are really keen on the idea of joint flights, they had better start learning Russian. All of us are studying English already.” (Anderson, Parade, 7/24/66, 4-5)
"The American Space Outlook” for 1967 was summarized by Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., in the Baltimore Sun. ". . . 1967 should he a year of genuine accomplishments in space for men and machines. ". . . astronauts will begin to fly around the earth in the kind of spacecraft that will carry them to the moon in 1968 or 1969. . . . "New unmanned spacecraft will climb into orbit for additional views of the earth’s weather. Other craft will fly away to study the science of the sun; make further on-the-spot examinations of the moon’s surface, probe the nature of the stars and take another close look at Venus. . . the Defense Department will lay the groundwork for the 1969 launching of a manned orbiting laboratory to study possible military roles of men in space . . . the people who make airplanes will be planning the big jumbo jets and, in Europe, fashioning airliners that will go faster than the speed of sound. . . .” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/28/66)
Taped conversations between Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and ground controllers disclosing the drama of the emergency but revealing nothing of the difficulty that had caused emergency landing March 16 of gemini viii were released at msc press conference. There was no indication of panic aboard the spacecraft during motion. In an "almost matter-of-fact tone,” Armstrong had reported to msc: "Well, we consider the problem serious. We are toppling end-over-end. . . . We cannot turn anything off.” It was announced there would be no public discussion of their mission by Armstrong and Scott for at least nine days during which they would rest and undergo debriefing at KSC. msc Director Robert R. Gilruth announced that preparations for the
Harold B. Finger, Director, nasa Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div. and Manager, aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed nasa and aec programs to provide nuclear energy systems for space applications before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: "A major new program initiated by the aec at nasa’s request during 1965 is the development of the snap-27 isotope-thermoelectric generator to power experiments that will be left on the Moon by the Apollo astronauts. This Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (alsep) is intended to transmit data . . . for at least a year. The snap-27 isotope power supply will provide 50 watts to the experiments and will weigh about 40 pounds. It will use a single plutonium loaded fuel capsule which will be inserted into the generator on the lunar surface by the astronauts.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 541)
Successful mock launching of Gemini 8 spacecraft at etr in preparation for March 15 three-day rendezvous and docking mission. Astronauts Neil Armstrong and David Scott spent two and one-half hours in Gemini capsule during simulated spaceflight, (dpi, NYT, 3/10/66, 10)
Soviet newspaper Trud said that although Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission had set new altitude record, it otherwise only repeated "already achieved results.” Trud added that some of these results were "worse” than before, citing the lesser length of time spent in Eva by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/16/66, A2)
NASA announced appointment of Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf), pilot in USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program, to X-15 research program, replacing Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf), who had transferred to MSC April 4 to become an astronaut. Following extensive training program, Major Adams would become 12th man to fly the rocket-powered aircraft, (frc Release 15-66)
NASA selected McDonnell Aircraft Corp. for negotiation of $9-million, fixed-price contract to provide an airlock for an experiment in which astronauts would enter empty hydrogen tank of a spent Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) 2nd stage (S-IVB). Airlock would be stacked on space vehicle between Saturn and Apollo units using lunar module mounts. In orbit, command and service modules would separate and dock with airlock unit, and the crew would activate systems to pressurize spent hydrogen tank for habitation; hatch in airlock would permit astronauts to egress into space without depressurization of tank or spacecraft. First mission in MSFC-managed program would be carried out "no earlier than 1968.” (nasa Release 66-223; msfc Release 66-189)
Astronaut Frank Borman returned to Gary, Ind., to help the city celebrate Frank Borman Day and start a year-long observance of its 60th anniversary. He said at a news conference that "it is inevitable” that the U.S. would lose a crew in its space program and that he hoped the public was "mature enough to accept the sacrifice.” (upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/15/66; AP, NYT, 1/15/66, 22; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/66, A2) January 15: Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, U.K., announced that Soviet space tracking station in the Crimea would send signals to Jodrell Bank via Venus for an entire 225-day Venusian year. Sir Bernard said that by following Venus during one complete solar revolution, scientists hoped to gain further information on exact distances of planets from each other and the sun; nature of the hidden surface of Venus; changes in the very slow rotation of Venus; and conditions in space between earth and Venus. (NYT, 1/16/66, 24)
Gemini X Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins flew from recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal to ksc to begin 10 days of debriefing on July 18-21 mission. (Strothman, Wash. Post, 7/23/66, A3)
gemini rv Astronaut Edward H. White II and gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., were among the ten outstanding young men of 1965 announced by U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce in Tulsa, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/9/66)
The 19 astronauts selected by NASA April 4 would be "too late to take part in the first lunar landings . . . [but they] should get into some of the follow-on Apollo flights and take some 60-day space trips,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of Medical Programs, msc, said in a press interview in Colorado Springs. (Gibney, Denver Post, 4/10/66)
Management organization to direct Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) project at msfc was announced by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun: Leland Belew, Program Manager; Reine Ise, Project Manager; William Keathley, Project Experiments Manager; E. B. Craig, Contracting Officer; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Project Scientist, msfc’s Astrionics Lab., headed by Dr. Walter Haeussermann, Director, and William Horton, Assistant Director, would be responsible for overall technical aspects of Atm development, (msfc Release 66-270) During November: Two experiments developed at arc and flown on Nov. 11-15 gemini xii mission were highly successful. Five runs with hand-held sextant proved it could deliver required accuracy of 10 sec. of arc (l/360th of one degree of a circle) in actual space flight. In experiment to study effects of weightlessness on living cells using newly fertilized frog eggs, astronauts arrested cell growth at programed intervals during mission. Data were being analyzed, (arc Releases 66-15, 66-16; arc Astrogram, 11/23/66, 1, 4)
Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott received Exceptional Service Medals from NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in ceremonies at msc. Armstrong received a quality step increase in his Civil Service pay, and Major Scott (usaf), promotion to lieutenant colonel by President Johnson. At a televised msc news conference, Armstrong said he and Scott developed some "anxiety” but that they never for a moment thought they could not return the spacecraft tc earth. Both Scott and msc Director Robert R. Gilruth said that if the trouble had occurred over a ground tracking station, mission might have been salvaged. Malfunction would have been localized immediately and the information relayed to the astronauts. As it was, they had had no idea what was wrong or even whether the trouble was with the gatv/gemini viii or the spacecraft alone. (Waldron, NYT, 3/27/66, 64L; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/21/66, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/27/66, Al)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
Long-range HC-130H cargo aircraft equipped with Fulton Recovery System successfully snatched Capt. Gerald T. LyVere (usaf) from Rogers Dry Lake at afftc in first test of new ground-to-air recovery system for rescuing downed fliers and astronauts. At 400-ft. altitude aircraft clamped onto balloon-suspended nylon cable attached to harness dropped earlier by parachute, pulled Captain LyVere up behind aircraft, and reeled him over rear ramp. In later demonstration, Col. Allison Brooks (usaf) and A-3C Ronald Doll (usaf) were recovered simultaneously in side-by-side two-man pickup using double harness. Lockheed-built HC-130H, which would become operational June 30, could fly missions to more than 2,000 mi. from its base, loiter at sea level, and rescue up to five persons in multiple pickups from land or sea. For NASA projects, aircraft would carry complex uhf spacecraft reentry tracker equipment to locate reentering spacecraft, (afftc Release)
usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) was "moving quietly but quickly toward its first test launch, now scheduled for Oct. 28 from Cape Kennedy,” Aviation Week reported. Operational Mol would consist of modified Gemini spacecraft connected to a "can-shaped” laboratory. usaf astronauts, while orbiting in space, would pass through door in spacecraft’s heatshield to reach laboratory. October test would show whether configuration would endanger astronauts in spacecraft during reentry. (Av. Wk., 7/18/66, 25)
Redeye, usa’s shoulder-fired antiaircraft missile system designed for forward-area defense against low-flying aircraft, had successfully completed Arctic phase of service testing at Ft. Greely, Alaska.. (Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release) Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, told the conference that "all technologies are sufficiently developed to make flight [to Mars] in 1986 appear possible.” Five Saturn V launch vehicles would carry the components of electrically powered Mars spacecraft and of Nerva II-powered nuclear earth-escape stage into 300-mi.-altitude earth orbit. After assembly and checkout, nuclear stage would accelerate electrically powered spacecraft to escape velocity. Flight time to Mars on a direct transfer trajectory would be 145 days; 280 days would be required to return to earth. Spacecraft would enter high earth orbit outside Van Allen radiation belt and astronauts would be brought back to earth by commuter rocket. Dr. Stuhlinger said: "Of the key developments still necessary, the electrical power system undoubtedly requires the major technological and funding effort.” Coauthors contributing to the paper presented by Stuhlinger were Joseph C. King and Dr. Russell D. Shelton of msfc Research Projects Laboratory and Gordon R. Woodcock, msfc Advanced Systems Office, (msfc Release 66-67) LRC scientist J. Reece Roth described an electric rocket life-support system that would supply interplanetary crews with meals which, when metabolized, would serve as fuel for spacecraft’s engine. According to Roth’s concept, some or all of the propellant, in the form of food, water, and oxygen, would be metabolized by crew to carbon dioxide, water, and solid wastes. C02 and water could then be used as propellant for an electric engine while solid residues would be small enough to be stored or discarded. Propellant reserve could be used for food, navigational corrections, and radiation shielding—enhancing safety of the crew. Weight savings from integrated propulsion and life-support system would be so great, Roth said, that a somewhat less efficient thruster could be used with no overall loss in performance, (lrc Release 66-12) Human experience most similar to one-to-three year space flight was life on submarine, according to Dr. S. B. Sells, Director, Institute of Behavioral Research, Texas Christian Univ. Dr. Sells presented results of NASA-sponsored study designed to formulate problems of "group organization, structure, and interpersonal interaction of crew members in the environmental circumstances of a typical space mission.” Fifty-six social system characteristics of extended space flight—such as motivation, status, background, training, and command structure of crew, as well as conditions of confinement, isolation, and environmental hazards—were compared with those of 11 other social systems. (Text) nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright said: "Thousands of dedicated people have laboriously laid . .. stepping stones to Mars. This nation is ready and able to step up the exploration of Mars, Venus, and the rest of the solar system. Just when such a program will get a go ahead depends on many factors. This coming year will be a crucial one for the decision makers. "Of one thing I am absolutely certain: comprehensive exploration of the planets is inevitable. Who will be leading this exploration seems less certain; but we can if we choose.” (Text)
NASA had assigned msfc project management of Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) for Apollo Applications (Aa) missions. A combination of accurate, high-resolution, solar-oriented telescopes, Atm would be attached to spacecraft so that astronauts could manually adjust it to select and focus upon a specific area on the sun. (nasa Release 66-185)
Sun had blinded Gemini ix Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan for more than two minutes of the critical liftoff period June 3, preventing them from reading control gauges or dials, ksc officials disclosed. As a result, NASA was considering fitting outside of spacecraft windows with tinted coverings on launchings when sun might be a serious problem. Coverings would be sprung free of windows when spacecraft had achieved orbit. Cernan’s suggestion of sunglasses would probably be rejected, NASA said, because it would be impossible to wear them under helmets. (NYT, 7/10/66, 45)
President Johnson was asked to invite a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut in a space mission in an open letter in Parade magazine written by editor Jess Gorkin. Gorkin admitted that, officially, there had been little cooperation in space science between the two countries, but said that "Russian and American scientists, guided by a tradition that scientific research belongs to all men, had been eager to cooperate. On a person-to-person basis, they had already exchanged more space data than their governments have officially sanctioned.” Gorkin envisioned joint space mission as proof that U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together for "the good of all men on earth” despite disagreement on "how they want to live.” (Parade, 1/9/66)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., headed six-man panel of investigators that began attempt to reconstruct St. Louis crash of T-38 jet plane in which Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II died Feb. 28. msc Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney told upi that full report would not be completed for "at least six weeks.” The tragedy prompted Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R-Wash.) to urge the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to investigate flight training of astronauts, particularly the number of hours of flying time required and the justification for such requirements, (upi, NYT, 3/2/66, 22; nasa lar V/36)
The Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II received editorial comment. Washington Evening Star: "Yesterday’s tragedy is all the more shocking in that it needn’t have happened at all. . . . "It is assumed that Bassett was Togging flying time’. .. See, a civilian, was not eligible for flight pay but as an astronaut was encouraged to keep his hand as an airplane jockey, "It is difficult to see why it is necessary for military men on astronaut duty to fly airplanes to qualify for 'hazardous duty’ pay . . . "Let’s save our spacemen for space, and let’s make it a bit easier for them by amending the military pay act to give uniformed astronauts those fjew hundred extra dollars a month just for being astronauts.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A6) Houston Post: "There is ... an element of irony in the fact that two men preparing for a highly hazardous space mission should die in this prosaic manner, but actually, under the procedures that are followed in space flights, there are just as great risks on the surface of the earth and in its atmosphere as in space, and they probably are much more numerous. If air travel is safer than land travel today, space travel is probably even safer . . .” (Houston Post, 3/2/66) Missiles and Rockets: "By emphasizing the everyday risk taken by all the astronauts in the course of training, the deaths of Capt. Freeman, Mr. See and Maj. Bassett have almost certainly lessened the outcry against the space program in the event of similar losses during space operations. "Each time an astronaut steps into a military jet aircraft, he is running a risk perceptibly greater than that he takes in space. . . . [nasa] takes the greatest of care to assure that manned spacecraft launches are as safe as the best engineering talent in the nation can make them. A launch atop a Titan II, hazardous as it may be, cannot compare with the danger inherent in groping through low fog for an elusive runway in a jet aircraft.” (Coughlin, M&R, 3/14/66, 54)
gemini VIII Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott returned to their families in Houston after debriefing at ksc. (AP, NYT, 3/22/66, 18)
Astronaut Donald K. Slayton received an honorary Doctor of Engineering degree from Michigan Technological Univ. in ceremony at msc. Degree was conferred "in recognition of high attainments in engineering.” As msc Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, Slayton directed the Astronaut Office, Aircraft Operations Office, and the Flight Crew Support Div. (msc Roundup, 1/21/66, 2)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott arrived at ksc to begin an intensive three-day conference with Gemini project officials to attempt to reconstruct events leading to their loss of control of the gemini viii spacecraft March 16. Scott told a crowd at the airstrip that "the lift off, launching, rendezvous, and docking were really tremendous. We were really looking forward to the whole mission.” Armstrong agreed, adding: "We had a magnificent flight in the first seven hours. It was a magnificent launch—without a doubt one of the best there’s ever been.” (AP, NYT, 3/20/66, 82)
NASA had awarded a $38,000 contract to U.S. Public Health Service on best approach to control and early diagnosis of viral infection in astronauts during space flight. Dr. Walter Kemmerer, msc’s monitor on the virus control study, said in an interview: "We want to have techniques to enable us to prevent this from happening, and to detect that it is happening. Also, we want to know how to prevent one astronaut from transmitting it to another inside the spacecraft.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/66, Al)
NASA Lewis Research Center, first Government laboratory devoted to flight propulsion in all its aspects, celebrated its 25th anniversary. Authorized by Congress in 1940, the naca facility was originally called the Aircraft Engine Research Lab.; it was renamed the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1948 in honor of Dr. George W. Lewis, former naca Director of Aeronautical Research (1924-47). In 1958, when naca facilities and personnel were absorbed by the newly created NASA, the facility became the Lewis Research Center. From an initial Congressional appropriation of $2 million in 1941, LRC had emerged as a major research and development laboratory valued at $200 million. Marking the anniversary, LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein said: "Man isn’t going to be held to a single conquest or success. The past decade has seen aviation and rocketry undergo phenomenal change, but we’ve just started to realize its potential. The present generation will live to fly better than 2,000 mph in commercial aircraft and to observe at close range the interplanetary exploits of U.S. astronauts. The past 25 years have witnessed truly remarkable strides in aeronautics and space activities. In 1941, man had the capability to fly 300 mph and to attain altitudes of perhaps 30,000 ft. Today, he orbits the earth at 17,500 mph and in a few years will set foot on the moon and possibly later Mars.” (lrc Release 66-1; Lewis News, 1/23/66, 1-12; upi, Miami Herald, 1/24/66)
Clark Univ.’s Robert Hutchings Goddard Library announced plans to bury a time capsule containing 100 "early Space Age” artifacts, including tape recording of former Astronaut John Glenn’s communications with ground control during his Feb. 20, 1962, MA-6 flight in friendship 7. Capsule would be set to be opened in 500 yrs. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/66, A4)
First manned Apollo mission might be launched in late 1966, predicted Astronaut Virgil Grissom during news conference held by Apollo crew and backup crew at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., facility. Mission was officially scheduled for 1967. (Transcript)
NASA’s lunar ORBITER I (Lunar Orbiter A) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in first U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Aug. 14-31]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 28-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft into 90-hr. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule, lunar orbiter i deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s startracker failed to lock on Canopus and flight engineers were forced to lock it on the moon—-a weaker navigational reference point. Assistant Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC was "still quite confident” about achieving lunar orbit, but noted it might be more difficult to obtain desired precision and exact positions required for optimum photos of lunar surface. At approximately 00:28 GMT Aug. 11 planned midcourse maneuver was successfully executed, and JPL scientists predicted spacecraft would miss original aiming point by only 50 mi. Primary objectives of NASA’s lunar orbiter i mission, first in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) obtain high-resolution photos of various types of lunar surface to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft and improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 3,000mi. strip along moon’s equator, concentrating on nine potential landing areas. Spacecraft would also attempt to photograph surveyor i landing sites; provide precision trajectory information; and monitor meteoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Release 66-195; Wilford, NYT, 8/8/66, 3; 8/11/66, 1, 12; 8/12/66, 51; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 8/11/66, Al; 8/12/66, Al; 8/13/66, Al; 8/14/66, Al, A6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/11/66, A3)
Gemini x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins flew from ksc to msc for reunion with families and continued debriefing. News conference had been set for Aug. 1. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/25/66, A12)
Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman and his family were welcomed by a parade in their hometown of Tucson, Ariz. Borman, who was given the keys to the city and told that a $300,000 planetarium would be built in his honor, was also praised in a special resolution passed unanimously by the Arizona legislature. He told a press conference he had joined the space program to go to the moon and "that’s what I want to do.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 1/9/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/11/66)
Investigations of seals’ habits might yield valuable information for astronauts exploring the moon, particularly with regard to enduring extremes of cold and lack of oxygen, Dr. Carleton Ray, New York Zoological Society, told the New York Times. Ray, who recently returned from Antarctica expedition sponsored by the Society with nsf aid, said that of pertinent interest would be "reasons why seals can endure tremendous cold, sleep under water without breathing, and use what appears to be a remarkable echo-sounding system for navigating in total darkness under thick ice to return to isolated breathing holes needed sporadically to help them remain submerged in a state somewhat akin to semihibernation.” (Devlin, NYT, 3/14/66, 6)
