Field Enterprises Educational Corp. announced that it would not exercise its option to extend its rights for book and newspaper distribution of the personal stories of NASA astronauts and their families. Present four-year agreement, which paid the astronauts $320,000 annually for exclusive publishing rights and provided each astronaut with $50,000 life insurance policy, would expire Aug. 31. Field Enterprises president Bailey K. Howard said large number of astronauts now, compared with number four years ago, made continuation of the project impractical. (AP, NYT, 5/3/67,13; US News, 5/15/67)
msfc awarded Bendix Corp. $7.4 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for development and production of Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) pointing control system (pcs) . Bendix was scheduled to produce three units by August. ATM system would permit Apollo astronauts to point a telescope to selected regions of the sun during period of maximum solar flare activities beginning in late 1968. msfc had awarded American Optical Co. $740,460 contract to build a dynamic simulator for use in developing the pcs. (msfc Releases 67-54, 67-58; nasa Release 67-66)
msc awarded SI million in six-month study contracts to General Dynamics, Boeing Co., and McDonnell Co. for space station facilities that could be assembled in orbit early in the 1970s. General Dynamics would study engine room module, a separately launched unit to furnish electrical power and life-support equipment for space station. Boeing would study space station design to include a 38-in optical telescope that would be launched with the space station by a Saturn V booster. McDonnell would study logistics/ferry spacecraft to provide ground landing capability for astronauts. (Tech Wk, 3/27/67, 23-4)
U.S. leaders expressed sorrow at the death of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. President Johnson: “The death of Vladimir Komarov is a tragedy in which all nations share. Like three American astronauts who lost their lives recently, this distinguished space pioneer died in the cause of science and in the eternal spirit of human adventure.” ~ Vice President Humphrey: “It is with great sorrow that we learn of the tragedy involving Vladimir Komarov. The loss of a dedicated life is indeed a heavy price. Yet progress and space development is necessary.” NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “All of us who have faced the difficulties of understanding and putting to use the forces of nature at the outer edge of Man’s knowledge of what is possible in this decade deeply regret the loss of life represented by the death of Cosmonaut Komarov, and extend our sincere sympathy to his family and associates. We feel certain that man will achieve great things in space. Some of these will determine what the men will be able to do on earth. “We also feel that at this dawn of the space age, man has the duty to seek cooperation between nations, such as the USSR and the United States on a realistic basis. “We at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration want to make every realistic effort. Could the lives already lost have been saved if we had known each other’s hopes, aspirations and plans? Or could they have been saved if full cooperation had been the order of the day?” U.S. astronauts: “We are very saddened by the loss of Colonel Komarov. We feel comradeship for this test pilot because we have met several of his fellow cosmonauts and we are involved in a pioneering flight effort which is not without hazards.” (Text; PD, 5/1/67, 660; AP, NYT, 4/25/67, 21)
Three Apollo astronauts died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc because “some engineer, technician, or inspector had gotten careless,” former Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations, told employees at General Motors AC Electronics Div., Milwaukee, where Apollo guidance and navigation equipment was manufactured. Slayton urged workers: “Take a good sharp look at your job. Are you giving everything you’ve got? Now you know somebody’s life depends on it.” An msc official later reported that Slayton’s speech had not been intended for publication. Slayton emphasized that he was not trying to affix blame for the Apollo accident, but was just trying to make workers ultraconscious of the importance of their jobs, (upi, W Star, 2/10/67; UPI, WIT, 2/11/67)
NASA announced selection of 11 civilian scientist-astronauts: Dr. Joseph P. Allen, 30, a physicist research associate at the Univ. of Washington; Dr. Philip K. Chapman, 32, a naturalized citizen horn in Australia and staff physicist at mit’s Experimental Astronomy Laboratory; Dr. Anthony W. England, 25, a graduate fellow in geophysics at MIT and the youngest man ever to be named an astronaut; Dr. Karl G. Henize, 40, an astronomy professor at Northwestern Univ. and experimenter in the Gemini program; Dr. Donald L. Holmquest, 28, who would report for duty in one year after completing his medical internship at Baylor College of Medicine; Dr. William B. Lenoir, 28, an assistant professor of electrical engineering at mit; Dr. John A. Llewellyn, 34, a naturalized citizen born in Wales and associate professor in chemistry at Florida State Univ.; Dr. Franklin S. Musgrave, 31, a post-doctoral fellow at Univ. of Kentucky with a doctorate in medicine from Columbia Univ., a Ph. D. in physiology from Univ. of Kentucky, and four other college degrees; Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, 27, who held a Ph. D. in astronomy and was in the NASA trainee program at Univ. of California Dept, of Astronomy’s Space Sciences Laboratory; Dr. Robert A. Parker, 30, assistant professor of astronomy at Univ. of Wisconsin; and Dr. William E. Thornton, 38, who recently completed two-year tour of duty with Brooks AFB Aerospace Medical Div. The new astronauts, except Dr. Holmquest, would report for duty at MCS Sept. 18. After two weeks orientation, they would begin “ground school” training, which would include orbital mechanics, astronomy, computers, spacecraft orientation, general mathematics and physics refresher courses, and field trips for contractor facility orientation. In March they would start Air Force flight training to become qualified jet pilots. The new group, which increased number of NASA astronauts to 56, was sixth class to be selected and second to be chosen specifically for scientific education. They were selected from a group of 69 nominees submitted to NASA in March by nas after evaluating 923 applications. (NASA Release 67—211; msc Roundup, 8/18/67,1-3)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
nas had received 923 applications for 20-30 positions in NASA’s astronaut training program. Academy was expected to forward NASA a list of 60-75 recommended candidates in March for final selection. (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/26/67)
Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr. (usaf), first Negro selected for a mission in the Nation’s space program, was killed during routine training flight when his F—104 aircraft crashed on landing at Edwards afb. Copilot Maj. Harvey J. Royer (usaf), chief of operations at usaf’s Aerospace Research Pilot School, was injured. USAF appointed a board of officers to investigate the crash. Selected June 30, to train for DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program, Major Lawrence was ninth astronaut—first in dod astronaut program—to be killed in an accident and fifth to die in an air crash; three others had died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire and one in an automobile accident. Memorial services were conducted at Edwards afb and in Chicago. ( W Post, 12/9/67, Al; AP, NYT, 12/10/67, 44; B Sun, 12/11/67, A15)
Adm. David L. McDonald, Chief of Naval Operations, and Gen. John P. McConnell, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, presented Distinguished Flying Crosses to the military astronauts who had made space flights in special Pentagon ceremony. Included were posthumous awards to L/Col. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and L/CoL Edward H. White II (usaf), who died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Capt. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., speaking on behalf of his fellow astronauts, said they were “proud members of the military, but also . . . representatives of a great and significant national effort,” who had grown “to enjoy the [space program’s] successes and live with its failures.” (dod Release 642-67; AP, B Sun, 7/14/67, 6; SBD, 7/17/67,_ 68)
Seven members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight continued hearings on Jan. 27 Apollo accident at ksc by touring AS-204 launch pad and questioning eyewitnesses. Donald Nichols, assistant test manager at ksc, told the Subcommittee that the decision to keep the hatch closed during Jan. 27 Apollo rehearsal might have cost die lives of the crew. On Oct. 31, 1966, he said, decision was made to change plans that would have kept the hatch open until the crew had been better trained on emergency procedures. Officials decided that hatch could be locked and emergency escape practice conducted after the test, he said. If test procedures had not been changed, the hatch would have been open or the astronauts not present in the spacecraft. Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., quality control inspector, said that Apollo 1 astronauts smelled smoke in their spacecraft 12 min before they died and tried for five minutes to escape. This information, he said, had been supplied by naa electrical technician Mervin Holmberg. Holmberg later made a surprise appearance before the Subcommittee and denied Baron’s allegation: “I listened to his [Baron’s] speculation, but I didn’t make any comment” on what caused the fire. “I wasn’t even near the accident when it happened.” Baron, who had submitted a report to NASA [see During March] prior to Jan. 27 accident charging laxity, poor morale, and bad management on the part of naa, was sharply criticized by subcommittee members, and his statement was disclaimed. (Abramson, W Post, 4/22/67, A4)
238,154 airmen certificates—a new annual record and a 32% increase over 1965 total—were issued by faa in 1966. (faa Release 67-18) nuclear rocket—it could be used for continued exploration of the moon after first Apollo landings. “Using a non-nuclear Saturn 5, astronauts are restricted to landing areas in a narrow strip along the moon’s equator. A nuclear upper stage would permit a manned spacecraft to land anywhere on the surface of the moon.” Other possible uses included manned flyby missions to Mars and Venus; unmanned flights of large payloads to Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury, or within a few million miles of sun; and manned orbital flights to Mars and Venus. (Hines, W Star, 3/6/67,1; 3/7/67)
NASA published Earth Photographs from Gemini III, IV, and V, an atlas containing reproductions of 244 high-quality earth photos taken by Gemini astronauts. Pictures, which were taken with hand-held cameras from 100- to 215-mi altitudes as scientific, meteorological, and terrain experiments, showed major • natural features and some manmade ones in 50 countries around the world, (nasa SP-129; nasa Release 67—153)
Ashes of Soviet Cosmonaut Col. Vladimir M. Komarov were buried in the Kremlin wall in a military funeral attended by Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin, President Nikolay V. Podgorny, and other high Government leaders and scientists. Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin, in a brief speech, pledged that Soviet cosmonauts would “continue the cause” for which Komarov gave his life. A nasa spokesman said plans to send U.S. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Frank Borman to funeral had been abandoned because U.S.S.R. denied permission, saying it was an internal Soviet affair. (AP, W Star, 4/26/67, A24; NYT, 4/27/67, 3; upi, W Pos*, 4/27/67, A4)
The press praised Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire. Technology Week: “The harsh, scathing report of the Apollo 204 Review Board has effectively laid to rest charges that the board was assembled to conduct a whitewash of the January 27 fire, which took the lives of three astronauts. The board should be commended for the vigor with which it undertook to establish the cause of the fire, the energy with which it attacked what it regards as dangerous practices and procedures and the directness with which it distributes the blame. . . . Perhaps the question that will linger longest about the January tragedy is the part played by the pressure of the lunar landing deadlines. We personally believe that such target dates play a large and important factor in motivating the space program and keeping it moving at a healthy pace. But they should not be so sacred as to invoke carelessness. . . . Without waiting for another accident, it might be well to undertake the same sort of review of practices and procedures throughout the major elements of Apollo that has just taken place in regard to the spacecraft. . . . The Apollo 204 Review Board has set a good example of what can be accomplished.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 4/17/67, 50) Aviation Week: “Its report is technically incisive and sharply critical of NASA and the private contractors manufacturing Apollo hardware. It is as thorough and technically solid as any other investigation of aerospace disaster in the past three decades. It disproves earlier charges that NASA is incapable of investigating its own technical faults. In fact, it would have been impossible to assemble another group sufficiently knowledgeable about the Apollo system from any other source to complete a useful investigation within this time span. “. . . there are none of the pat answers, so often demanded by legislators and harping critics, to the dangerous and complex problems of probing the unknown. Apollo is man’s most daring foray in his history on this planet. If all the problems involved in a lunar voyage were so obvious and the solutions so simple as many critics seem to think, we could all buy tickets for a lunar excursion tomorrow.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 4/17/67, 21)
A minimum of four manned space flights would precede the first U.S. attempt to land men on the moon, Astronauts Joe H. Engle and Alfred M. Worden, recently returned from a geology survey in Iceland, told NASA Hq. press conference. Three of the four missions would involve rendezvous with another spacecraft in earth orbit. Astronauts also said that they and their colleagues had even more confidence in the Apollo program now than they had before the Jan. 27 fire. (B Sun, 7/19/67; W Post, 7/19/67)
Trained monkeys completed a two-month simulated space flight which indicated that astronauts could return their spacecraft to earth even after a near-fatal dose of solar radiation. Sixteen rhesus monkeys, trained to operate an instrument panel, were used in a test at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Some of the animals were exposed over a 10-day period to from 500 to 1,000 roentgens of gamma radiation. Three of the monkeys in the high-dose group died but the others survived. This evidence of monkey vitality was of great importance to man because the U.S. target date for moon landings would come at a peak of the sun’s 11-year-cycle for emitting deadly radiation. (C Trib, 9/5/67)
Time magazine considered the question “Why Should Man Go To The Moon?” and concluded: “The moon itself may not be a particularly valuable piece of real estate. But neither is a flight to the moon an end in itself; the moon is no more than a way station on a route that scientists have only begun to map. And there is no doubt that man is going to make the trip some day. . . . “The moon is a challenge that the U.S. has already taken, a milestone that U.S. astronauts are already looking beyond. . . . The real object is for the U.S. to develop the capability of voyaging confidently to the limits of man’s imagination and ingenuity. The value of such voyages will always be unpredictable. But the history of the human race, said famed . Norwegian Explorer Fridtjof Nansen, ‘is a continual struggle from darkness toward light. It is therefore to no purpose to discuss the uses of knowledge; man wants to know, and when he ceases to do so, he is no longer man.’ ” {Time, 2/10/67)
Greatest damage to Apollo I spacecraft in which three astronauts died in Jan. 27 flash lire seemed to have occurred near point where electrical cables from launch pad entered cabin, reported Aviation Week writer George Alexander, who represented news media when NASA authorized one person to visit ksc’s Launch Complex 34. Alexander said the spacecraft “looked like the inside of a furnace . . . the interior . . . is a darkened, dingy compartment. Its walls are covered with a slate-gray deposit of smoke and soot; its floor and couch frame are covered with ashes and debris—most of it indeterminate. . . .” (upi, NYT, 1/30/67; W Post, 1/30/67, Al, A2; W Star, 1/30/67, Al, A3)
“We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation,” President Johnson pledges during tour of Michoud Assembly Facility. On the platform in front row from left are Astronaut Walter Cunningham, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., the President, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Mrs. Webb, Gov. John J. McKeithen, and NASA Associate Administrator for Administration Harold B. Finger. In the back row, behind and to the right of Webb, are Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Industrial Operations, msfc; Dr. George N. Constan, manager of Michoud; H. D. Lowrey, president of Chrysler Corp. Space Division; and J. K. Swearingen, project manager for Ling-Temco-Vougbt Range Systems Division. “In the 9 years since I first introduced in the . . , Senate the Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, we have seen the power of our rocket engines increase 50 times—from 150,000 to 7,500,000 pounds of thrust in the engines that you build here. “Not long ago-we had to stand by and watch other countries accomplish what we could not accomplish. I will never forget the days of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2, and the real concern. . . . “We were the most scientifically advanced nation on the face of the earth but we did not launch man’s first earth satellite. “We were backward because we did not choose to adventure. We did not choose to have vision. We did not choose to look forward. Now let us remember that our future achievements—or our future failures— will depend on how far ahead we choose to look and how far ahead we choose to think. “If we think second, and if we look third, then we are going to wind up not being first. . . we will advance in space to the extent that our people and their representatives are prepared for us to advance and are prepared to pay the cost of that advance. We may not always proceed at the pace we desire. I regret . . . that there have been reductions and there will be more. There have been interruptions, and I hope that we have had all we can take. But I do have faith and confidence in the American people. “We will not surrender our station. We will not abandon our dream. We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation.” (SBD, 12/13/67,218; PD, 12/18/67,1696-7)
Most Soviet reporting of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died was factual. A few members of Soviet and Italian press, however, charged that “haste” had contributed to the accident. Radio Moscow: “We in the Soviet Union are deeply grieved at the news of the tragedy at Cape Kennedy. “The courage of Virgil Grissom, Edward White, and Roger Chaffee had won our esteem and we join in paying homage to their memories. . . .” Trud (Moscow): “The astronauts became the victims of the space race created by the leaders of the United States space program. Recently, the hurry, the haste in space Sights has continued to grow. There were a number of Saws in the ApoHo system.” La Stampa (Turin, Italy): “Technical revisions must be brought about so that the tragedy will not repeat itself . . . perhaps the rigorous time schedule . . . ought to give way to slower and more secure rhythm.” II Popolo (Rome) : The accident offered “questions for reSection, above all an invitation to weigh in proper measure the margin of risk that accompanies all the conquest of man. ... It is ironic that this happened, just when any danger seemed to be less proximate, during a normal exercise on earth.” (AP, NYT, 1/30/67, 2, 3; AP, B Sun, 1/30/67; Trud, 1/29/67, 3, uss-t Trans.)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, speaking at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., criticized the press for uninformed discussion of the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy: “I deplore comment in the press recently regarding the accident. The press has a responsibility not to comment in areas about which it is not informed.” Speaking on the fifth anniversary of his space flight in Friendship 7, Glenn noted that the deaths of three Apollo astronauts were part of the price man must pay in his quest for knowledge: “Man tries something and sometimes he succeeds and sometimes he fails. It is very regrettable. We hate to lose good friends, but we think they went in a good cause.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/21/67,8; AP, WPost, 2/21/67; NYT, 2/22/67,50) During week of Feb. 20: Princeton Univ. announced development of accelerator capable of raising electrically neutral atoms and molecules to energy levels never before obtained in controlled experiments. Utilizing supersonic jets of mixed gases in high-vacuum container, accelerator could generate molecular beams of neutral particles with kinetic energies of 10 or more electron volts. Particles at this energy level were necessary to many common gas-phase chemical reactions. Dr. John B. Fenn, professor who directed NSF-sponsored project, said accelerator would aid studies in meteorology and aerospace technology. (NYT, 2/26/67, 59)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 3 to 3,818 mph (mach 5.18) and 277,000-ft altitude, becoming fourth usaf X-15 pilot to meet 264,000-ft-minimum-altitude requirement for usaf astronaut rating. Purposes of flight: (1) arc boost guidance system evaluation; (2) solar spectrum measurement; (3) micrometeoroid collection; and (4) ultravoilet plume and tip-pod camera evaluation. (X-15 Proj Off; frc X-Press, 10/20/67,1)
Purdue Univ. had approved memorials for alumni Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee, who died in Jan. 27 Apollo spacecraft fire. Memorials included naming two campus buildings for astronauts, providing full four-year scholarships for the two children of each man, and establishing astronauts’ scholarship fund for worthy students. (AP, NYT, 3/3/67)	_
MSC had awarded Bell Aerosystems Co. a nine-month, $5.9-million fixedprice contract to provide three Lunar Landing Training Vehicles (lltv) for astronauts to practice simulated lunar landings. Capable of simulating % gravity environment of the moon, lltv would be towed to about 4,000-ft altitude and released; pilot could damp out % of gravity force on vehicle using jet engines; remaining % gravity would be supported by rocket motors simulating lunar landing conditions, (nasa Release 67-58)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had signed contract to appear in at least eight Wolper Productions’ TV documentaries on great explorations in history, the New York Times reported. Series, beginning in January 1968, would include Henry M. Stanley’s African search for David Livingstone, Captain James Cook’s exploration of the South Pacific, and Roald Amundsen’s expedition to the South Pole. (Gent, NYT, 4/14/67, 67)
NASA’s selection of two foreign-born astronauts [see Aug. 4] was praised by Erwin D. Canham in the Christian Science Monitor: “The Australian, Dr. Philip K. Chapman . . . and the Welshman, Dr. John A. Llewellyn, . . . are both naturalized Americans. They are, one may assume, part of the brain drain which has brought so many able persons to the United States in the last quarter of a century. Nothing like this flow of talent has been seen on such a scale in history before. “The outreach of science also has become profoundly international. It is a deeper bond than we have yet recognized it to be. Someday, perhaps, it will transcend politics. That is the challenge: to bring political institutions into line with the basic unities which are evidenced in men’s constantly changing relationship to the physical universe. . . (Canham, CSM, 8/5/67) Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, told news conference at jpl that several of the pictures indicated there might be frozen liquid on the floor of perpetually shaded craters near the lunar poles. The nature of the “fluidal materials” was open to speculation, he said, but “meandering rills appeared to have been caused by some form of material flowing from a vdlcanic eruption—similar to terrestrial streams found in desert areas on earth.” (nasa Proj Off; AP, W Post, 8/9/67, A3; upi, C Trib, 8/15/67; NYT, 8/15/67, 1)
Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva reached provisional agreements on aiding and returning astronauts who landed in foreign countries and on payment of damages caused by space launches. Agreements would be submitted to full U.N. Committee for approval and then placed before U.N. General Assembly for final action, (dpi, P EB, 7/18/67; upi, W Post, 7/18/67, A3) Program Plans, OMSF Plans and Analysis Directorate, had been appointed Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Administration effective July 17; (2) R/Adm. Roderick 0. Middleton (usn), former Deputy Director of omsf Missions Operations Directorate, had been appointed Apollo Program Manager at ksc, replacing m/g John G. Shinkle (usa, Ret.), who resigned May 18; (3) Stanley de Jongh Osborne, a general partner of Lazard Freres & Co. investment banking firm in New York, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on Government-industry relations and on the impact of space technology on the national economy; and (4) Erskine E.	Harton, Jr., former Assistant Safety Director, had been appointed Acting Safety Director, replacing George D. McCauley who recently retired from Government service, (nasa Ann, 7/20/67; NASA Releases 67-189, 67-190)
Edward H. White II, one of the three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc, was named to receive AlAA’s 1967 Haley Astronautics Award. Selection had been made in early January. AIAA cited White for his historic walk in space and other contributions, undertaken “at great personal risk in the advancement of space flight” during June 3—7, 1965, Gemini IV mission. Award would be presented to his widow. (AP, W Post, 2/8/67, A6; upi, NYT, 2/9/67,9)
usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory Systems Program Office, Los Angeles, Calif., issued a $3.5-million initial increment to an $8.7-million fixed-price contract to Hamilton Standard, Windsor Locks, Conn., for development, procurement, and support of astronaut pressure suit systems for the MOL program, usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization issued a $4-million increment to an $8.1-million definitive contract for engineering services in support of the Agena space vehicle program, (dod Release 912-67)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham toured McDonnell Douglas Test Facility near Sacramento to inspect 3rd stage of the Saturn V booster which would be used to launch them on first manned Apollo mission in 1968. Schirra told newsmen that NASA would not be “pressed by the press” into flying the mission on a specific date. Asked if he believed pressure from the press was in any way responsible for the Jan. 27 fire, Schirra replied: “. . . I found that whenever we . . . get together with the members of the press that you’re right away asking us, ‘Well, now when are yon going to fly?’ That’s almost the first question, and it’s not a very unique question. ... It seems you want that answer that may be hard news, but when we give you that answer then if we don’t make that date, for some reason or another it appears that we’re failing our goal. While the goal is to have a successful flight at a reasonable time rather than an early failure. . . .” (Transcript)
Separate memorial services were held in Houston for Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H. White II. Among those attending were Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Astronaut Alan Shepard; and former Astronaut John Glenn. (Hines, W Star, 1/30/67, 1)
Under reduced gravity conditions on moon, most natural and comfortable gait for an astronaut would be “a lope at about ten feet per second,” advised Amos A. Spady, Jr., LaRC scientist. He and fellow scientist, Donald Hewes, had tested subjects on specially constructed device— simulating effects of astronauts moving in moon’s lower gravity. Simulated lunar gravity had not guaranteed that all motion would be higher, faster, or farther. Scientists had discovered that, at most speeds, lunar stride would be longer—sometimes twice as long—but number of steps per minute would be reduced by as much as half. (Weil, W Post, 10/2/67, B4)
Eight Apollo astronauts flew from New York to Iceland for eight-day expedition to gather geological data from an area believed to be similar to the lunar surface. Fifteen more astronauts were expected to join the expedition June 30. (NYT, 6/30/67,13)
Memorial service for Astronaut Roger B. Chaffee was held in Houston. Among those attending were Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc; and Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. (Bloom, W Post, 1/30/67)
NASA’s Apollo 4 (AS-501), which would be launched by Saturn V in three days, had the power to place astronauts on moon, or telescopes in orbit beyond earth’s atmosphere; American capability for major strides toward the unknown had arrived when interest in these endeavors had reached a new and understandable low, Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., reported in Baltimore Sun. Along with the new era of less than major interest in space had come the high-priority problems of the Southeast Asia war and the urban riots. Aviation Week for Aug. 7 had said “An era ended for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration last week when Congress voted a $234,000,000 cut in the agency’s budget authorization for fiscal 1968.” Many people during recent months had looked toward the achievement of social as well as scientific goals, reappraisement of both being called for by Congress. Because AS-501 would be one of the highest achievements in space, the question was no longer whether man could reach into space, but “. . . . with what urgency it should be done in the light of all the needs on earth.” (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/7/67, 6)
NASA had been concerned about oxygen fire danger prior to Jan. 27 flash fire and had taken steps to curb the danger, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. NASA felt it “had control of the sources of ignition . . . [but] underestimated badly .. . the course such a fire would take. If more thorough testing of flammable materials used in the cockpit had been conducted, the accident might not have happened.” He denied emphatically April 11 suggestion by naa Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy that Astronaut Gus Grissom could have triggered the fire by kicking loose a wire, and said he generally agreed with the Apollo 204 Review Board’s criticisms of deficiencies in project operations, conceding: “We were wrong in the standards we applied to the selection of materials for the spacecraft.” Efforts were currently being directed toward eliminating flammable cockpit materials such as nylon and replacing them with glass fiber cloth and Teflon plastic. Although a study was also under way to assess the relative merits of pure oxygen and two-gas life-support systems, Dr. Mueller doubted that present system would be abandoned. In answer to specific questions concerning escape and rescue, Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, testified that the astronauts had died from asphyxia before the spacecraft hatch was opened and that their bums alone would not have caused death. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips told the Committee that his concern “about the load of work on naa” had prompted an inspection by a NASA team of naa’s Downey, Calif., plant. He had reported to naa President J. Leland Atwood Dec. 19,1965, “some of things that if done differently would contribute to the progress of the program,” and on April 22, 1966, noted that progress was satisfactory: naa was “completely responsive to the programs we described ... and a very aggressive effort___was applied to these problems.” He declined to discuss specifics as requested by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) but indicated that NASA would consider releasing his report to the subcommittee [see April 18]. (Wilford, NYT, 4/13/67, 52; Reistrup, W Post, 4/13/67, A2)
President Johnson presented Harmon International Aviation Trophies for 1967 to Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (Capt., usn), and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (l/c, usaf), and Alvin S. White, former naa test pilot. Lovell and Aldrin were cited for successful Gemini XII mission
usaf would not use pure oxygen atmosphere on its manned space flights, partly because of the fire hazard, announced L/Col. John W. Ord, Director of Crew Test Evaluation at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine. Ord said Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program would use mixture of oxygen and helium because it was lightweight and conducted heat away from the spacecraft. (Lockett, W Post, 2/7/67) Dr. Hubertus Strughold, chief scientist at sam, recommended that astronauts preparing for long-duration interplanetary space flights undergo “prophylactic surgery” to prevent appendicitis or gall bladder attacks and prophylactic dental work to guard against abscessed teeth. Dr. Alfred C. Koestler, head of Holloman afb’s Altered Atmosphere Pressure Laboratory, reported that 18 chimpanzees had survived rapid decompression to the near vacuum of 150,000 ft for 3l/> min without any noticeable residual effects following four-hour recovery period. Tests offered hope that an astronaut outside his spacecraft could be rescued if his spacesuit were to spring a leak. Bends, the painful decompression sickness that cripples deep-sea divers, would imperil astronauts leaving a spacecraft with “mixed-gas” atmosphere to work in space, L/Col. Robert C. Mclver suggested. His conclusion was based on series of experiments in which 74 healthy men 324-801 0—69---4 underwent a total of 388 exposures to decompression; one fourth developed symptoms of bends, (usaf Proj Off; afsc Release 274.66; W Star, 2/8/67, A8; W Post, 2/10/67, A4; WSJ. 2/15/67, 1; upi, NYT, 2/24/67, 53)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter would never be able to fly in space again because of an arm injury suffered in 1964 motorcycle accident, the Washington Evening Star reported. Surgery performed six months ago had failed to restore full mobility of the arm. (AP, W Star, 4/17/67, A6)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb issued statement based on third interim report by Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., on work of Apollo 204 Review Board. Webb observed: (1) “The risk of fire that could not be controlled or from which escape could not be made was considerably greater than was recognized when the procedures for the conduct of the test were established. Our experience with pure oxygen atmosphere included not only the successful Mercury and Gemini flights but a number of instances where a clearly positive source of ignition did not result in a fire. . . .” (2) Apollo spacecraft had been equipped with such items as Velcro adhesive pads to hold frequently used equipment and nylon netting to catch dropped objects. “While most of these [items] were constructed of low-combustion-potential material, they were not arranged as to provide barriers to the spread of a fire. Tests conducted . . . since the accident have shown that an oxygen fire in the capsule will spread along the surface of Velcro and along the edges of nylon netting much faster than through the material itself. (3) Soldered joints in piping carrying both oxygen and fluids were melted away, with resultant leakage contributing to the spread of the fire. . . .” (4) Capsule burst in such a way that flames traveled over and around astronauts’ couches toward rupture. “Under these conditions, and with just a few seconds of time available, the astronauts could not reach the hatch and open it. (5) This fire indicates that a number of items related to the design and performance of the environmental control unit will require the most careful examination and may require redesign. . . .” Webb announced that Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences would hold open hearing on Review Board’s preliminary findings Feb. 27 and that House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight would conduct full investigation of accident after completion of Board’s inquiry, expected by late March. Dr. Seamans said in his report that an “electrical malfunction” was regarded as “most likely source of ignition” of the fire but the “possibility exists that no single source will ever be pinpointed.” Board was still considering chemical reactions in onboard materials, spontaneous combustion of certain materials, and possible electrical phenomena. Evidence indicated fire had had three distinct phases: originating in left side of spacecraft, it had burned several seconds unnoticed, then spread becoming more intense and causing cabin pressure to rise rapidly as atmosphere became heated. Fifteen seconds after crew first reported fire, cabin ruptured. During second phase, gases and flames flowed past astronauts’ couches and through hole moving from left to right. With cabin’s oxygen quickly reduced by rush of flames and gas outside, fire continued as localized flame, smoking heavily, in third phase. Dr. Seamans said Board noted: “The experience in flight and in tests prior to the accident had suggested that the probability of a spacecraft fire was low. Continued alertness to the possibility of fire had become dulled by previous ground experience and six years of successful manned missions. . . . Potential ignition sources inside the spacecraft had been treated so as to be considered safe; neither the crews nor the test and development personnel felt the risk of spacecraft fire to be high. . . .” Dr. Seamans emphasized that Board did not recommend changing pure oxygen system or planned cabin pressure for space flight, but did urge that “trade-offs between one- and two-gas atmospheres be re-evaluated . . . [and] pressurized oxygen no longer be used in prelaunch operations.” It also recommended: (1) combustible materials be replaced where possible with nonflammable materials; (2) nonmetallic materials be arranged to maintain fire breaks; (3) systems for oxygen and liquid combustibles be made fire resistant; (4) full flammabmty tests be conducted with mockup of new configuration; (5) more rapidly and easily operated hatch be installed; and (6) on-the-pad emergency procedures be revised to recognize possibility of cabin fire. (NASA Release
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CLXXXVIII entered orbit with 276-km (171-mi) apogee, 200-km (124-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. At 4:20 am, edt, spacecraft was automatically docked with Cosmos CLXXXVI (launched Oct. 27). Tass later announced: “. . . both satellites, equipped with special approach and docking units, carried out a number of complicated maneuvers in space, automatically finding each other, drawing closer, berthing and docking rigidly.” It was history’s first automatic docking in space and was filmed by TV cameras onboard both satellites. U.S. had successfully accomplished first manned docking March 16, 1966, with Gemini VII and Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (gatv) ; in this docking experiment, astronauts controlled the maneuver. After automatic docking, the two satellites continued in orbit with altitude ranging from 124-171 mi. At 7:50 am, edt, after completing 2% orbits, spacecraft were undocked on command from the ground, and placed into different orbits by restarting rocket engines. Cosmos CLXXXVI, larger of the two spacecraft, softlanded Oct. 31 after 65 orbits. Cosmos CLXXXVIII reentered Nov. 2. Cosmos CLXXXIX was launched into orbit with 600-km (373-mi) apogee, 535-km (332-mi) perigee, 95.7-min period, and 74° inclination. (Shub, W Post, 10/31/67, 1; Kamm, NYT, 10/31/67, 1; AP, W Star, 10/31/67, A3; Winters, B Sun, 11/1/67; gsfc SSR, 11/15/67)
Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra, Australia— newest member of NASA’s 16-station network to support manned Apollo missions—was dedicated in ceremonies attended by Australian Prime Minister Henry E. Holt, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey cabled congratulations to Prime Minister Holt: “The establishment of this tracking station is another link in the long chain of cooperative efforts in space between . . . Australia and the United States. “In its support of the Apollo program, this new station will play a vital role in communications with our astronauts in preparation for their landing on the Moon and return to Earth. . . .” (nasa Release 67-65)
Astronaut-Aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) was detached from NASA at usn’s request for assignment in Navy’s Deep Submergence Systems Project (dssp) . One of the Nation’s seven original astronauts, Carpenter became the second American to orbit the earth when he piloted Aurora 7 spacecraft on three-orbit mission May 24, 1962. Active in USN’s Man-in-the-Sea program since 1965, he set a world record in underwater work during Aug. 28-Oct. 10, 1965, Sealab II experiment when he lived 205 ft down in the Pacific for 30 consecutive days. Under dssp he was tentatively assigned as an aquanaut in Sealab III, a 60-day experiment 600 ft down in the Pacific scheduled to take place in 1968. As usn’s senior aquanaut, Carpenter’s duties would include responsibility for Sealab III ocean floor operations, experiments, and equipment and for coordination of aquanaut team training. NASA Administrator James E. Webb commented on Carpenter’s departure. “. . . we are grateful to him and the United States Navy for his services over the past eight years. During the past two years, he has demonstrated that many of the technologies, techniques, and psychophysiological factors related to space flight have direct applications to the Man-in-the-Sea program. Thus, Cdr. Carpenter becomes the first astronaut to return to his parent service in order to apply the skills, knowledge, and experience acquired during his assignment to NASA. ...” (nasa Release 67—208)
Funeral services were held for Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc. All three men were buried with full military honors: Virgil I. Grissom (L/Col., usaf) and Roger Chaffee (LCdr., usn) at Arlington National Cemetery, and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) at West Point. President Johnson and hundreds of dignitaries attended services at Arlington; Mrs. Johnson and Vice President Humphrey were among the attendees at West Point. (Hines, W Star, 1/31/67 Al, A6; Secrest, W Post, 2/1/67, Bl; Casey, W Post, 2/1/67, Al, A4)
Rep. Dante B. Fascell (D-Fla.) introduced in the House a bill (H.R. 7798) to strike commemorative medals in honor of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee who died in the Jan. 27 Apollo flash fire. (CR, 3/23/67, H3301)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel of the Harvard College Observatory said in a letter to Time that he planned to propose naming features of moon’s far side for the three American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut who lost their lives in accidents connected with space research. Features were to be named at 1970 meeting of International Astronomical Union. (Time, 9/29/67,11)
Initial reaction by the press to Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died: Business Week: “After 16 space flights, in which 19 astronauts returned from their missions safely, many had forgotten the inescapable peril of exploration. No previous frontier has ever been crossed without the loss of life; it was not to be expected that space—the most perilous frontier of them all—could be conquered without sacrifice. None of this lessens the grief that every man in NASA feels for fallen comrades. But it is the nature of test pilots ... to accept disaster not as defeat but as a call for intensified effort and dedication.” (Bus Wk, 2/4/67) Washington Evening Star: “Now that the initial shock ... is beginning to wear off, the second guessers are . . . wondering whether we should be going to the moon at all. . . . From any rational point of view, the only thing to do is to carry on. The Apollo program necessarily will mark time until the true cause of the spacecraft disaster is located and corrected. It is conceivable that the delay could cause the Dec. 31, 1969, deadline to be missed. It is entirely possible that the Russians may get to the moon ahead of us. But so what? The world will not end nor the United States vanish, if the Russians beat us to the moon. ... It would be senseless to stop now. Fortunately, it probably would also be impossible.” (Hines, WStar, 2/2/67) Editor & Publisher:	“The recent disaster at Cape Kennedy indicates we are no less reluctant to face up to disaster than anyone else. Not only were our reporters not prepared for it-—none of them were there for the simulated flight test—but neither were our space officials . . . [because] the full import of the tragedy was fed out piecemeal. . . . The lessons for NASA officials and for newsmen are obvious. Space travel is fraught with dangers in every test, every maneuver, every piece of equipment, but we became complacent about them because of our successes. NASA’s record of dealing with the press up to now has been pretty good and if it hasn’t already developed a ‘disaster plan’ for such accidents it soon will. News media have learned that nothing in the space program should be considered ‘routine’ and that front row seat should never be left unoccupied at any time.” (Editor & Publisher, 2/11/67) Some press reaction to the accident later became increasingly critical of NASA: Washington Evening Star: “The implication of the NASA story was that no fire extinguishing apparatus or quick escape mechanism— neither of which was present on the Apollo 1—could have saved the men. The implication of the truth is that if the spacecraft had been equipped with a means of blowing open the hatch, Grissom, White and Chaffee might have had a chance. NASA’s motive in attempting to distort the truth may have been to protect the families of the astronauts from undue mental anguish. But it also served the function of protecting NASA by heading off criticism of the agency ... by deliberately misleading the press, Congress and the public.” (W Star, 2/9/67) New York Times: “The most basic issue ... is not, as NASA has tended to emphasize, the source of the spark that started the fire. It is rather the question of why so much was permitted to hinge on the assumption that there would be no fire. . . . “The answer is only secondarily, as a NASA official has suggested, that ‘alertness . . . had become dulled’ by previous successes. . . . More fundamental was the willingness to gamble for the sake of winning the race to the moon.” (NYT, 2/28/67,34)
In its final 1967 session U.N. General Assembly unanimously endorsed new space rescue treaty, and urged signature by all countries. Primary provisions: (1) immediate notification when astronauts landed in other countries; (2) assistance to these astronauts, including rescue efforts on the high seas; (3) safe and prompt return of the astronauts; and (4)	notification and return of objects launched into outer space. Treaty would be open to all nations and would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. President Johnson, praising the agreement, said: “I hope that this agreement will help to ensure that nations will assist astronauts in the event of accidents or emergency. The agreement would carry forward the purpose of this administration to promote international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.” (Teltsch, NYT, 12/17/67, 1; Esta-brook, W Post, 12/20/67, A20; upi, NYT, 12/21/67, 29; SBD, 12/21/67,263; PD, 1/1/68,1763)
U.S.S.R.’s next manned space flight would use a Soyuz spacecraft similar to the one which crashed April 24, according to Astronauts Michael Collins and David Scott who had discussed future space plans with Soviet cosmonauts at the Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 26-31]. In upi interview Collins and Scott said they were “amazed by the similarities between the two [U.S. and U.S.S.R. space] programs.” Collins said that Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Konstantin Feoktistov indicated “that there would be several earth orbital flights and then ... a circumlunar flight” (upi, W Post, 6/4/67, A9)
To astronauts, Maj. Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr. (usaf), and Capt. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), had won the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy, the Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced in New York. Trophies also would go to Miss Sheila Scott of Britain, who had established speed records during a 28,633-mi solo flight around the world in a single-engine plane, and to Alvin S. White. White, now manager of supersonic flight research and development for Trans World Airlines, was named the outstanding airplane pilot for test flights of the XB-70 at mach 3 as chief test pilot for North American Aviation Company. The awards are made annually for exceptional feats of individual piloting skill. (NYT, 9/10/67)
37-yr-old Astronaut Edward G. Givens, Jr. (Maj., usaf), was killed near Houston when the car he was driving missed a curve and crashed into an embankment. Two other usaf officers with him were injured, one critically. Givens was the first U.S. astronaut to die while off duty. Six others had died in connection with the space program: three in air crashes and three in the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. He was selected to join the NASA astronaut team April 4, 1966. (msc Roundup, 6/9/67, 1; upi, NYT, 6/7/67, 30; upi, W Post, 6/1/61, A7)
Two-to-six percent weight loss in astronauts returning from space flights might reflect natural readjustment of body water content, not simple dehydration, Paul Webb of Webb Associates reported in Science. He based his theory on similar losses which had occurred during experiments in simulated weightlessness; blood normally pooled in the extremities returned to circulation, increasing central blood volume and causing excretion of water not replaced during space flights. Webb said it was not yet clear whether reduced water content during weightlessness has harmful effects. (Webb, Science, 2/3/67,558-9)
Jonathan Spivak in Wall Street Journal commented on congressional cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Plans to launch unmanned satellites to Mars or Venus in 1971 and 1973 and conduct extended exploration of the moon by astronauts face probable abandonment because of a lack of funds. There will also be sharp curtailment of proposals for long-duration manned flights in orbit about the earth to enhance the nation’s space technology and exploit practical and scientific applications of space. Thus, say space officials, the present outlook is that only a limited national space program will continue in the 1970s after the lunar landing.” (Spivak, WSJ, 10/11/67, 24)
Texas’ role in U.S. space program was summarized by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller for the Texas State Society. “Many thousands of Texans working for dozens of Texas firms are creating through their . . . [r&d] effort the new technology required for space exploration. One measure of Texas contributions may be made in terms of the $771,000,000 of work that . . . [its] firms have performed on NASA’s programs. In addition, Texas colleges and universities are not only conducting high level research for NASA, but are training future space scientists and engineers under nasa grants.” He noted also that Texas was birthplace of seven astronauts and five astronaut wives and “home town” of all 56 astronauts, based at msc. (Text)
Despite the high cost and dangers in exploring space, tragically dramatized by the deaths of three U.S. astronauts and a Russian cosmonaut in recent months, Americans overwhelmingly approve of the U.S. effort to land men on the moon,” the National Observer reported. Survey in 12 metropolitan areas showed that 77% of people questioned supported the lunar landing program; 17% opposed it; and 6% were undecided. There was less enthusiasm, however, for manned planetary exploration programs: 57% favored manned planetary expeditions; 31% opposed them; and 12% were undecided. (Nad Obs, 5/8/67)
NASA’s previous approach to preventing spacecraft fires by “preventing their ignition” had been inadequate, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified at open hearing held by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. Also present were NASA Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations. NASA’s future approach would seek to: (1) minimize possibility of ignition, recognizing “that this possibility will always exist”; (2) limit chance of fire’s propagating once it has started; and (3) minimize consequences of fire to crew. Dr. Mueller outlined an extensive program of testing, redesign, and procedural changes, which included escape hatch for Apollo spacecraft that could be opened in two seconds; search for new, less flammable materials for cabin interior and spacesuits; and revised emergency procedures. All improvements and changes would be incorporated into an advanced version—Block II—of Apollo spacecraft. No more Block I spacecraft like Apollo 204 would be used for manned space flights. Dr. Mueller said no estimate of fire’s eventual cost in time or money would be made until completion of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, but he indicated that it would be at least 8 to 10 months before next manned Apollo flight. Dr. Mueller testified that launch rehearsal during which fire had occurred had not been classified as “hazardous” because seven years of experience with Mercury and Gemini programs had never indicated such tests were particularly dangerous. Even if the test had been categorized as hazardous., he said, it would have still taken 90 sec for crew to open the double hatch and complete their egress. Crew died within 20 sec after detection of fire. Webb added that the handle for equalizing pressure, necessary precondition to opening hatch, had not been actuated. Dr. Berry said carbon monoxide had asphyxiated astronauts. He confirmed that bodies had had “some thermal bums of second and third degree” but “not of sufficient magnitude to cause death.” Dr. Berry warned that “we are never going to be able to completely eliminate the risk of fire as long as oxygen is available.” Dr. Mueller said “an atmosphere which will support life will also support combustion. Therefore the first answer . . . must be fire prevention in terms of strict control of both potential ignition sources and combustible materials.” During the questioning session, Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) inquired about a 1965 report by Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel Phillips (usaf). Dr. Mueller said that he did “not recall such a report,” and when asked to supply a copy, Webb said NASA would try and identify the specific report and would make it available to the Comptroller General “under any request that the Committee . .. would make to him.” (Testimony; Transcript, 3-4, 24, 41-2, 61, 70, Apollo Accident, Part 2, 65-66, 75, 86, 97, 108, 115, 125 ff., and 130 ff.)
110 scientists from U.S. and six other countries were selected by NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell—upon recommendation of Space Science Steering Committee—to conduct experiments with first lunar samples returned by U.S. Apollo astronauts. Principal U.S. investigators represented 21 universities, two industrial firms, three private institutions, and 10 Government laboratories. Nine scientific institutions were represented in U.K.; three in West Germany; and one each in Canada, Japan, Finland, and Switzerland. Most investigations would be conducted in scientists’ own laboratories, but time-critical experiments would be carried out in msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory during quarantine period—anticipated to last 30 days. Plans called for a total of 122 experiments on approximately 50 lbs of lunar material to study composition of lunar surface and search for evidence of its origin. Four major investigative areas were: (1) mineralogy and petrology; (2) chemical and isotope analysis; (3) physical properties; and (4) biochemical and organic analysis, (nasa Release 67-55)
Flash fire swept through oxygen-filled pressure chamber at Brooks APB, Tex., killing Airman 2/C William F. Bartley, Jr., and Airman 3/C Richard G. Harmon in accident similar to the one Jan. 27 which killed three Apollo astronauts at ksc. Fire struck at 9:45 a.m. Est, about 12 min. after airmen had entered the chamber to take blood samples from rabbits under observation to determine effects of pure oxygen on the blood. Cabin pressure was brought down to ground level within 13 sec after fire had ignited, but both men died from burns within several hours. Col. James B. Nuttall, commander of USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, said there were no plans to change research methods because of accident. “As you have seen, it is not safe,” but he said one-gas systems were less complicated and more reliable than two-gas systems. (AP, W Star, 2/1/67, A3; O’Toole, W Post, 2/1/67, 1)
Apollo spacecraft would carry two fire extinguishers, designed and built for NASA by Southwest Research Institute, the New York Times reported. Foam from new extinguishers would provide fire protection for astronauts. Extinguishers would weigh about eight pounds, measure nine inches long with five-inch diameter, and would have removable safety pin and pistol-type grip with thumb button for release of foam. (NYT, 10/15/67,29)
Alumni Assn, of Western High School, Washington, D.C., would honor alumnus Edward H. White II, one of three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 accident, with a memorial, which would include furnishings, decorations, and possibly a space exhibit for school’s guidance library and counseling rooms. (W Star, 5/7/67, Bl)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, repeated his request that Congress reopen its investigation of NASA [see June 12]: “The Apollo hearings should be reconvened—not for the purpose of continuing further a technical discussion of possible technical causes for the Apollo fire—but to undertake a serious and far-ranging management review of the sort that would force NASA to take stock and develop sound management practices for the protection of the public’s investment in the space program. This is not to mention the safety of our astronauts. . . .” (CR, 7/17/67, H8750)
Plumbing leaks in the first model of LEM had delayed flight testing at Cape Kennedy. Portions of the plumbing system had been sent back to the plant of the main contractor, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., Bethpage, N.Y. The plumbing leaks had virtually eliminated any chance of launching this year the first model of the craft that would land American astronauts on the moon. (AP, W Post, 9/26/67, A9)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., submitted second interim report to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on Apollo 204 Review Board investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo I astronauts died. Board had established 21 panels to conduct inquiry, and Dr. Seamans said he was satisfied that the procedures they were following were “well worked out. When this work is completed, it will give us as clear a view as can be obtained from the evidence.” Source of ignition had not yet been determined, but physical evidence thus far examined indicated fire had had considerable variation and density and might have had more than one phase. “One hypothesis, supported by the cabin pressure history, assumes a small, low-grade fire whose heat was at first largely absorbed by the spacecraft structure and that was burning at the time of the first crew report; that fire may have continued for as long as ten seconds. A more intense fire may have then developed, causing the rapid increase in cabin pressure. This fire was probably then extinguished by the depletion of oxygen.” Additional information on accident had been identified and was being analyzed. It was now clear that all three spacesuits had been burned through, Astronaut Grissom’s receiving the most exposure and Astronaut Chaffee’s, the least. Dr. Seamans said disassembly of spacecraft was proceeding with great care, and spacecraft was expected to be removed to industrial area at ksc by Feb. 17. He concluded: “It is important to note that no single spacecraft element is touched or removed for analysis without full Board approval and evaluation of its possible effect on any of the other on-going studies or analyses.” (nasa Release 67-28)
Astronaut Frank Borman told Cleveland Engineering Society that he and other astronauts hoped U.S. would immediately revitalize the Apollo program: “We’d like to see the crews regrouped and the program under way as soon as possible.” (AP, W Post, 4/6/67, G2)
Astronauts Donald K. Slayton, Alan B. Shepard, Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Frank Borman, and James A. McDivitt, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, expressed confidence in NASA’s management of U.S. space program. They noted that there had been only one mishap in the program, compared with 16 successful manned flights under the same management. Since fire had been foreseen as a significant danger in orbit but not on the launch pad before fueling of the launch vehicle, everyone had been “lulled into a sense of false security . . . [and] grossly underestimated the fire potential of the spacecraft,” they said. Schirra explained confidence astronauts felt prior to the fire Jan. 27: “The back-up crew [of which Schirra was commander] had left the Cape with the feeling that we had a good spacecraft behind us. ... I was not at all prepared for the news I received when I arrived at Houston.” (Hines, W Star, 4/18/67, 1)
President Johnson appointed Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., Special Consultant to the President for Physical Fitness, to replace Stan Musial who resigned in January. Lovell would assume the new position in addition to his regular duties as an astronaut. (PD, 6/12/67, 833—4*)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.) introduced to the House H.R. 10674, a bill to rename the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore in honor of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom who died in Jan. 27 Apollo accident, (nasa lar VI/65)
NASA announced that primary mission objectives of Biosatellite II (launched Sept. 7) had been accomplished. Biological experiments had been conducted to investigate synergistic and antagonistic effects of weightlessness and controlled gamma radiation aboard attitude-controlled spacecraft. Spacecraft recovery—essential to success—had been completed as planned. Environmental control of capsule and experiment packages had kept organisms alive while radiation source was exposed for flight duration. Dr. Rudolph H. T. M^ttoni, principal investigator for bacteria experiment, said bacteria had increased 20 to 30% faster in weightless condition. He concluded “cellular turnover may be higher in man” during weightlessness and could be harmful to astronauts during long-duration space flights. He suggested that if further research proved growth of human cells to be faster in weightless state, future spacecraft might have to be equipped with some form of artificial gravity or astronauts might have to carry drugs to prevent too-rapid turnover of their body cells. Since the 45-hr experiment with bacteria equaled many years of human life, this would not be significant on flights of a few weeks or even a few months. The pepper plant experiment showed abnormal growth, indicating that plant leaves also depend on gravity. Other experiments did not show significant change and were still being analyzed, (nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 10/15/67,46)
Twenty-one U.S. astronauts began a week of training at usaf’s Tropical Survival School in Panama. Their first meeil was iguana thermidor and baked armadillo. (W News, 6/13/67; AP, C Trib, 6/14/67)
International space events were highlighted by ratification on Oct. 10, 1967, of space law treaty, approved by U.N. on Dec. 19,1966, and endorsement on Dec. 19, 1967, of a new treaty providing for rescue of astronauts. Draft of space rescue treaty, negotiated by the Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, would become effective following ratification by five nations, including U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. NASA’s international program included orbiting of U.K.’s Ariel III and ESRo’s Esro II and assistance with orbiting of Italy’s San Marco II—first satellite to be launched from a platform at sea. Some 124 scientists from 26 countries participated in research at NASA centers; scientific sounding rockets were launched from six sites in cooperation with Argentina, Brazil, West Germany, India, Japan, and Norway; and by the end of 1967, 84 countries had cooperated with U.S. in space research activities. Kenya, Korea, Peru, and Tanzania joined the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat), bringing total membership to 60. Australia successfully launched her first satellite, Wresat 1. (nasa Re' lease 67—301; EH; ComSatCorp pio; NASA International Programs)
m/g Holger Nelson Toftoy (usa, Ret.), a leading Army ordnance expert who recommended that former German V-2 development team under the leadership of Dr. Wemher von Braun be brought to U.S. at end of World War II, died at Walter Reed Army Medical Center after a long illness. General Toftoy became commander of White Sands Proving Grounds immediately following World War II. In 1952 he became Director of the Ordnance Missiles Laboratory at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., and in 1958, when Redstone was reorganized as the Army Ordnance Missile Command, he was named Deputy Commander under m/g John B. Medaris. General Toftoy subsequently became commander of Aberdeen (Md.) Proving Ground until his retirement in 1960. {vpi, NYT, 4/20/67) Landing sequence began when Surveyor III shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar (later ejected), main retromotor burned and slowed spacecraft to about 250 mph. Vernier engines, which were to have slowed spacecraft to about 3 mph, failed to cut off at 14 ft above lunar surface as planned, and the 620-lb spacecraft made three separate landings—covering distance of 33 ft—before engines shut off 37 sec after initial touchdown. First pictures transmitted were unclear because of sun’s brightness, but later photos were excellent. They revealed that spacecraft was resting in a depression or small crater with 5° slope—which was expected to hinder photography of lunar horizon—and showed impressions made by footpads during multiple landing. Shortly after touchdown a telemetry malfunction falsely indicated major drain on power system, but photos confirmed that spacecraft’s batteries were intact and undamaged. In addition to photographic equipment, including two additional mirrors to expand camera’s field of view, spacecraft also carried a shovel-like surface sampler which would scoop soil, move debris, and strike lunar rock with an expandable arm operated by radio signals from earth. On April 21—22 sampler began bearing strength tests and excavation of trenches up to six inches deep. On April 23-24, cooled by two-hour lunar eclipse, Surveyor III took 118 excellent color photos of Venus, a star duster, and earth as it passed between the moon and the sun. On basis of preliminary digging operations and photos, project scientists concluded that lunar soil had consistency similar to wet sand and a bearing strength of about six pounds per square inch—firm enough to support Apollo spacecraft. Cal Tech professor and advisor to JPL on soil mechanics Dr. Ronald F. Scott explained: “The surface is like ordinary soil... a lot like fine grained sod or damp beach sand, and it behaves in perhaps a disappointingly ordinary way. The area presents no hazardous conditions and looks good for a landing site. An astronaut walking across the surface would not need snowshoes.” On May 3 communications with spacecraft were halted temporarily to conserve battery strength throughout two-week lunar night. Performance of Surveyor III, with equipment identical to Surveyor I	and Surveyor II except for soil sampler and two additional mirrors, was near flawless, and expected lifetime was indefinite. Surveyor I was launched May 30, 1966, successfully softlanded on moon June 2, 1966, in Ocean of Storms, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor II	was successfully launched Sept. 20, 1966, but failed to softland because of an ignition failure, (nasa Proj. Off; NASA Release 67-85; upi, W Star, 4/23/67, A10; O’Toole, W Post, 4/22/67, A4; 4/23/67, Al)
msfc used aedc facilities to investigate preparation of spent rocket stage for human occupancy in space by dumping. 840 gal of super-cold liquid nitroeen through “dead” or inactive J-2 rocket engine. Simulating 100,000-ft altitude, dumping experiment would pave way for astronauts to move inside orbiting stage and use tanks as living quarters for space station, (msfc Release 67-203)
Gerald J. Mossinghoff, Director of the Office of Legislative Planning at U.S. Patent Office, was named director of Congressional Liaison Div. in NASA’s Office of Legislative Affairs, (nasa Release 67—297) Dr. Hilliard V. Paige, General Electric Co. Vice President and general manager of Missile and Space Div., compared role of the space program in stimulating technological development to that of World Wars I and II. World War I, he said, marked real beginning of American'aviation activities. World War II led to current U.S. leadership in production of jet aircraft. Space program was current counterpart of this stimulus, he noted, but program was declining because of crippling budget and program cuts. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) described his experiences living in Sealab II [see Aug. 28, 1965] and plans for a larger Sealab III in 1968. In addition to Sealab experiment, series of special vehicles would be tested, he said: Deep Submergence Rescue Vehicle (DSRV—1) to rescue men from disabled submarines resting on ocean floor; Deep Submergence Search Vehicles (dssv) to conduct research on ocean floor, collecting and surfacing small objects; Nuclear Powered Deep Submergence Research and Ocean Engineering Vehicle (NR—1) which would run along ocean floor on wheels; and Large Object Salvage System (loss) to develop a variety of tools, from surface craft with strong lifting ability to equipment enabling swimmers to operate effectively in deep water. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/6/67, 35; 12/24/67, E3; NY Academy of Sciences pio)
President Lyndon B. Johnson presents the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy to two NASA astronauts and a veteran test pilot in the White House Rose Garden. From the left are. North .American Aviation XB^70 test pilot Alvin S. White, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and the President. {Nov, 11—15, 1966) during which Aldrin spent 5 hrs 28 min outside spacecraft. White was cited for mach 3 XB-70 flights, British aviatrix Sheila Scott, scheduled to receive award for her record-setting solo flight around the world in a single engine aircraft, was unable to attend ceremony. {PD, 10/16/67, 1436-7; AP, NYT, 10/14/67, 7) *	Nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 37-mi (59-km) altitude, fourth in nots series to measure incident polar UV irradiance in direct support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee had died of “asphyxiation due to smoke inhalation” but cause of Jan. 27 flash fire was still unknown, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., reported in memorandum to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr. Seamans had met Feb. 2 with Apollo 204 Review Board at Ksc. “. . . clear identification of the source of ignition or of its possible source will depend upon detailed step-by-step examination of the entire spacecraft and its relative test support equipment.” Dr. Seamans said duplicate Apollo spacecraft had been flown to ksc from North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant to permit a “parallel step-by-step disassembly process.” In addition, Board was “defining a series of investigative tasks . . . and assigning these to teams for execution. . . .” Report confirmed that spacecraft had been operating on external power when fire occurred, but there was no evidence “up to this time that the source of power whether simulated internal or external was related to the accident.” Dr. Seamans emphasized that his statement was preliminary. nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller announced that nasa would proceed with launching of three unmanned Apollo flights scheduled for 1967: AS-206, AS-501, and AS-502. Manned Apollo missions were postponed indefinitely pending the outcome of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, (nasa Releases 67-21,67-22)
Apollo 204 Review Board, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Key Board members summarized the Board’s findings and recommendations. Astronaut Frank Borman, asked if he believed U.S. decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been influenced by a desire to achieve first manned lunar landing, replied: “. . . never since I have been associated with NASA have I ever experienced any decision where a known detriment to crew safety was sacrificed to any operational requirement. And although I am willing to accept risk ... I am not willing personally to accept undue risk and I would not participate in any decision which I thought was expediting a program in an unsafe manner. And in the final analysis the crew is the Review Board because if we do not like the way the spacecraft is configured, we don’t have to get in.” Borman said if on Jan. 27 he had had the information accumulated by the Board, he would not have entered the Apollo spacecraft because: (1) the test had not been classified as hazardous; (2) the spacecraft contained too many combustibles; (3) the wire that provided the ignition source was vulnerable. Borman said he would be “willing and eager” to enter a 100% oxygen Apollo spacecraft which incorporated Board’s recommended improvements. (Testimony; Transcript, 181, 209—10, 258)
Astronaut Frank Borman objected to making anyone a scapegoat for Jan. 27 Apollo flash fire and said everyone connected with the program must be blamed. Interviewed on ABC television network with Chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Subcommittee on NASA Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Borman said he had “never . . . seen safety sacrificed for anything” in U.S. space program. Both men suggested that the greatest safety problem was tendency toward complacency about dangers inherent in tests. (W Star, 4/17/67, A2)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial on Dec. 8 death of Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr., (usaf) : “[His death] deprives the Nation of another highly trained scientist who had been selected for future service in space. . . . “With the toll of astronauts now at nine victims, it is significant that not one has been lost in space itself. ... Our astronauts are not only men who have extensive educational qualifications but who have equally extensive experience as test pilots and similar extremely hazardous activities. . - “They may put their lives on the line willingly, but the Nation should strive to safeguard them as much in their non-space activities as ... in space.” (PInq, 12/11/67,10)
Most probable cause of Jan. 27 flash fire in which Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee died was a sparking short circuit in worn, defective, or poorly insulated wire, Apollo 204 Review Board concluded in its final report. Copies of report were distributed simultaneously to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, congressional committees, and the press. Board was unable to pinpoint exact ignition source, but identified conditions which led to the disaster: (1) a sealed cabin, pressurized with an oxygen atmosphere; (2) an extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin; (3) vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power; (4) inadequate provisions for the crew to escape; and (5) inadequate provisions for rescue or medical assistance. Having identified these conditions, the Board addressed itself to the question of “how these conditions came to exist. Careful consideration of this question . . . leads ... to the conclusion that in its devotion to the many difficult problems of space travel, the Apollo team failed to give adequate attention to certain mundane but equally vital questions of crew safety. “The board’s investigation revealed many deficiencies in design and engineering, manufacture and quality control. When these deficiencies are corrected the over-all reliability of the Apollo program will be increased greatly.” Board offered a total of 21 recommendations, including: (1) an “indepth” review of the entire Apollo life-support system; (2) an investigation of effective ways to control and extinguish spacecraft fires; (3) severe restriction and control of amount and location of combustible materials inside spacecraft; (4) reduction of time required for crew to egress and simplification of escape operations; (5) continuous monitoring of safety of all test operations to assure adequacy of emergency protections; (6) improved ground communications system; (7) continued studies of two-gas cabin atmosphere; and (8) full-scale mockup tests to establish fire safety of reconfigured command module. Board emphasized that its report was not intended as a criticism of NASA’s entire manned program: “The board is very concerned that its description of the defects in the Apollo program . . .will be interpreted as an indictment of the entire manned space flight program and a castigation of the many people associated with the program. Nothing is further from the board’s mind.” (Text; NYT, 4/10/67, 1, 28-9; W Star, 4/ 10/67, Al, A6-7; W Post, 4/10/67, Al, A8) .
MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun was presented the Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Medal by Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Dr. von Braun was cited in “recognition of his creative vision of the practical application of rocket power to space flight leading to the first U.S. satellite, and of his technical leadership in development of the Saturn class of large launch vehicles upon which the Apollo moon flight is based.” He was the 13th recipient of the award, which was established in 1908 to commemorate the aeronautical achievements of Samuel Pierpont Langley, third Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. Other recipients included Orville and Wilbur Wright, Charles A. Lindbergh, Robert H. Goddard (posthumously), Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. In making the presentation, Dr. Whipple said U.S. could have launched the world’s first satellite if it had endorsed the proposal which he and Dr. von Braun developed in 1954 to launch small spacecraft from the equator using existing rockets. Government decision to fund, instead, usn’s Vanguard project, allowed U.S.S.R. to win “the first space race.” (Text; Smithsonian Release; Marshall Star, 6/7/67, 1; AP, NYT, 6/6/67. 3)
Congressional actions in response to Jan. 27 flash fire at KSC in which three Apollo astronauts died: Sen. Harrison A. Williams, Jr. (D-N.J.), urged Senate to ratify space law treaty [see Dec. 8,1966] as a worthy tribute to the astronauts. (CR, 2/3/67, S1449-50; nasa lar VI/16) Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) and Rep. Edward J. Gumey (R-Fla.) introduced joint resolution (S.J. Res. 30) to establish a Commission “to formulate plans for a memorial to astronauts who lose their lives in the line of duty in the U.S. space program.” Astronauts Memorial commission would be composed of five Presidential appointees—one NASA representative, one dod representative, and three civilians. (CR, 2/7/67, S1657; nasa lar VI/17) Sen. Vance Hartke (D-Ind.) praised efforts of Mitchell, Ind., residents to erect a memorial to Apollo Astronaut Gus Grissom. “The memorial will preserve the memory of that record for future generations who might otherwise lose sight of the spectacular achievements of the few individuals who made the first forays into space.” (CR, 2/16/67, S2071)
U.S. astronauts were honored with a special award at American Personnel and Guidance Assn, convention in Dallas. Accepted by Charles Duke on behalf of his fellow astronauts, the award cited the “exemplary model astronauts display to American youth in intellectual achievement, selfdiscipline, personal dedication and physical fitness.” (upi, W Star, 3/24/67, A6)
Washington Evening Star commented on Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ open hearing Feb. 27 on the Apollo fire: “The nation’s space officials evidently have managed to keep their heads in the midst of the emotional chaos that followed the tragic accident at Cape Kennedy. They have resisted pressures from semi-informed sources condemning the pure oxygen environment that supported all Mercury and Gemini astronauts in space. And there is mounting evidence that the arbitrary 1970 goal for a manned lunar landing is no longer a maj or consideration in the space program . . . [and] that the space planners are determined that they will no longer be prompted to act because of any arbitrary timetable or out of a competitive desire to beat the Soviets to the moon, “This is as it should be. This nation should move outward into space with all deliberate speed. And right now, the emphasis should be heavy on that qualifying word.” (W Star, 3/6/67, All)
msc Director of Flight Operations Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that new technological developments might enable NASA to make up some of the time lost when three astronauts died in Apollo capsule. In commencement address at St. Louis Univ.’s Parks College of Aeronautical Technology, Cahokia, Mo., he said, “If things go very right for us, we may still put a man on the moon by 1970.” He predicted space exploration would contribute solutions to problems posed by world’s growing population, specifically in communications, transportation, food production, and weather forecasting. {St. Louis P—D, 7/29/67)
Secretary of State Dean Rusk signs the space law treaty at White House ceremonies while (seated, left to right) Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, British Ambassador Sir Patrick Dean, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Arthur J, Goldberg, and President Lyndon B. Johnson look on. photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. (NASA Release 67—14)
The Nation mourned the deaths of NASA Apollo Astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee. President Johnson: “Three valiant young men have given their lives in the nation’s service. We mourn this great loss and our hearts go out to their families.” Vice President Humphrey: “The deaths of these three brilliant young men ... is a profound and personal loss to me. . . . The United States will push ever forward in space and the memory of the contributions of these men will be an inspiration to all future space-farers.” nasa Administrator James Webb: “We’ve always known that something like this would happen sooner or later, but it’s not going to be permitted to stop the program. . . . Although everyone realized that some day space pilots would die, who would have thought the first tragedy would be on the ground?” Former President Eisenhower: “The accident that took the lives of three of our highly trained, skilled and courageous American astronauts is a tragic loss to our entire nation. . . .” (upi, W Star, 1/28/67,1; AP, NYT, 1/29/67)
Selection of NASA’s sixth astronaut class [see Aug. 4] indicated that astronaut “glamour” grew with each new peril, Neal Stanford reported in Christian Science Monitor. “Scientists . . . compete more intensively for the few scientist-astronaut jobs open than do jet pilots in the military services for the pilot j obs available. “The glamour has not entirely gone out of space flying. What has happened is that its perils have become more apparent, its scientific opportunities more exciting, and its financial rewards less considerable. “There have been 6 selections of astronauts, 4 of flier astronauts, and 2 of science astronauts. In this sixth and latest selection 939 [sic] scientists applied for the 11 positions open. In the previous selection of pilot astronauts only 403 applied for 19 positions open. . . .” (Stanford, CSM, 8/15/67)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., told the press at MSC that he did not foresee any problems in combining his new assignment as President’s Consultant on Physical Fitness [see June 6] with his duties as an astronaut. He said he would devote about one fourth of his time to the fitness program and the rest to keeping “in a state of readiness” for future space flights. “The fact that I am not spending all of my efforts on my new assignment does not mean I consider it any less important than my role in space. In fact, I can’t think of any mission more important than that of persuading the American people to keep themselves healthy and fit. These qualities are basic to everything we do. Whether we are trying to reach the moon, or merely running to catch a bus, it helps to be in good physical condition. ... A healthy population is the backbone of a strong nation.” (Text)
Astronaut Donn F. Eisele, in Columbus, Ohio, to receive a “Governor’s Award” for increasing the prestige of the state, told AP he was opposed to “an unrealistic, arbitrary” chronological date for reaching the moon. He favored a “technical” date, which he explained to mean “as soon as we’re ready, when we have performed sufficient missions to be ready, when the spacecraft is ready.” (AP, NYT, 2/12/61, 31)
Small fire in KSC building housing an astronaut training simulator damaged $1,200 worth of equipment, AP reported. Fire occurred in a rack of gear which provided electricity to the equipment, but which was not connected to the spacecraft simulator. NASA officials said no astronauts were inside simulator when fire broke out but even if they had been there would have been no damage. NASA issued no official announcement on the fire. (AP, NYT, 5/13/67,15)
Astronaut Clifton C. Williams, Jr. (Maj., usmc) , was killed during routine flight when his T-38 jet aircraft crashed and disintegrated near Tallahassee, Fla., apparently after he had blacked out from an oxygen deficiency. A Lunar Module specialist and Gemini X backup pilot, Williams was eighth astronaut to be killed in an accident and third to die in a T-38 crash: one other astronaut had died in an air crash; three in Jan. 27 Apollo fire; and one in an automobile accident. He would be buried in Arlington National Cemetery Oct. 9 with full military honors. (W Post, 10/6/67, Al; 10/10/67, B3)
NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III (Lunar Orbiter C) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in mission to photograph possible lunar landing sites for Apollo astronauts (see Feb. 8-28). Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb spacecraft into 100-mi (161km) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 15-min coast period, injecting spacecraft on 92-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule Lunar Orbiter III deployed its four solar panels and two antennas, locked its five solar sensors on the sun, and fixed its star-tracker on Canopus. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III mission, third in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; (2) to obtain high-resolution pictures of previously photographed lunar surface areas to confirm their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft; and (3) to improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 12 primary target sites located within the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. Spacecraft would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in the lunar environment, refine definition of moon’s gravitational field, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of JPL-oper-ated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—12; AP, W Post, 2/5/67, A6; AP, W Star, 2/5/67, A8; AP, NYT, 2/6/67, 12)
msfc had awarded Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. a $334,031 contract to study methods of increasing the number of astronauts that could be delivered to the moon with the Saturn V booster and to determine the most promising concepts for efficient delivery of logistic payloads. For the purposes of the study, Lockheed would consider: (1) a hypothetical 1975 mission involving two “product improved” Saturn V boosters— one to launch a modified Apollo spacecraft and one to launch a cargo payload; and (2) a hypothetical 1980-82 mission in which two Uprated Saturn V boosters would launch a six-man spacecraft direcdy to the moon, (msfc Release 67-123)
Soviet Vostok spacecraft were equipped with quick-opening explosive hatches and jet-propelled ejection seats—equipment might have saved U.S. Apollo astronauts Jan. 27, Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolayeva-Tereshkova said in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. (upi, NYT, 3/23/67)
Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee would conduct a “full review” of the Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed three Apollo astronauts, Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex) announced. {NYT, 1/29/67,47; WPost, 1/29/67, A18)
Memorial services in Houston for Astronaut Edward G. Givens, Jr., were attended by many of his fellow astronauts and their families. Givens would be buried June 9 in Quanah, Tex. (msc Roundup, 6/9/67,1; AP, W Post, 6/9/67, B8)
First flight test of Apollo Lunar Module (lm), designated Apollo 5, was scheduled no earlier than Jan. 17, 1968, NASA announced. The 31,700-lb lm, one of three modules comprising the Apollo spacecraft, was designed to carry two astronauts from lunar orbital flight to a landing on the moon, then back to the Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit. It would be launched on the 6-hr 30-min test flight by 1.6-million-lb-thrust Uprated Saturn I (AS-204) originally scheduled for first manned Apollo mission in February 1967, and would not be recovered. Primary objective of the unmanned Apollo 5 flight would be verification of lm’s flight readiness for manned operations in space. Test would flight qualify lm descent stage propulsion engine, including restart; ascent stage propulsion engine; systems; structures; and staging. (NASA Release 67-313; upi, NYT, 12/27/67, 15; AP, W Post, 12/27/67, A4)
Apollo Command Mod ole at Launch Complex 34, Kennedy Space Center, is a silent, grim reminder of the dash fire that took the lives of the three-man crew when it swept through the spacecraft during launch rehearsal. 204) died, apparently instantly, when flash fire swept through their Apollo I spacecraft mated to an Uprated Saturn I booster 218 ft above the ground. Crew was Virgil I. Grissom, one of seven original Mercury astronauts; Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space; and Roger B. Chaffee, preparing for his first space flight. Accident, worst in the history of the U.S. space program, occurred at 6:31 p.m. est at ksc’s Launch Complex 34 during first major rehearsal for scheduled Feb. 21 . mission. Immediately after tragedy, msc Director Dr. Robert Gilruth, Chairman of the Board of North American Aviation, Inc., Lee Atwood, and NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips flew to Ksc from Washington, D.C. General Phillips described the accident at a press conference Jan. 28: “The facts briefly are: at 6:31 p.m. (est) the observers heard a report which originated from one of the crewmen that there was a fire aboard the spacecraft . . .” At T-10 and holding in the countdown, observers saw a “flash fire” break out inside the spacecraft, penetrate its shell, and surround its exterior with smoke. Rescue workers rushed to the pad area but could not open the hatch for five minutes. Phillips said astronauts’ only hope of escape would have to open hatch manually with a crank tool. He refused to speculate on how long accident would delay the Apollo program or on source of the fire but admitted that “if there is an ignition source ... in pure oxygen this, of course, has flash-fire potential.” His statement that spacecraft was operating on internal power when fire broke out was corrected Feb. 3 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans: “The fuel cells in the service module were not in use, and the so-called internal power was being supplied by batteries having the same characteristics as the fuel cells but located external to the spacecraft.” NASA immediately appointed a board of inquiry (see Jan. 28) and announced that all data had been impounded pending its formal investigation. Unmanned Apollo flights would proceed on schedule, but manned flights were postponed until board’s inquiry was completed. Apollo I backup crew—Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham—were expected to be named prime crew for rescheduled mission, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-16; NYT, 1/28/67, 1, 18; 1/29/67, 1, 48, El; W Post, 1/28/67, Al, A7; 1/29/67, Al, A18; WStar, 1/28/67, A1,A4; 1/29/67, Al, A6)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Washington, D.C., women’s club that Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would report to icsc Feb. 2 to meet with Apollo 204 Review Board investigating Jan. 27 accident which killed three Apollo astronauts. Dr. Seamans would report Board’s preliminary findings to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said NASA’s decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been made after “a long series of tests and evaluations. Any change would be made only after a most careful examination of all alternatives.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., BSun, 2/2/67; W Post, 2/2/67)
Brian Todd O’Leary, one of NASA’s 12 new scientist-astronauts, was appointed assistant professor of Astronomy Dept., Univ. of Texas. Although flight training portion of astronaut’s program would continue for next two years, 30% of O’Leary’s time would be available for scientific activities. (AP, B Sun, 10/6/67)
Average U.S. taxpayer would not help finance any space program beyond manned lunar landing unless he could understand it and identify with its purpose, m/g John B. Medaris (usa, Ret.) told aas Symposium in Huntsville. “Putting a man on the moon was a good objective. People can see the moon. They can understand communication and weather information and possible defense benefits from a moon landing. “But after the astronaut puts an American flag on the moon’s surface and satisfies the public, what will happen to our program then? We have to have a steady commitment of great resources to keep this program going. We have got to convince the public that there is a link between them and our next objectives . . . [and] give them some sort of objective they can identify with their own welfare.” Noting that “people recoil in fear from the concept of the endlessness of interstellar space,” General Medaris suggested that public would approve of an objective such as establishment of a lunar colony. “We better forget the spectacular and use a public relations approach like the soap companies do and figure out what the public will pay for.” (Houtz, B News, 6/14/67)
Robert Walker, writing in the New York Times, reviewed new applications for industrial use of gold. In telephone industry, gold was used for coating electromechanical switchgear and for transmitter domes; in computers, for coating metal tapes and electroplating printed circuits; and in automotive industry, for connecting alternator-regulator systems. To aerospace industry, one of gold’s most important characteristics was that it reflected heat and light. Gold was used to coat the “umbilical cord” which connected Astronaut Edward H. White II to Gemini IV spacecraft (June 3, 1965); to cover shrouds that contracted very hot jet aircraft engine parts; and to coat satellites so that they reflected more than 90% of sun’s heat. By adding oxides to gold coatings space scientists used the gold to absorb infrared energy which could be converted to electrical energy. (Walker, Ayr, 12/24/67, IF)
msc engineer Caldwell C. Johnson was granted patent for a cocoonlike escape device for orbiting astronauts. Device, which would be stored in an external compartment on the spacecraft, consisted of an insulated zippered nylon bag with a retrorocket. Astronaut would don his pressure suit with oxygen supply, seal himself in the bag, and fire retrorocket to thrust toward a landmark on earth. He would then inflate a bladder to shape the bag into a sphere for stability during reentry. Sphere would deflate during reentry, notifying astronaut when it was time to deploy parachute for safe landing. (U.S. Patent Off; msc Roundup, 7/7/67, 8; Jones, NYT, 7/15/67, 29)
Rep. Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) introduced legislation to House authorizing the President to “designate a day in January of each year as a day of remembrance” for Apollo Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee, who died in Jan. 27 fire at ksc. (CR, 3/9/67, H2460)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Thomas P. Stafford, and Frank Borman were interviewed on nbc-tv’s “Meet the Press.” Borman said he had “nothing but admiration for the way NASA had conducted its investigation of the Jan. 27 Apollo accident and that, far from losing confidence in the agency, he had gained confidence in it. Asked if he believed that some other group should also investigate the fire, he replied: “Absolutely not. I don’t understand the desire for another investigation.” Schirra, asked if he believed it were necessary to send men to the moon when unmanned spacecraft were obtaining valuable information, responded: “It is only natural that man must go out there and see for himself.” The computer in unmanned flights is only a product of man’s mind, and, “if something different occurs, man is best equipped to make the move.” (AP, Newsday, 5/22/67)
White House had received a letter from an unnamed scientist suggesting that it conduct its own investigation into Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed three Apollo astronauts, Karl Abraham reported in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. Scientist, who was not identified, felt nasa had not sufficiently heeded warnings of fire hazards presented by use of pure oxygen atmosphere. (Abraham, P EB, 2/8/67)
NASA had presented monetary awards totaling $4,200 to six inventors, all employed by industrial contractors, for advancements in space technology: Charles R. Peek and Lewis E. Boodley, RCA—$1,000 for new type of interconnector for satellite solar cells; G. Richard Blair, Hughes Aircraft Co.—$1,000 for passive heat protective coating used on Surveyor spacecraft; Kenneth A. Ruddock and Robert G. Rempel, Spectra-Physics, Inc.—$1,000 for magnetometer to measure earth’s magnetic field more precisely; and Paul A. Jensen, Hughes—$1,200 for low-noise antenna feed system used in all NASA Deep Space Network stations. (NASA Release 67-^2) During February: Space flights lasting one month or more should pose no new respiratory problems for astronauts, but additional research was necessary to ensure against respiratory problems that could arise from prolonged weightlessness and an artificial environment, nrc Space Science Board study concluded. Only serious effects of weightlessness on respiratory system anticipated were possibility that astronauts might inhale dust and other solid particles floating in the spacecraft and that muscles controlling the lungs might weaken because work was easier in weightless environment. Areas recommended for further study included: toleration limits for carbon dioxide in case spacecraft’s absorption system malfunctioned; problems of infection during long missions; possibility of intentionally filling astronauts’ lungs with a liquid to prevent collapse of blood vessels and tissues during acceleration greater than 15 g; and basic medical training and use of drugs for self-medication by crew during weightlessness. Committee also recommended efforts to improve methods to detect and extinguish spacecraft fires, and suggested that a two-gas system with nitrogen or helium be used until effective methods of fire control in 100% oxygen were developed. Report, to be released shortly by NAS, was the product of a June 26-July 9,1966, conference held at Woods Hole, Mass., at oart request. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 2/67)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, told AP he did not think “we will ever know what caused that fire” in which three Apollo astronauts died. Thousands of NASA and industry technicians responsible for Apollo I spacecraft would always wonder whether they contributed to the accident, Teague suggested. Asked if he believed NASA officials had taken unnecessary risks to land a man on the moon by 1970, Teague said: “Maybe we were a little bit careless.” He said some of the safety checks probably should have been more thorough, but did not elaborate. (AP, W Star, 3/30/67)
Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) challenged President Johnson’s budget priorities and attacked Administration plans to develop a nuclear rocket system for interplanetary space exploration. He told newsmen that it would be a much greater tragedy to limit school aid than to have a Russian cosmonaut welcome U.S. astronauts to Mars. “. . . We can’t be like the Roman Empire. They gave their people circuses when they needed bread. And that empire disappeared.” (upi, W Post, 3/4/67, A2)
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
New York Times praised Senate ratification of the space law treaty April 25 and called for increased international cooperation in space: “Ideally, the probing of space and the planets would be the province of a World Space Organization affiliated with the United Nations, financed by the contributions of all nations desiring to participate, and drawing upon the technical manpower and knowledge of all nations. This international organization could be the owner of the moon and other solar bodies, arranging for the exploitation of resources found there, and using any extraterrestrial profits for the benefit of all men. “It will take much time before such an ideal can be reached. But even now the more sober spirit evident in Moscow and Washington opens the door to greater bilateral cooperation. Both nations have technical knowledge in this field that they could exchange to their mutual advantage. Their space tracking and rescue facilities could be coordinated into a single world system; they could agree on a division of labor that would eliminate such duplication as is represented by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter. The result could easily be major savings in money and increased safety for all astronauts, regardless of nationality.” (NYT, 4/26/67)
Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin received first honorary membership awarded by International Assn, of Machinists and Aerospace Workers at iam Aerospace Conference in Houston. Aldrin, considered by the Union to be the first space mechanic, was cited for his work with tools outside Gemini XII spacecraft Nov. 13, 1966. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received an Award of Merit for being first American in space. (Houston Chron, 6/2/67)
Astronauts on long-duration space flights might have to accept greater radiation exposure than the amount considered safe for industrial workers and, in some cases, this additional exposure could heighten the risk of cancer and shorten life expectancy, nrc’s Space Science Board concluded in report entitled Radiobiological Factors in Manned Space Flight. Board recommended that criteria different from those used in industry be set up to gauge radiation risks in space flight and to decide what was acceptable. “Manned space flights are high risk endeavors. They take place in a hostile environment that cannot be permitted to encroach beyond the limits of human endurance if the missions are to succeed.” Report noted, however, that radiation was “only one of many recognized and accepted potential risks” to space flight and shielding against it added weight to the spacecraft. Consequently, protection against radiation had to be balanced against other needs vital to the success of the mission, (nrc Release; Schmeck, NYT, 7/18/67, 38M; Reistrup, W Post, 7/18/67, A3; AP, WStar, 7/18/67, A3)
usaf’s $3.3-million solar vacuum telescope, designed to predict more accurately solar proton showers which endanger astronauts and spacecraft, was meeting its timetable for construction at Sacramento Peak Observatory near Sunspot, N. Mex., Office of Aerospace Research announced. Telescope—of which 193 ft would be underground and 135 ft above ground—would be largest solar vacuum telescope in the world when completed in 1968. In addition to predicting “safe periods” for space flight, it would study solar phenomena and solar-terrestrial relationships. (oar Release)
Soviet Union announced a new series of rocket tests believed designed to perfect a sea-landing system for Russian astronauts in preparation for a resumption of manned space flights. Soviet news agency, Tass, said the test of “carrier rockets” would begin Sept. 3. It warned all ships and planes to stay clear of two 80-mile-wide “bulls’ eyes” in the Pacific Ocean, one about 900 miles northeast and one 300 miles northeast of Midway Island, from noon until midnight every day through Oct. 30. (Reuters, W Post, 9/S/61, A16)
nasa Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., tested space simulator at Martin Co.’s plant near Littleton, Colo. Unit, which provided 6° of freedom, was linked to computer that determined exertion forces on astronaut as he performed simple tasks in simulated weightless environment. {Denver Post, 1/19/67)
U.S. astronauts would one day encounter “other living things” in outer space, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of ksc, told Rollins College audience. “This prospect cannot be dismissed as metaphysical speculation. ... It is much more a mathematical certainty than were the early theories expounded by scientists and philosophers whose observations and discoveries made possible many of our activities today.” (upi, NYT, 2/27/67,12)
Illustrations of the predictive ability of the contemporary engineer were made by arc’s Simulation Sciences Div. chief, George A. Rathert, Jr., at Moffett Field Scholarship Night Banquet for Bay Area Joint Engineers Council: “. . . faa pilots were experiencing certain characteristics of the supersonic transport on simulators at the Ames Research Center 15 months before the FAA asked for bids on the design studies. You will recall Astronaut Gordon Cooper having to manually control the attitude of his space ship during a reentry retrofiring to successfully complete his mission. Engineering test pilots at Ames were studying problems of coping with manual control of a simulated spacecraft reentering with , partly failed control systems more than nine years ago.” (Text)
USNS Mercury, third Apollo insertion-injection tracking ship, left General Dynamics Corp.’s Quincy, Mass., shipyard after successfully completing final contractor instrumentation systems tests. Ship docked in Hoboken, N.J., where it would undergo inspection and instrumentation adjustments before range testing and final preparations in Florida for Apollo 503 mission. Mercury, her two sister ships Vanguard and Redstone, and reentry ships Huntsville and Watertown were part of National Range Instrumentation Ship pool. They would be equipped with special antennas for communications between Apollo astronauts and mission control via Atlantic and Pacific satellites. For Apollo missions they would be operated as part of GSFC-operated msfn, which supported Apollo with tracking, command, and voice and telemetry communications via land lines, microwave, submarine cables, and comsats. Operation of Apollo ships was assigned to wtr; crew was provided by Military Sea Transport Service, and technical instrumentation crew by usaf, (nasa Release 67-305)
Dr. Heinz von Diringshofen, a German pioneer in flight and space medicine, died in Frankfurt, Germany, at age 67. Among the first to study the effects of weightlessness in vertical flight, Dr. Diringshofen recorded reactions of humans in weightless periods of up to eight seconds. He also developed systems currently used in the training of U.S. astronauts, including a centrifuge that produced 17 g’s pressure. (NYT, 5/9/67, 43)
First regular data reports of activity on sun’s “invisible hemisphere”— side visible from earth only once every 13.5 days—were being made to essa’s Solar Disturbance Forecast Center in Boulder, Colo., by nasa’s Pioneer VI and VII satellites, in orbit around sun. Satellites’ observations on physical characteristics of solar storms would allow continuous scientific study of solar surface and provide Apollo astronauts with additional warning time to avoid solar radiation hazards. (nasa Release 67-174)
nas forwarded to NASA a list of 69 recommended candidates for 20-30 positions in nasa’s astronaut training program. A total of 923 applications had been evaluated. NASA was expected to make final selections before Aug. 15. (nas-nrc—nae News Report, 3/67, 3)
Prime and. backup crews for NASA’s first manned Apollo mission [see May 9] told a news conference at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant that they were “very impressed” with the design changes being made in the Apollo spacecraft as a result of the Jan. 27 flash fire. Major changes included: (1) a new hinged hatch that could be opened outward in about two seconds by activating a springed lever; (2) replacement of many highly flammable materials such as nylon netting; (3) sheathing of open wiring with hard panels; and (4) flame-resistant spacesuits. In addition, spacecraft would be pressurized with nitrogen rather than oxygen on launching, and in orbit—where oxygen is indispensable—pressure would be reduced one third to 5 psi. Questioned about his attitudes toward the program since the Jan. 27 Apollo accident, Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra replied:	. . we went through a very agonizing self-appraisal; we suffered through three months of recrimination; we’ve culminated these three months with some very firm ideas.” These ideas, Schirra said, were being phased into an orderly program that “will continue—with orderly haste . . . [and] we are not going to run rampant on schedules.” The crews anticipated that Apollo 101 spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in December and that first manned mission would be flown in first quarter of 1968. Primary mission objective would be to “exercise the vehicle in earth orbit,” Schirra said. Asked if the April 24 death of Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov had had any adverse effects on plans for earth landings in the Apollo program, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford replied: “The earth landing system that consists of the three main parachutes and the two drogue chutes- had been qualified completely. . . . We still have some earth landing drops to be made. But right now as far as the crew is concerned, either the parachutes in this vehicle are qualified or we don’t fly.” (Transcript; Newsweek, 5/22/67, 94; Hill, NYT, 5/11/67,27)
