NASA named five-man board with counsel to investigate crash of Lunar Landing Research Vehicle piloted by Astronaut Neil Armstrong at Ellington afb, Tex., May 6. Board would determine probable cause of accident, identify and evaluate corrective actions, and evaluate implication for llrv and lunar module design and operations. (NASA Release 68-90)
John Lannan in Washington Evening Star called GSFC “home base” for Apollo 7 astronauts. All their communications would pass through Center. Communicating with some or all lunar spacecraft would be 14 land stations, 4 ships, and 8 aircraft around the world, manned by 4,000 persons. All circuits used would be put together from GSFC switching centers. Except for astronaut’s electrocardiagram and his voice, all mission data would be channeled in digital form, which meant vast bulk of detail controlling system itself, in addition to mission data from Houston or spacecraft, could be handled rapidly by computers. (W Star, 9/2/68,1)
NASA announced that Astronaut Brian T. O’Leary had withdrawn from astronaut training program because he disliked piloting aircraft. Dr. O’Leary, who had completed 15 hr flying time in training program at Williams afb, Ariz., hoped to remain with space program as researcher in planetary astronomy. Astronaut F. Curtis Michel had received special permission to spend 80% of his time teaching and studying at Rice Univ. and 20% in astronaut training for one year, (msc Release 68—32; AP, W Star, 4/24/68, A2; W Post, 4/24/68, 4)
nasa issued summary of combined findings of Accident Board and Review Board appointed to investigate May 6 accident which destroyed Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) at Ellington afb. Pilot, Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, had to eject few seconds after loss of helium pressure in propellant tanks caused premature shutdown of attitude control rocket system. Helium had been inadvertently depleted earlier than usual in flight. Armstrong incurred minor injuries. Review Board, appointed by then nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Thomas 0. Paine to study accident’s possible impact on Apollo program, discovered no unfavorable effects on lunar landing project, particularly lunar module. It agreed with Accident Investigation Board in calling for improvements in design and operating practices in LLRV and urged more stringent control over such flying programs and greater attention to all NASA lunar landing simulators, (nasa Release 68—182)
MSFC announced it had requested proposals from 11 aerospace companies for six-month design and definition study for dual mode lunar roving vehicle (lrv) capable of transporting astronauts on lunar surface and of performing automated, long-range scientific traverses across moon under remote control from earth. Vehicle was to permit manned sorties of up to 6 mi from landed spacecraft, with total round trip of more than 18 mi. After astronauts left moon, lrv would be placed in remote control mode for automated long-range (600 or more mi) geological and geophysical trips for one year. It would collect up to 200 lb of lunar samples and measure terrain, then rendezvous with manned spacecraft for return of samples to earth, (msfc Release 68—274; SBDf 12/3/68, 134; Marshall Star, 12/4/68, 1)
New observations from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station indicated distance estimates to pulsars had been 30 times too short. Observations from Australia’s Molonglo Radio Observatory had identified pulsar PSR 1749—28, believed to be three times more distant than 10 others observed to date. Despite great distance, its pulses were more powerful than those of all but one other. From these observations, Jodrell’s Dr. Graham Smith believed pulsars lay in distant halo, not in Milky Way. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/13/68, 74) Dr. Welsh said: “I would place high on the list of benefits those which flow from increased international cooperation in the field of space. . . . stimulated by the universal desire for knowledge [it] has brought somewhat closer together the peoples of the world. ... as the practical applications of space become more evident in the form of weather predictions, communications, and increased knowledge of the world’s limited natural resources, additional strength is added to the foundation for peace.” (Text) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of $1,000, made annually by International Academy of Astronautics in recognition of outstanding contribution to progress of space research and exploration over five-year period, was presented Oct. 18 at iaf Congress banquet to Dr. Zdenek Svestaka of Astronomical Institute of Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. He was Chairman of Commission on Solar Activity of the International Astronomical Union, (iaf iaa Release 34; aiaa Release 10/13/68)	, Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid I. Sedov in news conference said U.S.S.R. was not in race to moon with U.S. “The question of sending astronauts to the moon at this time is not an item on our agenda. The exploration of the moon is possible, but it is not a priority.” Prof. Sedov said Soviet timetable for manned expeditions would depend on next series of flight tests using Zond rocket. Zond V was successful, he said, “because the capsule returned safely, which was the purpose of the flight.” Regarding U.S.—U.S.S.R. scientific cooperation, “its successful implementation is very much dependent on international relations.” At present, he said, close relations did not exist. (NYT, 10/15/68, 48) Informal meeting of international space scientists, organized by Northwestern Univ. ufo expert, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, in conjunction with iaf Congress, discussed advisability of world cooperation on UFOs. Several speakers urged international cooperation such as uniform ufo report forms, but it was agreed that no action should be taken until after appearance of Univ. of Colorado report expected later in year. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/16/68,12)	_ Dr. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey astrogeologist, reported to iaf analysis of data from spacecraft that had orbited and crashed into or landed intact on moon had shown side facing earth was largely a basin similar to that of Pacific Ocean. It seemed more like earth than had been previously believed. Lunar interior had been molten. Deep cracks in its crust were lined with craters where molten material had erupted from below. Study of remains of giant crater in western Texas had shown features analogous to lunar craters with mountain in center. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/19/68,19)
Apollo 8 astronauts heading for moon would be “in far less hazardous position” than they would have been as crew for Columbus, NASA Director of Manned Space Flight Safety Jerome F. Lederer said in speech before Wings Club in New York. “Columbus did not know where he was going, how far it was, nor where he had been after his return. With Apollo, there is no such lack of information.” Nevertheless, mission would “involve risks of great magnitude and probably risks that have not been foreseen. “Apollo 8 has 5,600,000 parts and one and a half million systems, subsystems and assemblies. Even if all functioned with 99.9 per cent reliability, we could expect 5,600 defects. Hence, the striving for perfection and the use of redundancy.” (Text; NYT, 12/19/68, 56)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent five hours in briefings at ksc, ascending to spacecraft level of Apollo 8 moon rocket, performing simulated rendezvous and formation flying inside mock spacecraft, and lunching with NASA officials and Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. During visit, he said: “The space program has contributed greatly to the structure of our nation. ... I have felt it has been underfunded at times and we will pay the price. I feel it is a wise investment on the part of Congress and the public. I’ll do what I can as a private citizen and a former chairman of the space council to see it is funded.” (ksc Release ksc—496—68; AP, W Star, 11/20/68, A8; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, Cl; Today, 11/20/68, 1) _
NASA announced Astronaut John A. Lewellyn had withdrawn from astronaut training program because of inability to progress sufficiently with jet flight training at Reese afb, Tex. After discussions with NASA and usaf officials, he had withdrawn to consider several opportunities within NASA and elsewhere. His departure reduced total number of NASA astronauts to 52. Nine of eleven scientist-astronauts selected in 1967 were in flight training. Dr. Brian T. O’Leary had withdrawn April 23 because he disliked flying, (msc Release 68-63; AP, NYT, 8/24/68, 12) .
usaf experiments in human reactions to extreme heat had indicated astronauts could survive reentry through earth’s atmosphere if their cabin cooling system failed. In tests at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, airmen were being subjected to 300°F and 400°F heat in four-foot-high oven three times daily. Some could stand up to 15 min at 300°F; limit at 400°F had been two or three minutes. (AP, LA Times, 8/6/68)
Spacecraft for first manned Apollo mission would use 60% oxygen and 40% nitrogen cabin atmosphere while on launch pad and pure oxygen in orbit, NASA announced. Astronauts would continue to breathe pure oxygen in their spacesuits before and during launch phase, at higher pressure than that of cabin to avoid leakage into suits. Spacecraft environmental control system in orbit would gradually replace mixed cabin atmosphere with pure oxygen. Since October 1967, more than 140 flammability tests on full-scale simulated spacecraft at MSC had shown that spacecraft modifications and installation of fire extinguisher and new quick-opening hatch for crew egress had drastically reduced fire hazards. Detailed physiological review of new mixed gas atmosphere had included considerations of operational characteristics of spacecraft and life support equipment. Astronauts would be adequately protected physiologically during all phases of atmosphere change. Crew procedures during period when diluted oxygen atmosphere would be in cabin were only slightly affected, (nasa Release 68—47; O’Toole, W Post, 3/6/68, 1; upi, NYT, 3/15/68, 41)
nasa released plans for lunar landing experiments. First LJ.S. astronauts to land on moon in 1969 would place three scientific experiments on lunar surface instead of more complex Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) originally planned. Change was necessitated by uncertainties in workload required to deploy ALSEP by astronauts in pressurized suits on moon’s surface. Mission’s primary objective would be to prove Apollo system by achieving successful moon landing and safe return to earth. During first landing, two astronauts would leave spacecraft for up to three hours on moon’s surface, making observations and photographing area in vicinity of landed spacecraft, collecting soil and rock samples, and deploying experiments. Scientific and medical data would be obtained on expenditure of astronauts’ energy, monitoring ability to perform in vacuum, extreme temperature, and 1/6 gravity for planning of longer, more complex missions. Experiments were (1) passive seismometer (self-contained 100-lb seismic station with earth-moon communications link, designed to last up to one year), (2) 70-lb laser ranging retro-reflector, and (3) 1-Ib solar-wind-composition experiment. They would provide data on internal activity of moon; would provide data to improve measurement of earth-moon distance, fluctuation of earth’s rotation rate, and variations in gravitational constant G, as well as to test theory of intercontinental drift by direct measurements from different continents; and would entrap noble gases (helium, neon, krypton, xenon) from solar wind for analysis. In second lunar landing mission, astronauts would deploy full geophysical station or alsep and conduct detailed field geology investigation. (nasa Release 68-200)
usaf denied decision had been made to cut back or cancel FB—111 production [see Nov. 15], Wall Street Journal said, but reports persisted that fewer than 253 would be purchased because of their high cost and indifferent performance. Aerospace Daily said its sources reported recommended cutback of more than 50% was “essentially accurate” and put figure at “about 100” to give usaf Unit Equipment force of 90 aircraft. (WSJ, 11/18/68,12; Aero Daily, 11/18/68) Air Transport Assn, of America reported that 15- to 19-mo use at three major airports had convinced airlines that runway surface grooving was “an effective aid in overcoming hydroplaning” during wet landings. Airline operation evaluation had “dispelled earlier fears that grooving might damage runways or aircraft.” (Text; NYT, 11/24/68, 84) Dr. Walton W. Jones, nasa Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, told conference U.S. could keep astronauts in earth orbit a year within 10 yr if U.S. would allocate sufficient resources to project. arc experiments had shown rats subjected to gravitational pull 4.7 times above normal had increased life expectancy. He said after meeting that NASA planned experiments with rats at zero gravitation to determine if aging process was suspended while mem was free from gravitational pull. Dr. J. F. Kubis of Fordham Univ. emphasized importance of psychological factors in selecting space crews. On long flight, “lack of privacy, crowding, and continuous exposure to interaction will become sources of aggravating stress.” He recommended no more than one in crew with dominant personality. Soviet scientist Dr. N. N. Gurovsky said condition of two dogs after 22-day orbital flight (in Cosmos CX Feb. 22—March 16, 1966) had aroused forebodings on effect of year-long flights on astronauts. Loss of calcium in bones would make them prone to breaking. Both dogs had .developed liver and intestinal ailments including edemas. Human beings could expect same effects. Earlier reports had noted dogs suffered muscular reduction, dehydration, and confusion in adjusting to walking. Cal Tech Prof. Fritz Zwicky said some apparently unexplained deaths on earth each year could he due to blows from meteors or heavy nucleons in cosmic rays. (Hamilton, NYT, 11/20/68, 31; 11/21/68, 18; AP, B Sun, 11/22/68,1)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle began 177-hr simulated space journey with Apollo 2TV—1 model spacecraft inside giant vacuum chamber at msc, to prove spacecraft structure and inner pressure vessel and verify Apollo’s environmental control system in temperature and vacuum extremes. (West, H Chron, 6/17/68; H Post, 6/18/68, 2; nar Skywriter, 6/21/68,1)
Apollo 7 spacecraft, which would carry three astronauts on 11-day earth-orbital mission in late 1968, was undergoing combined systems tests at KSC. Unmanned and manned altitude runs would follow, before spacecraft would be sent to Cape Kennedy to be placed on Saturn IB launch vehicle. Saturn had undergone tests and checkout on Launch Complex 34 for several months. NASA announced Apollo mission—which would demonstrate performance of spacecraft’s command module (cm), service module (sm), crew, and support facilities—would begin with mid-morning launch, carrying commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., CM pilot Donn F. Eisele, and lm pilot Walter Cunningham into earth orbit. During second revolution, crew would separate Apollo from rocket’s upper stage and perform transposition and simulated docking maneuver similar to one to be performed on lunar mission. Reentry under manual control of crew would culminate in splashdown in Atlantic at approximately 7 am EDT on 11th day. (nasa Release 68—108; ksc Release 285-68)
Polish noncommunist party newspaper Zycie Wrszawy said of Apollo 8 crew: “We were all with them during those five days. . . . We congratulate them heartily. At such a time we do not think about politics and we forget about the country from which they come.” Paper also said, “Only a few changes would be enough for the monstrous rocket to carry a nuclear warhead into orbit instead of astronauts.” (upi, C Trib, 12/29/68)
John N. Wilford described in New York Times front page article decline in U.S. space expenditures since 1966: “Under pressure from the war in Vietnam, civilian space spending has dropped from $5.9-billion in the peak year of 1966 to $4.8-billion this year, and it is expected to drop much lower in the fiscal year starting in July. Employment in space work at private companies, universities and Government centers has declined from 420,000 in 1966 to fewer than 300,000 today, and it is still dropping at the rate of 4,000 a month.” Signs of decline were clearly visible, in “ghost towns” that were once test sites, and in removal of numerous projects from NASA’s post-Apollo plans. Fortunately, impact of cutback was softened because NASA had not replaced many personnel who ordinarily left agency each year and because personnel dismissed were absorbed by growing aircraft industry and expanding military space program. But there was a growing feeling “that once astronauts have landed on the moon, they will have no other place of significance to go for several years because of sharp budget cuts. These cuts have trimmed to the bone all preparations for future missions. It is as if the astronauts are heading for a dead-end on the moon.” (NYT, 4/16/68, 1)
Washington Post editorial praised “magnificent achievement” of U.S.S.R.’s Zond V: “In its own way, Zond-5 should serve to shake this Nation’s complacency once again. Our national goals in space exploration are fuzzy, our hopes have been out of line with our commitments. From President Kennedy’s glowing picture of Americans in space we have slipped into a program put together in fits and starts—fits brought about by a realization of how much it would cost to do it right and starts caused by a basic desire never to be second to anybody. Because of this, there is no use in seizing upon Zond-5 as a reason to go all-out to beat the Russians in a race for men on the moon. Our program . . . ought to move at its own pace. If that pace is sufficiently rapid to bring American astronauts to the moon first, fine. If it is not, so be it. The Russians will deserve the honor and praise they will win if their men make the first landing. In space exploration, it is more important to do things right than to do them first.” (W Post, 9/24/68, A16)
In Washington Post, columnist Joseph Kraft said post-Apollo programs had been sharply cut in Congress and space spending had been compared unfavorably with money for pressing internal needs. “In this situation, it makes sense for this country to disengage while it is ahead. There is no need for the United States to race Russia to every new milestone in space. On the contrary, what the United States wants is a program closely connected to explicit American requirements—a program of exploration for its own sake, not for the sake of beating the Russians. In that way, this country can continue to develop a capability in space, without having to respond in a panic to the ups and downs that are necessary part of the space business.” (W Post, 12/26/68) Outgoing Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, recommended reexamination of concept of Federal Dept, of Science since science “has now assumed such importance to the nation that its position would be stronger if it had a voice in the Cabinet.” He advocated annual report on state of science similar to annual economic report and said Office of Science and Technology “could eventually evolve in an office of planning and analysis, looking broadly at national problems with some scientific or technological component, but extending well beyond the purely technical areas.” Under questioning, Dr. Hornig said he agreed with Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, President of Univ. of Oklahoma and former Assistant Secretary of Commerce, that Federal Dept, of Science, with NSF as its core, might encompass oceanographic agencies, high-energy-physics research currently funded by AEC, ESSA, Bureaus of Census and Labor Statistics, geophysics branches of Geological Survey, and some NIH programs. Dr. Hollomon also suggested NASA be added when it could be included “without having it become the tail that wags the dog.” Dr. Hornig insisted no massive “science agency” should be created to usurp supervision of Nation’s science effort. Bacteria might have caused gastrointestinal upset suffered by astronaut Frank Borman on Apollo 8 mission, Dr. Rudolf H. T. Mattoni, head of Biological Systems Div. of Nuclear Utility Services, Hawthorne, Calif., told meeting. Effects of weightlessness on bacteria on Biosatellite II flight (Sept. 7—9, 1967) suggested that lack of gravity might have allowed common, normally benign, intestinal bacteria to cause illness like Borman’s. Drs. Bouilin Browning of St. Thomas Univ. and Irwin Oster of Bowling Green State Univ. reported first experimental evidence that weightlessness can cause chromosomal damage of genetic significance, based on sperm cells flown 45 hr aboard Biosatellite. Cornell Univ. map expert, Prof. Arthur J. McNair, said sophisticated photographic mapping by satellites at 140-mi altitude would provide faster, cheaper, broader, and more detailed coverage than now possible by airplane mapping. Single map-making satellite photo, he said, would be equivalent to 1,000 photos taken by aircraft. U.S. could be fully mapped in one year from photos from satellite in near-polar orbit for four weeks. Another 11 mo would be needed for data processing. Dr. Robert H. Hardie of Vanderbilt Univ. said planet Pluto had appeared to be dimming for past 10 yr. It was moving in 248-yr orbital period to point where it reflected little sunlight and its surface temperature had dropped two degrees. He speculated that planet froze into mass of stone and solid nitrogen as temperatures reached —250° C when facing away from the sun. When bathed in sunlight, planet warmed to —200° C and formed reflecting puddles which astronomers saw as variations in light intensity. (Text; UPl, W Post, 12/28/68, A9; Lannan, W Star, 12/30/68, A3; AP, W Post, 12/30/68, A6) December 27: At White House press conference President Johnson discussed Apollo 8’s effect on U.S. position in space race: “We are very pleased with the progress we have made. . . . Each side has different examples of its achievements. But in the 10 to 11 years since Sputnik I . . . when we didn’t even have a space committee in the Congress, when we were talking about the basketball up there in the air, when we have weathered the storms that have brewed—everyone who wanted to cut anything, the first thing they wanted to cut was the space program —when we have seen the editorial professors inform us that there was really no value in doing all of this anyway, it gives me great pleasure now to see the thrill that even they are getting out of it.” President described anxiety about complex mission and said he had repeatedly asked himself whether U.S. was ready, whether date selected was best one, whether every possible precaution had been taken, and whether every man had performed his requirements. “About all you can do ... is to pick men that you have confidence in, that you trust, give them the support they need, and then hold on.” Remembering he had “recommended this goal for this decade” to President Kennedy, he said: “There have been many pitfalls every step of the way. I don’t know how many folks have just wanted to abandon it, clip it, cut it, take the money for the cities or the war or just anything else. Space has been a whipping boy. “So when you see the day approaching when visions, and dreams, and what we said to the Congress when we created the Space Administration back in 1958 are becoming reality, you naturally are hopeful.” Later, in telephone message to Apollo 8 astronauts, President congratulated crew and said: “You have made us very proud to be alive at this particular moment in history. You have made us feel akin to those Europeans nearly five centuries ago who heard stories of the New World for the first time. . . . My thoughts this morning went back to more than 10 years ago . . . when we saw Sputnik racing through the skies, and we realized that America had a big job ahead of it. “It gave me so much pleasure to know that you men have done a large part of that job.” {PD, 12/30/68, 1744-50)
Dr. Robert H. Guest, professor of organizational behavior in Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College, was sworn in as consultant by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting nasa Administrator. Dr. Guest would serve on Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—220) At 10:42 am est 3rd stage burned for second time, injecting spacecraft into lunar trajectory, and astronauts began journey to become first men to leave earth’s gravitational field. Stage and instrument unit separated as planned and service module propulsion system was fired to increase separation distance from 3rd stage, which was trailing 500—1,000 ft behind spacecraft, spewing unused propellants. Crew fired service propulsion system (sps) engine for 2.4 sec, correcting trajectory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. Second midcourse maneuver, scheduled for second day, was canceled because trajectory was already so accurate that burn would have required velocity change of only 0.7 fps. Borman reported illness, apparently from 24-hr intestinal virus or from reaction to sleeping pills being used during space flight for first time, and Lovell and Anders reported nausea. Crew took navigation sightings and conducted first TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior and earth from 138,690-mi altitude and demonstrating food preparation and movements in weightlessness. Signals were received at ground stations and transmitted to NASA Mission Control Center in Houston before release live to commercial networks. Second TV transmission, on third day, showed excellent pictures of earth from 201,365-mi altitude, including view of Western Hemisphere in sunlight. Crew pointed out North Pole, South America, Cape Horn, and Baja California and noted that U.S. East Coast was very cloudy. Earth, they said, was beautiful; water looked royal blue, land areas brown, and clouds bright white. Reflection off earth was much greater than off moon, sm reaction control system’s four rockets were fired for 12 sec to reduce velocity by 2 fps and to make approach to moon closer to 60 mi at nearest point. On fourth day, Christmas Eve, communications were interrupted as Apollo 8 passed behind moon and astronauts became first men to see moon’s far side, sps engine was fired for 4 min 2 sec, reducing speed by 2,994 fps and placing spacecraft in lunar orbit with 193.6-mi (310.6-km) apolune and 69.1-mi (111.2-km) perilune. In third telecast Anders described lunar surface as “whitish gray, like dirty beach sand with lots of footprints on it. Some of these craters look like pick-axes striking concrete, creating a lot of fine dust.” After spacecraft passed behind moon at end of second revolution, SPS engine burned for 10 sec to reduce speed by 135 fps and to circularize orbit with 70.0-mi (112.6-km) apolune and 69.6-mi (112.0-km) perilune. Lovell said astronauts had “a grand view” of the lunar surface and confirmed that prospective landing sites were satisfactory. He reported that at about two minutes before sunrise a fan-shaped white haze appeared just behind moon’s limb. Crew continued landmark sightings and named numerous unnamed lunar features after other astronauts, NASA officials, and friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed that radio signal from earth to Apollo 8 and back to earth took three seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. Third TV transmission during ninth revolution showed heavily impacted mountains described by Anders as “a vastness of black and white, absolutely no color. The sky up here is also rather forbidding, foreboding extents of blackness with no stars visible when we’re flying over the moon in daylight. You can see by the numerous craters that this planet has been bombarded through the eons with numerous small asteroids and meteoroids, pock-marking the surface of every square inch. And one of the amazing features of the surface is . . . that most of the craters . . . have a round mound type of appearance instead of sharp jagged rocks. All, only the newest of features have any sharp definitions to them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment of small meteoroids.” The moon is “a very dark and unappetizing place. . . .” Crew read verses from first chapter of Genesis and wished viewers “good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good earth.” On fifth day, Christmas Day, while spacecraft was behind moon completing its 10th revolution, SPS engine was fired for 3 min 23 sec, increasing spacecraft velocity by 3,523 fps and propelling Apollo 8 back toward earth. Spacecraft left lunar gravity at 201,807 mi above earth. At 104 hours mission elapsed time 14-sec reaction-control-system burn increased velocity by 5 fps. Fifth TV transmission showed spacecraft interior, controls, and food preparation. Data analysis revealed sixth midcourse correction would not be necessary because of accuracy of course. Astronauts reported they had slept well and were in “very good shape.” Sixth TV transmission showed earth from 112,125-mi altitude. On sixth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from cm on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events were nominal and Apollo 8 splashed, apex down, in Pacific about 5,100 yd from recovery ship U.S.S. Yorktown at 10:51 am est Dec. 27, 147 hr after launch and precisely on time. According to prior planning, helicopters and aircraft hovered over spacecraft and pararescue personnnel were not deployed until local sunrise, 50 min after splashdown. Crew was then picked up and reached recovery ship at 12:20 pm EST. All primary ApoUo 8 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved and, in addition, five not originally planned. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan. Engineering accomplishments included use of ground network with onboard navigational techniques to sharpen accuracy of lunar orbit determination and successful use of Apollo high-gain antenna, four-dish unified S-band antenna that deployed from SM after separation from 3rd stage. Mission proved capability of Apollo csm and crew, as well as ground support and control systems, to operate out to lunar distances and return through the earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 8 was fifth Apollo mission to date, second manned Apollo mission, first manned mission on Saturn V launch vehicle, and first manned operation of Apollo system under conditions for which it was designed. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with the spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 Oct. 11—22, had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—208; NASA Special Releases; W Star, 12/21/68, Al; W Post, 12/21-28/68, Al; NYT, 12/21-28/68, 1; B Sun, 12/21-28/68, Al; MSC Roundup, 1/10/69, 3) December 21: President Johnson sent congratulatory message to Apollo 8 astronauts: “I am confident that the world’s finest equipment will strive to match the courage of our astronauts. If it does that, a successful mission is assured.” {PD, 12/30/68,1738)
At White House Dinner honoring members of space program, President Johnson presented Presidential Medal of Freedom, Nation’s highest civilian award, to retired NASA Administrator, James E. Webb, “a most distinguished public administrator, ... a farsighted and forceful leader of this Nation in the pioneer exploration of outer space, opening new frontiers of discovery and progress for the American people,” President told 23 Apollo astronauts, NASA officials, Government leaders in space program, and heads of rocket-building firms, “I asked you to come here tonight in the twilight of this administration, so I could pay the respect and the honor and the affection that I felt for the man who has directed your efforts and directed them so well, and so that I could express my personal admiration and respect for you.” In response, Webb said, “The challenge of space is large and so is NASA. In all such human endeavors, organized institutional efforts are essential, and we know, in the words of Emerson, that they are ‘the lengthened shadow of one man.’ We in NASA know, Mr. President, that you are the man of which our civilian space effort, conducted for the benefit of mankind, is the lengthened shadow.” At predinner ceremony, document for White House Treaty Room was signed by Apollo 7 astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., R. Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele; Apollo 8 Astronauts William A. Anders, Frank Borman, and James A. Lovell, Jr.; and pioneer aviator Charles A. Lindbergh. Also in Treaty Room were commemorations of May 21, 1963, visit to White House by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper following 22-orbit mission in Faith VII May 15—16 and of June 17, 1965, award of Exceptional Service Medal to late Astronaut Edward H. White II, and Astronaut James A. McDivitt following first U.S. space walk during June 3—7 Gemini IV mission. During exchange of dinner toasts President Johnson said that “in the hundreds of laws on which I have answered the rollcall, the bills that I have sponsored or cosponsored or amended or defeated, there is not a single one that gives more pride than the Space Act.” Responding, Webb cited three generations of spacecraft in 10 yr, “put to use ... in every major field,” and said he had “strongly held view that in the kind of world we live in, our Nation needs this kind of success in this kind of endeavor.” {PD, 12/16/68, 1689—91; McCardle, W Post, 12/10/68, Dl; Shelton, W Star, 12/10/68, B6; NYT, 12/10/68, 86)
Slide-wire escape way, 1,200-ft-long, from 215-ft level to ground at ksc Complex 34 was declared man-rated following tests by five dummies and five men. Slide wire was designed as last means of escape from ton of Saturn IB gantry for astronauts and close-out crews if emergency should shut off other routes. (Spaceport News, 9/12/68,1)
In New York Times John N. Wilford said some NASA Hq. officials were “hesitant to approve a lunar orbit mission out of fear of being criticized for taking undue risks by skipping preliminary test flights. They are worried about the spacecraft’s electrical system, which developed some minor ‘bugs’ during Apollo 7, and the propulsion system, even though the on-board rocket apparently performed well in eight firings during Apollo 7.” If lunar mission was decided on, it would probably be launched Dec. 21 when moon’s position to earth would require minimum midcourse rocket firing maneuvers for landing and light conditions would give good view of potential lunar landing site. First astronauts on moon were expected to stay less than 24 hr, to demonstrate it could be done. In time astronauts would make many return trips and would roam moon’s surface in “moon buggies.” Day might come when people would establish lunar colonies. (NYT, 10/28/68, 12E)
U.S.S.R. announced through Tass successful completion of experiment in which three researchers spent from Nov. 5, 1967, to Nov. 5, 1968, in isolated chamber consisting of living compartment and greenhouse linked to outside world by videotelephone. Purpose of experiment was to test man’s ability to live in isolation for year, using water and oxygen regenerated from waste products and dehydrated food supplemented by greenhouse-grown vegetables; study effects of various factors on human organism and establish optimum conditions for long isolation; and evaluate effectiveness of self-contained life-support systems based on regeneration of waste products. Daily requirements of astronauts on long voyage included 700 g of food, 2.4 kg of drinking water plus 5.5 kg of water for other purposes, and 800 g of oxygen, amounting to 11 tons of supplies for one-year space voyage. Report said there were no significant changes in body weight and temperature of experimenters except one lost eight to nine pounds before his weight stabilized in five to six months. Electrocardiogram remained unchanged and no dehydration was observed. Pulse and respiration rates had fluctuated before assuming lower level than at start of experiment. Researchers Gherman A. Manovtsev, Andrey N. Bozhko, and Boris N. Ulybshev were reported in good health at conclusion of experiment. (Shabad, NYT, 12/25/68, 38)
Apollo 7 prime and backup crews successfully completed egress test at ksc. Astronauts performed both aided and unaided egress from spacecraft under simulated emergency conditions. At MSC three astronauts completed five-day vacuum chamber tests in spacecraft similar to command and service modules to be flown on second manned Apollo mission and lunar flights, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 9/10/69)
John A. Manke, NASA research pilot at prc, stands before wingless HL—10 lifting-body vehicle which he flew in first powered flight, after air launch from. B-52 aircraft. Manke reached 610 mph in NASA—usaf program to evaluate possible forerunners of reusable spacecraft. Eventual 1,000-mph speed was expected. Donn F. Eisele, and Edgar D. Mitchell. Flight crew support team wa3 Astronauts Joseph H. Engle, James B. Irwin, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Mission probabilities ranged from earth orbital operations to lunar orbital flight, with separation and docking of command and service module and lunar module. (NASA Release 68-201; AP, W Star, 11/14/68, A7; W Post, 11/14/68, A12; AP, NYT, 11/14/68, 21; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/14/68, 1)
In Washington Evening Star, David Lawrence asked, “What was really the big ‘miracle’ in the voyage of the American astronauts to the moon and back?” It could have happened, “and the rest of the world would not have witnessed the dramatic arrival of the astronauts aboard an aircraft carrier in the middle of the Pacific Ocean or the pictures sent from outer space for several days if it had not been for another great feat of science—transmission of television and radio from artificial satellites direct to every continent of the world.” (W Star, 12/30/68, A9)	_
Washington Post editorial noted total cost of space program to date was upwards of $20 billion: “The expenditure of sums of money like these cannot be justified in terms of the military or civilian spinoff, although both have been substantial, or of the knowledge we have gained about the atmosphere surrounding our planet. But they can be justified in terms of the national prestige that is to be won or lost in space and of the inevitable fate of man to pursue knowledge towards its ultimate end in hope of some day achieving a better understanding of what the earth and universe are all about. It is in this latter hope that we cheer the astronauts on, wish them well in their planned 163 orbits of the earth, pray for their safe return, and urge those who make the crucial decisions about the future space program to proceed with all deliberate speed to reach the goal President Kennedy put before us.” (W Post, 10/12/68, A12)
Cal Tech said Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar observatories were keeping close watch for developing sunspots that might threaten Apollo 8 astronauts with dangerous x-ray radiation. (Reuters, W Post, 12/5/68, H9) December 4: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 454-mi (730.6-km) apogee, 94-mi (151.3-km) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 106.2° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 12. (Pres Rpt 68)
Dr. R. G. Mclver, head of aeromedical research at Holloman afb, N. Mex., said tests on chimpanzees had shown astronaut experiencing sudden decompression outside spacecraft might live at least three minutes in total vacuum, giving his companions time to get him inside pressurized cabin. Survival of astronauts in ruptured space cabin would depend on presence of one man wearing space suit and thus able to place other crewmen in suits after they lost consciousness. Earlier, scientists had predicted sudden death for astronauts experiencing space vacuum decompression. Revised estimates of life expectancy were based on simulated space capsule experiments with 150 chimpanzees. (AP, B Sun, 11/16/68, A4)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart were scheduled to be launched on Saturn V in second manned Apollo space flight. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 with Saturn IB booster, would carry Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham into earth orbit in third quarter of 1968. (nasa Release 68-81; W Star, 4/28/68)
NASA’s Apollo 5 (AS—204) unmanned earth orbital mission, delayed for nearly four hours because of ground equipment malfunctions, was successfully launched from ksc Complex 37 at 5:48 pm est in fourth flight of Saturn IB and first flight of 31,700-lb lunar module (LM—1), designed to land two astronauts on the moon. Primary mission objectives were to verify operation of LM ascent propulsion system (aps), descent propulsion system (dps)—including restart—and spacecraft structures; evaluate LM staging; and evaluate 2nd-stage (S—IVB) and instrument-unit (iu) orbital performance. Launch phase occurred as planned; S—IVB ignited to insert spacecraft into orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 101-mi (163-km) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 31.63° inclination; nose cone jettisoned; spacecraft coasted for 43 min 52 sec; and LM separated from spacecraft LM adapter. LM entered orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 104-mi (167km) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 31.63° inclination. Initial 39-sec dps burn, designed to simulate deceleration for descent to lunar surface, was automatically shut down after only 4 sec because of overly conservative computer programming. Ground controllers switched to minimum requirement sequence, an alternate flight plan with shorter total dps firing time and no provision for lunar landing simulation. Second dps engine firing occurred successfully, with 26-sec burn at 10% thrust level and 7 sec at maximum thrust. Third DPS engine firing 32 sec later consisted of 26-sec bum at 10% thrust, 2 sec at maximum thrust, and ascent stage fire-in-the-hole (fith) burn during which the two stages separated and aps engine was ignited simultaneously while dps was being shut down, simulating abort during landing phase. Duration of initial aps burn during abort staging was 60 sec, aps engine fired second time for 6 min 23 sec until fuel was depleted. At end of 11-hr 10min test period, both stages of the lm were left in orbit eventually to reenter and disintegrate. Apollo 5 mission, adjudged successful by NASA in spite of premature dps engine shutdown, proved out structural integrity of lm; verified in-space operation of dps and APS; and proved value of contingency planning, lm was last major piece of Apollo hardware to have its first test in space. Command module (cm) had been tested during AS—203 mission (July 5, 1966) and with service module (sm) on AS—202 (Aug. 25, 1966) and Apollo 4 (AS-501) (Nov. 9, 1967). Final decision on whether Apollo 5 results justified omitting second unmanned test and scheduling next mission to be manned would be deferred until March, pending final mission review, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—6K, 68—19; msc Release 68-4; AP, Strothman, W Post, 1/23/68, 1; Fahnestock, W Star, 1/23/68, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/24/68, 20)
Apollo 7 Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received Kitty Hawk Memorial Trophy for distinguished achievement in aeronautics at annual Wright Brothers memorial banquet in Beverly Hills, Calif. Banquet commemorated 65th anniversary of flight of Kitty Hawk, (upi, W Star, 12/7/68, A2)
Dr. Charles A. Berry. Director of Medical Research and Operations, msc, was elected 1969 President of Aerospace Medical Assn, at 39th Annual Meeting in Bal Harbour, Fla. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin was named honorary member, (msc Roundup, 5/24/68,1)
Denver Post editorial: “With the goal of the project—landing of men on the moon by 1970—so close at hand, it would be sad indeed if NASA lost some key people now because of budget and morale problems. . . . There are future manned flights and space experiments to consider, and these will surely be crippled at infancy if NASA’s budget is cut back too severely.” {Denver Post, 6/24/68) In keynote address Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, noted no other program had given such impetus to technological and economic growth as national space program. “Those who oppose adequate spending on space technology are deliberately or inadvertently campaigning for a lower standard of living for our people, a declining Gross National Product for our Nation, and a secondary position in strength to that of the Soviet Union.” U.S. investment in space to date, he said, “has mostly been an investment in the future, the returns of which can be lost in large measure if we lack the vision and the vigor and the desire to keep this country great by maintaining a vigorous space effort. “Every major power and every nation eager to raise its standard of living and world influence strives to participate in space technology and space exploration. It certainly would be ironic if the United States, as the world’s leader in international cooperation and the world’s leader in standard of living, were to abandon or even neglect the source of such strength. I believe it might be labeled the worst mistake in history.” (Text; CR, 6/24/68, E5775—6; SBD, 6/25/68, 267; Aero Daily, 6/25/68) Gen. James Ferguson, AFSC Commander, said bioastronautics problems and provisions could have serious impact on mission performance, space station design, cost, and operations. Principal problems included those of crew rotation, crew size, compartment volume per crew member, radiation exposure, versatility of astronauts, station atmosphere, and prolonged weightlessness. In one study, savings from doubling crew rotation intervals from 30 to 60 days ranged from $220 million to $470 million per year, depending on altitude. Savings from increasing from 60 to 90 days were another $100 million a year. For same cost, slightly longer interval could support two more astronauts. Crew rotation intervals of two or more months should he goal. “If a future station can be expected to be useful over a period of many years and its cost can be amortized accordingly . . . efforts to achieve long crew rotation intervals have a very large potential payoff.” (Text; Aero Daily, 6/28/68) Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, described 100-man orbital workshop that could be operational by late 1970s. Proposed 615-ft-long, 1-million-lb vehicle, carrying 10,000 lb of experiments, would be launched in three separate parts by three Saturn V boosters and assembled in space. Baton-shaped station would revolve around hub in center which would serve as spaceport and zero-gravity laboratory. Crew would live and perform some work in 240-ft arm on one side of hub. On other side, 375-ft arm would house engine which would spin entire station at 3.5 rpm, creating centrifugal force to serve as artificial gravity. (Maloney, H Post, 6/26/68; AP, W Star, 6/26/68; CSM, 6/28/68) Arthur C. Clark, co-author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, suggested that most earth inhabitants could not be very objective about possibility of extraterrestrial life because they were too “geocentrically minded,” still considering earth the center of the universe. “The whole history of astronomy teaches us to be cautious of any theory purporting to show that there is something special about the earth. In their various ways, the other planets may have orders of complexity as great as ours. Even the moon—which looked a promising candidate for geophysical simplicity less than a decade ago—has already begun to unleash an avalanche of surprises. “The discovery that Jupiter is quite warm and has precisely the type of atmosphere in which life is believed to have arisen on earth may be the prelude to the most significant biological findings of this century.” If we discover no trace of extraterrestrial life, he said, “even such a negative finding would give us much sounder understanding of the conditions in which living creatures are likely to evolve—and this in turn would clarify our views on the distribution of life in the universe as a whole.” (Leavitt, AF/SD, 8/68, 59-62)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., announced he would retire as NASA astronaut after commanding Apollo 7 mission. At 45, Schirra would be world’s most experienced astronaut, having flown six orbits Oct. 3, 1962, on Sigma 7 in Mercury mission and having commanded two-man Dec. 15—16, 1965, Gemini VI mission, which had participated with Gemini VII in first rendezvous of spacecraft in space. He would remain ^ in space program, he said, “until we effect the job we set out to do”— to land men on moon and return them. (W Post, 9/21/68, A7; W Star, 9/21/68, A2)
Chicago Tribune said, “Now that Apollo 8 and its three astronauts are home from their historic trip around the moon, we can safely call it one of the most memorable Christmas gifts ever given to the American people and mankind.” (C Trib, 12/28/68, 12)
In 12-yr NASA-sponsored experiments with roosters spinning at 130 rpm up to 15 mo on double-deck centrifuge, Univ. of California’s Davis Chronic Acceleration Laboratory gravity experts had noted possible adverse effects of long-term weightlessness on astronauts. Without steps to counter effects, “man in space for long periods will find his body decalcified,” said Dr. Arthur H. Smith. “He will not be able to stand up without fracturing bones. All his muscles will shrivel up including those around his blood vessels. He will be overloaded with fat which he may not be able to use.” Among methods being developed to offset disturbances to human body in space were drugs which stabilized proper balance of red cells and steroids which helped maintain calcium metabolism. Roosters were used in tests since their upright posture, heart-to-head distance, and circulatory systems were similar to man’s. (Hillin-ger,W Post, 9/19/68, Gil)
nasa said it had reassigned management responsibility for Saturn I Workshop airlock module and modified lunar module ascent stage for Apollo Telescope Mount from msc to msfc, to establish satisfactory balance between Apollo Applications and Apollo programs. Move placed aa program design and integration responsibilities under single NASA center. Management responsibilities encompassed systems engineering, including development test and integration, to ensure compatibility of flight hardware and ground support equipment. Airlock module, mounted on Saturn IB vehicle, would provide 65-in-dia airlock tunnel for Apollo astronauts between spacecraft and living area of workshop inside hydrogen tank of rocket’s 2nd stage. Lunar module ascent stage was being modified as control station for ATM. AA program would further develop space capability in series of earth-orbital long-duration flights using Apollo hardware and other facilities, (nasa Release 68—159)
History of lunar nomenclature and tradition in naming lunar features was reviewed by Director of Fels Planetarium, Dr. I. M. Levitt, in Air Force and Space Digest. Knowledge from space research had created complications for specialists who had to name lunar features. In past, craters, mountains, rills, and seas on moon had heen named for scientists, mathematicians, and philosophers. In 1647, Johannes Hevelius had published Selenographica in Danzig, setting stage for naming lunar features. Ground rules were set down in 1932 hy International Astronomical Union (iau) , which formed committee of astronomers to select names. U.S.S.R. had asked 1967 General Assembly of iau to pass on 153 more names for features on moon’s hidden side. Levitt recommended that names of dead astronauts—both American and Russian—be accepted for lunar nomenclature; later, living astronauts could be similarly honored. Also pioneers in space research—“such as Goddard, von Braun, Gilruth, Newell, Ley, Lovelace, Flickinger, Stehling, and so on” —and astronomers and; benefactors of mankind could be considered. (.AF/SD, 1/68, 66-9)
White House announced from Johnson City, Tex., that President Johnson would present NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders during “Astronaut Day” ceremonies in Washington, D.C., Jan. 9, 1969. (AP, W Star, 12/31/68, A5; upi, NYT, 1/1/69, 10; W Post, 1/1/69, 2)
MSC engineers Edwin Samfield and William C. Huber were granted patent No. 3,389,877 for inflatable tether to connect orbiting spacecraft or to connect astronauts and spacecraft. Tether, which became semirigid when inflated to avoid problems of flexible tether, consisted of nylon tube with aluminum end pieces and shock-absorbing struts for attachment to spacecraft. It could be folded and stowed in end piece and expanded with compressed gas when needed. Prototypes were being constructed at msc. (Patent Off pio; Jones, NYT, 6/29/68, 37)
usaf test pilot Maj. William J. Knight was named 1968 winner of Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy as “world’s outstanding pilot for exceptional individual piloting performance.” He had piloted X—15 No. 2 to 4,520 mph Oct. 3, 1967. Maj. Knight held both command pilot and usaf astronaut’s command wings, having piloted research aircraft to 280,000-ft altitude. (NYT, 10/20/68, 84; CSM, 10/21/68)
President Johnson transmitted NASA’s 15th, 16th, and 17th Semiannual Reports to Congress covering July 1, 1966, to Dec. 31, 1967. President wrote, “I commend these reports to your attention. They contain, I believe, concrete evidence that NASA is moving forward, and that America is contributing mightily in the worldwide effort to conquer space for the benefit of all mankind.” In letter accompanying 17th report, NASA Administrator James E. Webb wrote, “This period was overshadowed by the Apollo fire which took the lives of three of our astronauts. The thorough investigation of the accident and the steps that were initiated to improve safety by changes in design and procedures have previously been made matters of public record. This report shows that the same period was also one of progress in aeronautics and space as evidenced, for example, by the successful flights of Surveyor, Lunar Orbiter, and many other spacecraft. It was a difficult time for NASA, but one in which the agency showed, I believe, that it could react maturely to failure as well as success, and continue to deserve the confidence and support of the nation.” (Text; nasa LAR VII/III)
Holder of world manned aircraft speed record, X—15 pilot Maj. William J. Knight (usaf), received senior astronaut wings and Distinguished Flying Cross from m/g Hugh B. Manson, Commander of afftc. Maj. Knight set 4,534-mph speed record Oct. 3, 1967, in special ablative-coated X—15; two weeks later he reached 277,000-ft altitude to qualify as an astronaut. On June 29, 1967, after experiencing complete engine and power failure, he had piloted X—15 to safe landing to earn DFC. (afftc Release 68-1-9)
nasa issued Management Instruction establishing Committee on ExtraVehicular Activities (eva), activities performed in space by astronaut outside space vehicle. Seven-member committee, serving for two-year period, would provide Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight with recommendations on overall NASA eva planning and development by: identifying eva capabilities which must be defined and developed to support manned space flight activities; identifying ground-based, orbital, and lunar surface experiments to establish required eva capabilities; providing recommendations on short- and long-term EVA program plans; reviewing proposed eva flight experiments and making recommendations; and maintaining awareness of EVA-related activities of organizations other than NASA, (nmi 1152.36)
NASA investigation board reported that primary cause of Oct. 5, 1967, crash of T—38 jet trainer near Tallahassee, Fla., was “a jam in the lateral control system (ailerons) from unknown source.” Accident had claimed life of pilot, Astronaut Clifton C. Williams. Board recommended improvement in T—38 inspection procedures, (nasa Release 68-102; upi, W Post, 6/7/68, A2; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 6/7/68, A3)
essa was studying solar flare prediction technique and ground observatory support for NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount flight scheduled for 1971. NASA had transferred $30,000 to essa for six-month investigation to enable astronauts to know when and where solar flare would occur within accuracy of 1,000 mi out of 860,000-mi-wide face of sun. essa also would study data required for maximum results from atm mission and examine existing data collection networks and observing procedures. Effort would be monitored by atm Project Office and Space Sciences Laboratory at msfc. (msfc Release 68—103; SBD, 5/15/68, 73)
President Johnson presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest award, to recently retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb at ceremony in Johnson City, Tex. He also awarded cluster to NASA Exceptional Service Medal held by Apollo 7 commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Exceptional Service Medals to Apollo 7 Astronauts R. Walter Cunningham and Donn F. Eisele. President said U.S. was “ready to take that first great step out into the solar system and on to the surface of the nearest of the many mysterious worlds that surround us in space.” Noting that Apollo 7 had logged more than 780 man-hours in space—more than had been logged “in all Soviet manned flights to date”—and had accomplished 56 mission objectives, as many “in this one flight as were accomplished in the first five manned flights of the Gemini spacecraft,” he said: “This is not important as either a game or a contest. But it is important because the United States of America must be first in technology if it is to continue its position in the world. I believe today, as I did when we had our original hearings that created the Space Administration, that the United States must be first.” President read citation, presenting Medal to Webb for “outstanding leadership of America’s space program from 1961 to 1968. . . . More than any other individual he deserves the credit for the great achievements of the United States in the first decade of space, and for helping man to reach outward toward the stars.” Webb responded: “The citation and medal . . . should, in my view, be converted into some kind of holographic substance so it could be divided into thousands of parts . . . and each part should really go to an outstanding person in NASA, in our scientific group, Working in our universities, and in the great industrial organizations of this country that have really done the work.” (Transcript; Citation; PD, 11/8/68, 1568-71)
usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was conducting research with 5-million-w arc heater to determine temperature and pressure limitations of ablative materials used to prevent military reentry vehicles from burning up on encountering earth’s atmosphere. Military reentry vehicles had to withstand conditions similar to high-speed reentry of interplanetary vehicles on return to earth, far more severe than those to be met by lunar astronauts. Data had been produced for civilian and military agencies, (afsc Release 117.68)
At Washington, D.C., ceremony, Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations, usn, presented Distinguished Service Medal to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Capt. usn), for space deeds “exceeded by no one afloat or airborne.” (AP, W Star, 12/18/68, B2; W Post, 12/18/68, A3)
NASA announced Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had replaced Astronaut Michael Collins as prime command module pilot for third manned Apollo mission. Lovell had held same position on mission’s backup crew. Collins had undergone successful spinal surgery July 23 and would require three to six months recuperation. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup lunar module pilot, had been moved to command module pilot position on backup crew. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., had been assigned to backup crew as lunar module pilot. Lovell joined Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders on prime crew for mission scheduled for first quarter 1969. (msc Release; KSC Release KSC-374-68; AP, NYT, 8/9/68, 14; upi, W Star, 8/9/68; W Post, 8/9/68, A7; SBD, 8/9/68, 169; msc Roundup, 8/16/68, 1)
Washington Post said of Apollo 8: “Above all, perhaps, this Christmas Eve at the moon and Christmas Day on the way home have told us more about our earth than about the moon. One of the astronauts had wondered on his way to the moon whether, if he were a traveller from another planet, he would think that intelligent life existed on Earth. The answer, from Captain Lovell at least, is that our planet is ‘a grand oasis in the great vastness of space.’ That is an awing insight and it reminds us that man has far to go here at home to fulfill the Christmas promise of Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men.” (W Post, 12/26/68, A20)
Television sequences showing Apollo 7 astronauts working in spacecraft as it passed Corpus Christi, Tex., and Cape Kennedy, Fla.—as well as shots of terrain more than 130 mi below and views of anything interesting in space would be telecast by three major U.S. networks “live” Oct. 12 through Oct. 19, nasa said. Pictures would be transmitted from camera in space capsule to msc for instant showing over TV networks. Neither launch day nor splashdown day would be included in 11 am to 12 pm series. (Kirkman, W News, 9/24/68, 7)
Army Map Service technicians were building 22- by 14-ft hand-carved model of landing site astronauts would see on approaching lunar “target area,” to assist NASA in simulating manned landings on moon. Model, part of lunar module simulator (lms), would be constructed from high-fidelity lunar relief map made from Orbiter IV and V photography. (dod Release 966—68)
Engineering mockup of Saturn l orbital workshop readied for crew station review at Marshall Space Flight Center. Space-sidled astronaut leaves full-size model of Saturn S—IVB rocket stage which will contain individual sleeping rooms, kitchen-dining area, laboratory work spaces, and waste-management area. hope that the conquest of space can contribute to the establishment of peace.” (Text)
Washington Sunday Star editorial on Apollo 6 mission: “. . . Saturn 5’s latest performance . . . suggests that our astronauts may not be able to carry out their lunar mission until considerably later than optimists have suggested—possibly not until 1971, if then. . . . However ... it is better to be safe than sorry. Saturn 5’s deficiencies must be eliminated, no matter how long the job takes, before it is used to lift a manned Apollo spacecraft to the moon. Despite loose talk about a So-viet-American ‘space race,’ there should be no all-out drive, no senseless rush, to score a first in this field.” (W Star, 4/7/68, FI)
Global military expenditures ranked first in world public expenditures. They had risen from $132 billion to 1964 to $138 billion in 1965, $159 billion in 1966, and estimated $182 billion in 1967—record high level. Preliminary data, said U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Report, World Military Expenditures 1966—67, said current military spending exceeded by 40% world’s expenditures on education by all levels of government and was more than three times worldwide public health expenditure. (Text; Shackford, W Post, 1/24/69, A21) During 1968: In 1968 U.S. orbited 64 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 74. U.S. total included 43 launched by DOD. NASA’s 21 included satellite orbited as secondary payload. Highlight of NASA’s 10th anniversary year was success in carefully planned series of Apollo missions—including first two manned flights in Apollo lunar landing program. Unmanned Apollo 5 and Apollo 6 completed inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. First manned mission, Apollo 7, carried three astronauts around earth for 11 days, verifying spacecraft operation before splashing down precisely on target. Mission included live TV transmission from space, largest number of inflight restarts of sps to date, and new record of 781 manhours in space. Apollo program climaxed Dec. 21—27 with highly successful six-day Apollo 8 mission on which three-man crew demonstrated operation of spacecraft systems in lunar environment while world watched live TV coverage via satellite. Spacecraft orbited moon 10 times, providing man with his first trip out of earth’s gravitational field and first look at moon’s far side and proving capability of crew, spacecraft, and support and control systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar-return velocity. Unmanned Surveyor VII, NASA’s first launch in 1968 and last spacecraft in Surveyor series, softlanded on moon, conducted on-site analyses of lunar soil, and took part in laser-detection communications experiment. Applications satellites launched included Intelsat—III F—2 comsat for ComSatCorp and Essa VII and VIII meteorological satellites for essa. Scientific achievements included orbiting of NASA’s Ogo V, Aao II, Explorer XXXVI, XXXVIII, XXXIX, and XL satellites and Naval Research Laboratory’s Explorer XXXVII. Oao II—heaviest and most complicated U.S. automated spacecraft ever launched—took first UV photos of stars, returning previously unobtainable data. Explorer XXXVI was successfully used by gsfc as target in first daylight operational laser tracking. Pioneer IX, launched into solar orbit, carried Tetr II pickaback and ejected it into earth orbit where it served as tracking target for nasa’s Manned Space Flight Network. Some 157 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—II spacecraft was launched on suborbital mission to obtain data on radio attenuation during reentry. X—15 rocket research aircraft made 13 flights, ending its flight program with 199 missions, including 154 at mach 4 or greater, 109 at mach 5 or above, and 4 at greater than mach 6. NASA—usaf flight research continued with 13 flights of XB—70 supersonic aircraft, usaf’s C—5A, world’s largest military cargo aircraft, made its maiden flight and three of the aircraft completed 31 flights for 88-hr total flying time. Design of sst was reevaluated and program was delayed until new fixed-wing design was selected, with prototype construction expected to begin in 1969. nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 12 successful glide flights and first powered flight. dod space program included orbiting of 8 IDCSP comsats, 1 Lincoln Experimental Satellite, 5 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, and 2 environmental research satellites; static test-firings of Titan III—M 1st stage; and near completion of mol launch complex at Vandenberg AFB. In joint NASA—aec effort, propulsion technology highlights included power tests of Phoebus 2A nuclear reactor, first tests of cold-flow test engine in flight configuration in new test stand, and first test-firings of Pewee 1 fuel element test-bed reactor. U.S.S.R. launched 74 payloads, including 64 Cosmos satellites, 1 Luna, 1 Proton, 3 Zond, and 2 Soyuz spacecraft, and 3 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz III rendezvoused but did not dock with unmanned Soyuz II launched one day earlier. Unmanned Zond V and VI completed circumlunar flights and were recovered. Zond IV circled moon and apparently crashlanded. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully made 38-min maiden flight. (Pres Rpt 68; NASA Release 68-219; B Sun, 1/18/69, 28; Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; upi, W Star, 1/1/69 A7)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Stuart A. Roosa were chosen prime crew for 48-hr at-sea checkout of Apollo spacecraft, scheduled to begin March 18 in Gulf of Mexico. Apollo’s at-sea post-landing systems for first manned mission would be checked from deck of NASA’s motor vessel Retriever. (H Chron, 3/7/68)
The space age, no doubt, will produce many future heroes and many other historic accomplishments, New York Times said, “but even now it is plain that yesterday Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders assured themselves of immortality as the first men literally to break the shackles of earth and travel successfully to another destination in this suddenly shrunken solar system.” (NYT, 12/25/68, 30)
msc officials announced resignation of Astronaut John S. Bull (L/Cdr., usn), third astronaut to leave space program because of medical problem. Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Chief of Medical Programs, told news conference Astronaut Bull had rare respiratory disease for which there was no known cure and no medical name. It was characterized by chronic sinus difficulties, lung obstruction, and sensitivity to aspirin. (upi, W Post, 7/17/68, All)
nasa’s 10th anniversary was celebrated with appropriate fanfare, but the 11th anniversary of the Space Age, which came during the same week, slipped by with barely a nod of recognition,” James J. Haggerty, Jr., charged in Armed Forces Journal. “It should have been given more attention. The U.S. needs a continual reminder that we were dragged kicking and screaming into space exploration, that the U.S. space program was born only out of reaction to the accomplishments of another nation. . . . “The summary for 11 years of space launchings shows a total of 881 launches through the Oct. 4 anniversary date. About 400 of all the spacecraft launched still are in orbit. “The U.S. enjoyed a considerable quantitative lead at the end of the 11-year period. It sent into orbit 564 spacecraft, or 64% of the total, compared with 298 spacecraft, or 33%, for the USSR. . . . “Manned flights, of course, were confined to the U.S. and the USSR. Through the anniversary date the U.S. had launched 14 flights involving 24 astronauts and 1,993 man-hours; the USSR had made nine flights with 12 cosmonauts piling up 532 man-hours.” (AFJ, 10/12/68, 13)
While Soviet scientists believed in use of some drugs to help man adapt to long space flights, U.S. medical experts wanted to avoid use of medication in orbit because of unpredictable side effects they sometimes produced, Associated Press reported. U.S. astronauts had carried only nonbromide, antimotion sickness pills and these had been used only once, by Gemini VIII pilots Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott when stuck thruster caused spacecraft to roll and forced emergency landing. Soviet representatives at Vienna U.N. Conference on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space had indicated most U.S.S.R. cosmonauts had used depressants for sleeping in orbit and stimulants to counteract fatigue. To avoid need for drugs, NASA selected only highly qualified astronaut candidates and trained them to cope with situations they might find in space. (B Sun, 9/16/68, 8)
At press showing in Dover, Del., NASA introduced fireproof Apollo spacesuits developed after Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire to protect astronauts against extreme heat, cold, and flash fires. Beta cloth of glass fiber was nonflammable, with 1,200° F melting point. Former spacesuit fabric would melt at 700° F and would burn if ignited. New 54-lb suits were ,22 lb heavier but more flexible, consisting of inner layer of cotton underwear and cover layer of Beta cloth, nylon, and aluminized Kapton to protect against micrometeoroids and temperatures between 310° F and —250° F. Intermediate garment contained ventilation unit which, for astronauts participating in extravehicular activity, would be cooled with continuous flow of water while wearer was outside capsule and with pure oxygen inside capsule. Suits and cloth helmet to be worn after removal of plastic headwear were manufactured by icl Industries, Inc., and cost $175,000—$200,000 each, nasa had ordered 100. (Lyons, NYT, 8/3/68, 3; Lannan, W Star, 8/3/68, A2)
NASA announced that sinus condition that was aggravated by pressure changes and had not responded to treatment led to grounding—perhaps permanently—of Astronaut John S. Bull. Astronaut Robert A. R. Parker had suffered spine fracture during parachute training at Williams afb, Ariz., but injuries were not thought to be serious. (AP, B Sun, 5/16/68, A3; W Star, 5/16/68; H Post, 5/16/68, 8)
Orbital workshop engineering mockup was readied for five-day crew station review Feb. 12—16 at msfc. It was second of three design reviews. First had been conducted Dec. 11—14, 1967. In mockup, recently returned to msfc from McDonnell Douglas Corp., astronauts would carry out tasks on ground that would later be done in orbit under zero gravity conditions, including experiment installation and operation, msfc announced that third and final critical review in July would precede production of flight model of orbital workshop. (msfc Release 68-18)
Representatives of 43 nations signed space rescue treaty at separate ceremonies in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow. At State Dept, ceremony in Washington, D.C., President Johnson said he hoped treaty would end wasteful competitive spacemanship between U.S. and U.S.S.R. and that next decade in space would increasingly become a partnership. Treaty, which provided for assistance to astronauts in emergency and safe return of astronauts and space hardware, had heen unanimously approved by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19, 1967. Secretary of State Dean Rusk signed for U.S. It would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. (Ward, B Sun, 4/23/68,1; PD, 4/29/68,1108)
nasa announced award to Bendix Corp. of $1,567,550 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for development, test, and delivery of one prototype and five flight-model atm star trackers in 15-mo period, atm, part of Apollo Applications program, would be launched into earth orbit and docked with Saturn I Workshop being developed by msfc for 28- to 56-day astronaut stays in space. Astronauts would use atm to study sun from above earth’s atmosphere, (msfc Release 68—196) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, asserted U.S. could afford multibillion dollar space program; “at least as much as President Johnson proposed this year—nearly $7,000,000,000—and perhaps an appreciable amount more.” (Figure included all Government spending, not just NASA funds.) Persons advocating big cuts in space program were “doing this country a disservice.” Much of high U.S. gross national product was result of prior investment in r&d. “This Nation invests more per capita in research than any other nation in the world and that is a major reason why we have a higher standard of living. The space program is the most active, economical, and productive stimulus to research and development in history. We cannot afford to slow it down . . . unless we think we can afford less investment in the elimination of poverty, less expenditure for health improvement, less income for an expanding population, and less readiness in the realm of national security.” Space program cost, though large, was “not really so expensive when we figure that we are spending less than 1% of our Gross National Product for a technological capability that increases the rate at which this Nation becomes wealthier and more powerful by many times 1%.” (Text; B Sun, 8/29/68, A5; AP, LA Times, 8/29/68) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Library of Congress Research Specialist, said U.S.S.R. was launching more military espionage satellites than any other spacecraft and therefore had softened complaints about U.S. espionage satellite activity. Tracing political and social implications of Soviet space program, Dr. Sheldon said U.S.S.R. accepted “importance of basic research on the cosmic scale” and vigorous exploitation of space applications for civil purposes was definite goal. In long-term outlook, U.S.S.R. talked of “future automated, cybernetics-aided industrial state ... in which space applications, space travel, and use of extraterrestrial resources play a vital part.” He also credited NASA program of international cooperation with some influence on recent Soviet shift toward increased cooperation within and without Soviet bloc, though joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. program for space exploration would probably prove inoperable even if it could be established. (AIAA Paper 68-900; AP, NYT, 8/30/68, 7) m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf) , director of faa sst development, said cost of designing and developing two prototype commercial SSTs would amount to $1,587 billion. Government share in total spending from 1963 through 1972 would be $1,239 billion, or 78%. Contractors, Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., would pay $287.8 million, or 18%, and customer airlines would contribute $59.5 million, or 4%. Principal problem in financing, he said, was protection of manufacturers against catastrophic failure. This would require “some limitation of recourse of creditors ... in event of program failure.” In addition, Gen. Maxwell forecast $2.5-billion to $5-billion market risk for period starting in 1972 and $15 billion commercial risk for period between start of sales and end of century. (AIAA Paper 68—916; AP, NYT, 9/1/68,22)
Entire thrust of Soviet space program pointed to circumlunar flight by cosmonauts before U.S., according to former astronaut Cdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn). Speaking at Beloit College symposium on oceanography, he predicted NASA might try to send crew around moon in autumn as counter to Soviet manned space spectacular. (Lewis, B News, 5/19/68)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was announced winner of Kitty Hawk Memorial Trophy for distinguished achievement in aeronautics. Trophy would be presented at annual Wright Brothers memorial banquet in Beverly Hills, Calif., Dec. 6. (upi, W Star, 11/19/68, A2)
Recorded aircraft highjackings had totaled 14 in past year, with 13 U.S. airliners over southern U.S. forced to land in Cuba, Andrew Wilson of London Observer reported. (IP Post, 8/14/68, A3) August 14^-27: At U.N. Conference on Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space held in Vienna and attended by 500 delegates from 74 nations, Soviet Premier Alexey N. Kosygin announced U.S.S.R. and “other Socialist countries” would establish comsat network “Intersputnik” to compete with Intelsat. Draft agreement had been submitted in New York to U.N. Secretary-General U Thant by U.S.S.R., Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Mongolia, and Cuba. Vladimir Minashin, head of comsat div. of Soviet Ministry of Communications, said Intersputnik satellite would have same synchronous orbit used by the four U.S.-provided Intelsat satellites. U.S. Dept, spokesman said U.S. had no need to join U.S.S.R.-sponsored system; Intelsat, with 62 member nations, was already operating successfully, handling 95% of total international telecommunications traffic. U.S. was not opposed to Soviet proposal for political reasons, but on grounds there would be economic problems in creation of two worldwide comsat systems. (W Post, 8/14/68, 12; O’Toole, W Post, 8/15/68, A21; Hamilton, NYT, 8/15/68, 18; 8/20/68, 18; WSJ, 8/15/68, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/15/68, 1) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at Vienna conference discussed three results of U.S. manned space flight program to illustrate contributions to space exploration. Program had proved man could live in space and man could do useful work in space and it had created technology to make these possible. In first category, nasa, nas—nrc Space Science Board, nsf, arpa, dod groups, universities, and others had conquered problems of weightlessness in space, heavy acceleration and deceleration forces, air supply and pressure required for breathing in space, psychological problems presented by isolation, and problem of radiation. Successful termination of Mercury and Gemini programs had proved man capable of existing in space. His capability to do useful work in space had been proved by successful rendezvous and docking of spacecraft, by space photography, and by extravehicular activity. Pervasiveness of space technology had been demonstrated by range and variety of thousands of products, including Saturn V launch vehicle, world’s largest flight vehicle, and integrated circuit, one of world’s smallest manufactured items. Dr. Mueller said: “Our civilization has been built upon our accumulated knowledge of the natural laws of our environment. All of our inventions have been the result of the application of these natural laws. Advances in our civilization have always followed after discovery of some one of the missing links in our chain of knowledge. ... We know that many of the missing links . . . will he supplied ... as we move man with his accumulation of experience and his sophisticated equipment for exploration, into a new laboratory . . . the laboratory of the moon and outward to our solar system. ... If all of us, from all nations, are sufficiently creative, abundantly inventive, and freely adaptive, we have it within our power to improve the lives of every man, woman, and child.” (Text) U.S.S.R. Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov at Vienna conference proposed Aug. 15 that Ocean of Storms, prominent feature of lunar landscape, be renamed Ocean of Gagarin in honor of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gargarin, who made first manned earth orbit April 12, 1961. Leonov, who took man’s first walk in space in 1965, read Gagarin paper which emphasized similarity between experience of Soviet astronauts and that of crews of deep-sea exploratory craft. He said all actions taken in Soviet space vehicles were tried first in underwater craft. Large Soviet exhibit at conference showed full-scale model of original Soviet spacecraft and listed Soviet space firsts. U.S. exhibit, small because of cut in nasa funds, depicted benefits space exploration would produce for developing countries. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/16/68) J. L. Blondstein of British National Industrial Space Committee told group meeting at conference Aug. 20 that production of U.S. military satellites capable of direct TV broadcasts to military units was “imminent.” He said U.S. had spent between $80 million and $100 million on development but denied information was being withheld for military security reasons. DOD spokesman in Washington had said he knew of no plans for direct TV broadcasts by military satellites. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/21/68, 3) W. T. Pecora, Director, U.S. Geological Survey, said Aug. 23 that worldwide volcano and earthquake monitoring network might be provided within a few years by space satellites carrying cameras and sensing devices to give up to one hour advance notice of strong earth shocks. (AP, C Trib, 8/23/68)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary. In preparation for first manned Apollo flight, Apollo 7 spacecraft command module (cm) and service module (sm) had been mated in ksc altitude chamber to confirm compatible operation systems. Saturn IB launch vehicle 2nd-stage engine was being modified to strengthen propellant feed lines to augmented spark igniter. Apollo/Saturn 503 mission might be first manned Saturn V flight. Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle had successfully completed eight-day vacuum chamber test of Apollo 2TV—1 cm and sm at msc June 24. All tests necessary to help verify Apollo for first manned flight had been completed, with review of test data in progress. Last of seven scheduled verification tests of modified Apollo earth landing system had been postponed to complete analysis of all possible test conditions before drop of 13,000-lb full-scale Apollo cm from aircraft at Naval Air Facility, El Centro, Calif. Test would simulate severe landing condition using one of two drogue parachutes and two of three main parachutes. Ultimate load test of two modified Apollo drogue parachutes in reefed condition was scheduled no earlier than June 27. Repeat of unsuccessful test, it would be conducted from 13,00-lb parachute test vehicle at aircraft altitude of 46,000 ft. (Text; upi, W Post, 6/22/68, A8; SBD, 6/25/68, 270; 6/27/68, 285)
In New York Times Walter Sullivan described “The Sun-Spot Menace to Astronauts.” Apollo 7 and U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz III served as reminders that sunspots were reaching their 11-yr peak. If eruptions were particularly severe, protons were hurled out at almost speed of light. These could penetrate spacecraft. While Apollo 7 astronauts were never in danger, Soviet spacecraft placed in orbits reaching north beyond latitude 51° might “nudge zone” within which protons ejected by sun “rain fiercely on the atmosphere.” Major flare had occurred Oct. 30 just after Soyuz III returned to earth. If astronauts had been in orbit —particularly if they had been outside spacecraft—they could have been subjected to hazardous radiation. Many warnings preceded this event. For moon journey it should be possible to postpone or cut short flight if sun looked ominous. In any miscalculation, radiation exposure to astronauts inside spacecraft would be severe only during most intense outbursts. However, on prolonged journeys to other planets there would be no escape. “It may therefore be necessary to design the spacecraft so that a portion of its interior will be shielded from such radiation.” (NYT, 11/10/68, 7E) Zond VI reentered and softlanded in a predetermined area in Central Asia Nov. 17. Unlike Zond V, which had plunged directly through upper atmosphere, Zond VI skipped across outer layers of atmosphere to reduce its reentry speed and then resumed its descent with aerodynamic forces. Announcing recovery, Tass said Zond VI had for first time tested a “more complex and promising method of the return of spacecraft from interplanetary trajectories—the method of controlled descent with the use of aerodynamical lifting force (aerodynamical quality) of the descending craft. . . . “The braking of the descending apparatus in the atmosphere . . . was effected along a trajectory with two immersions in the atmosphere. During the first immersion . . . the second cosmic speed ... [11 km per sec, 24,607 mph] was reduced to 7.6 kilometers a second (17,000 mph) through aerodynamical braking. In doing so, the descending apparatus . . . was oriented through the onboard control system in such a way that it, passing through the dense layers of the atmosphere, left them and next continued along the ballistic trajectory until the second immersion . . . [in which] the further lowering of the descending apparatus was also effected along the trajectory of controlled descent with the use of aerodynamical qualities which ensured its return to the Earth in the pre-set district.” Zond VI was sixth spacecraft in Zond series [see Sept. 15—21]. (AP, W Star, 11/11/68, 1; NYT, 11/15/68, 8; gsfc SSR, 11/15/68, 11/30/68; Winters, B Sun, 11/19/68, 1; Kamm, NYT, 11/19/68, 1; SBD, 11/19/68, 71-2)
Associated Press quoted Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair, who was instrumental in having prayer removed from U.S. public schools, as saying she would register complaints with NASA against reading by Apollo 8 astronauts of portions of Genesis during lunar orbit and would organize mail campaign to bar prayer from space. (AP, W Post, 12/28/68, A9)
President Johnson proclaimed Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts, and the Return of Space Objects in effect with deposit in three capitals of instruments of ratification by U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. Ireland and Nepal had previously ratified treaty, which had been signed by 75 countries. Proclamation noted new agreement was essentially humanitarian. Its provisions “carry forward the goals qf international cooperation to which the United States has been dedicated since enactment of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and to which the United States renewed its commitment in the outer space treaty of 1967.” {PD, 12/9/68, 1658; AP, NYT, 12/5/68, 13; nasa Off of General Council)
The Economist: “What did they think, those three men of Apollo 8 who risked their lives and their sanity to fly to the moon only to report that it looked like grey plaster of paris? What should we earthbound ones think? In New York City, there are at least 2,000 people who would rather have watched a football game and were sufficiently incensed to telephone the television networks and tell them so. The blame is not the astronauts’. A whole series of photographs, some taken from instruments actually on the moon’s surface, some in black-and-white, some in colour, had already warned them what to expect. The buck lies on the desks of the men who for the past 13 years have directed the United States’ $32 billion space programme, and spent 70% of it on getting men into space without planning anything constructive for them to do when they got there. . . . The cost of a manned moonshot is put at around $1 billion, and for that sum you could get a whole programme of unmanned moon launches. . . . “But man does not live by science alone. . . . the greatest achievements of men in space have so far been in the realm of the human spirit. . . . Apollo 8 is part of the unceasing restlessness, invention and ambition of our kind. Have we really any reason to believe that man’s evolution has come to a stop after a bare half million years on earth? It requires arrogance, a closed mind and absolutely no sense of history ... to say that sending men into space is an utter waste of time.” [The Economist, 12/28/68, 112)
Library of Congress had acquired from former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., The John Glenn Papers, 90,000 items representing national and international response to his first manned space flight, Feb. 20, 1962. Majority of letters covering 1962—64 were from ordinary citizens, largely elementary school children. Other items included subject files, space manuals, news clippings, scrapbooks, invitations, certificates, awards, maps, and charts which Library’s Information Bulletin said “reflect the contemporary need for a popular hero—one who can be held up to the young and who at the same time must undergo the rigorous pressures brought about by ‘instant’ fame and worldwide recognition.” Papers provided “many insights into contemporary social history.” Glenn had been asked for his opinion on every conceivable topic. (Sifton, LC Info Bull, 8/29/68)
NASA announced award of $7.4-million contract to Link Group, General Precision Systems, Inc., for maintenance and modification support of MSc’s simulator complex, continuing services provided by Link Group since March 1964. Apollo mission simulators, at msc and at ksc, had provided flight training for astronaut crews in which nearly every detail of flight except weightlessness could be simulated, (nasa Release 68—20).
usn announced selection of 54 men to serve as aquanauts in 60-day Sealab III experiment in underwater living, scheduled to begin in October. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), team leader for Sealab II (Aug. 28—Sept. 26, 1965), would serve as Senior Aquanaut. Ocean floor experiments would be conducted at 620-ft depth off San Clemente Island by 40 aquanauts in 5 teams serving 12 days each. Remaining 14 men would serve as alternates and backup surface support divers, (dod Release 579—68; Aero Daily, 6/26/68)
International comment on Apollo 8 mission:	, In statement distributed by Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., Boris Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, hailed “hardware” and “courage” of Apollo 8 astronauts but called attention to “considerable accent” placed on “automatic devices” in Soviet space program. He said, “The Soviet Union is engaged in a large-scale program of planned studies and exploration of outer space, which provides for the investigation of the earth’s upper atmosphere and of near-earth outer space and studies of sun-earth relationships and of our closest space neighbors—the moon, venus and mars, and later, on more remote planets.” Cuban National Radio called mission “a total success.” Toss: “Due tribute should be paid to the courage and mastery of Frank Borman, William Anders and James Lovell who have accomplished this outstanding scientific and technical experiment. The successful flight of Apollo 8 ushers in a new stage in the history of space exploration.” Ten Soviet cosmonauts telegraphed Apollo crew congratulations for “another milestone in scientific and technical progress.” Pope Paul VI, in message to President Johnson: “Giving thanks to God for the successful completion of the magnificent enterprise of the Apollo 8 mission, we congratulate you and the people of the United States of America and particularly the intrepid space travelers, and invoke divine blessing upon all contributing to this noble achievement.” U.N. Secretary General U Thant: “The powerful thrust of the rocket engines, the awesome speeds attained in flight, the vast distances traveled, the precision of navigation and the fidelity of communications, aural and visual, all stagger the imagination and defy the comprehension of man.” Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia: “a great milestone in man’s continued search of the unknown.” Gov. Gen. Roland Michener of Canada, in message to President Johnson: Canadians had followed astronauts’ flight with “admiration for their courage and the technical skill of all who have a part in the enterprise.” Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan to President Johnson: feat showed America’s “courage and the high level of scientific technology.” In Kaduna, Nigeria, New Nigerian said Apollo 8, “Apart from being the supreme technological achievement ... of all time,” was “another exciting chapter in man’s eternal quest to triumph over his own natural environment.” Same skills and resources which were helping to conquer space ’’could easily be diverted to giving man a better life on earth itself—if only all of us would allow the good that is inherent in all mankind to assert itself.” (AP, B Sun, 12/28/68, 1; New Nigerian, 12/27/68, 1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, at dedication of Grissom and Chaffee Halls at Purdue Univ. said, “The pressing sociological problems besetting this nation will require a high order of technological skill to solve.” Space program was contributing to “fundamental solution” of problems of poverty and human welfare by bringing “advancement in economic and technological growth.” Space flight would help public understand ability of industry, science, and government to-work together to mobilize .resources. Honoring late astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee, Dr. Mueller predicted space program would “help to shape our future” and U.S. would continue “to rely upon the vision and dedication” of such men. Conquest of space would be “our most enduring memorial to these men.” (Text)
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., William A. Anders, and Frank Borman—scheduled to begin lunar orbital mission Dec. 21—• held preflight press conference at MSC. Borman, comparing mission to “a combat tour in Vietnam,” said: “The risks we take are acceptable ones. . . . We have to accept them if we believe it’s worthwhile. If I ever feel it’s not worthwhile, I’ll quit.” Describing the magnificence of space flight, Borman said, “When you’re finally up at the moon and looking back at the world, the nationalities blend. . . .You get the concept that this really is one world and wonder why ... we can’t live together like decent people.” Anders said crew “might use the opportunity [of being in lunar orbit ChristDeoember 7-10: NASA’s' Oao-II 21-foot-wu!e, 4,400-pound Orbiting Astronomical Observatory carried 11 telescopes into orbit to seek answers to questions on origin, evolution, and future of universe. Photo was made in final flight qualification testing. mas Day] to express to all peoples of the world our purposes and the benefits we can expect from space exploration.” (Lannan, W Star, 12/8/68, A4; AP, KC Star, 12/8/68; AP, M Her, 12/8/68)
NASA announced it had assigned Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan as prime crew for Apollo 10 mission, scheduled for second quarter of 1969 as second manned flight of lunar module. Backup crew would be Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper,
Apollo 8 astronauts were pronounced in perfect health by NASA Director of Medical Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, after three-hour physical examination as countdown proceeded toward Dec. 21 launch for moon flight. “The crew is in real fine spirits,” he added. (AP, B Sun, 12/17/68; AP, W Star, 12/17/68)
Apollo 7 editorial comment: Washington Post: “. . . as the men in the space program go over the data on Apollo 7 and consider the alternatives of manned or unmanned flight on Apollo 8, they must not allow anyone’s desire to heat the Russians, or to get around the moon by the end of 1968, or to fan public interest in the future of space exploration to enter into their calculations. Only if they are convinced that our knowledge is sufficient, our spacecraft is totally adequate, and our men are ready should they give the go to Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders for a Christmas trip into space.”(IF Post, 10/23/68, A24) Washington Evening Star: “To those who have made a close study of the space program, [Walter M.] Schirra is the astronaut’s astronaut; the man whose ability stands out in that company of the superable. To those in the know, Schirra is the mischievous perfectionist, the naval officer who lives by the book w'hen he isn’t too busy carrying out an elaborate practical joke. But Schirra will surely be remembered by the public as the astronaut who caught cold, who growled when the alarm clock rang, and who blew up when he was pushed too far. And it may be that Schirra’s greatest contribution to the space program is that he, the most superlative of the supermen, forcefully demonstrated to the world that his is completely and refreshingly human.” (W Star, 10/23/68, A20) Baltimore Sun: “The toting up and analysis of all the information brought home this time must be left to the teams of experts. So must the decisions as to what comes next, and the planning such decisions call for. The public is content to know that three men in a spaceship have added another brave and brilliant chapter to a history of which all of us are unreservedly proud.” (B Sun, 10/23/68, A6)
U.S. patent No. 3,396,921 was issued to Francis M. Rogallo, head of low-speed vehicle branch at LaRC, for control devices to regulate pitch and roll of paraglider planned for Apollo Applications flights. Rogallo and his wife Gertrude had developed paraglider—called Rogallo wing —under NASA contract. It was free-flight vehicle with flexible wings which could be extended upon reentry to carry astronauts to a landing. (Pat Off pio; NYT, 8/17/68, 37)
Senate unanimously approved space rescue treaty, providing for rescue and return of astronauts downed on foreign soil. It had been signed by '75 nations. (CR, 10/8/68, S12215-6; AP, B Sun, 10/9/68, A10)
New York Gov. Nelson B. Rockefeller announced Apollo 8 astronauts had accepted invitation to come to New York for special day of observance Jan. 10. (Fox, NYT, 1/1/69, 1)
Ten years ago NASA officially came into being. In photo, President Dwight D. Eisenhower hands commissions to heads of new agency after Sept. 8, 1958, swearing in ceremonies. At President’s left Is Dr. T. Keith Glenrtan, first NASA A d m in is! tutor. Accepting commission is first Deputy Administrator, the late Hugh L. Dry den. stone of this rewarding effort, we renew our dedication to the guiding principle we expressed 10 years ago at nasa’s launching: that our further mastery of space may continue to be ‘for the benefit of all mankind.’ ” {PD, 10/7/68,1435-1436) During its first 10 yr NASA had completed 234 major U.S. and international launches plus thousands of sounding rocket launches. Of 234 major launches, 189 were launch-vehicle successes and 174 were spacecraft or mission successes, with two missions still under evaluation. For these launches NASA had developed rockets ranging from 88,000-lb thrust to Saturn V with 7.5-million-lb thrust capable of sending nearly 100,000-lb payload to moon. First phase of manned flight program, Project Mercury, had begun seven days after NASA was established. Six manned Mercury flights had proved man could go into space and function as pilot-engineer-experimenter for up to 34 hr weightless flight before returning to earth. Gemini program announced in 1961 had demonstrated work could be performed in orbit outside spacecraft in more than 12 hr extravehicular activity. Gemini included 52 experiments, among them 17 scientific—in astronomy, biology, geology, meteorology, and physics. Seven rendezvous techniques and nine dockings had been accomplished during Gemini. More than 2,000 hr manned spaceflight experience gained through Mercury and Gemini had contributed heavily to Apollo, including 16 flights of unmanned Saturn launch vehicle which had confirmed Apollo engineering concepts and qualified all systems for manned missions. Although Apollo fire on Jan. 27, 1967, had delayed manned missions, it had resulted in safer spacecraft and improved suits for astronauts. Ahead were two manned missions for 1968 and possibly five for 1969, culminating in landing of U.S. astronauts on moon. Facilities at NASA installations in U.S. were worth more than $2.5 billion and peak 35,000 staff included some of Nation’s top scientists. Industrial work force had peaked at 400,000 and was dropping to 200,000. NASA had established global tracking network capable of communicating with vehicles as far away as far side of sun. Its aeronautics program conducted R&D on noise abatement, flight safety, supersonic and hypersonic aircraft, lifting-body vehicles, and v/stol aircraft, nasa’s technological advances included development of new electronic parts, alloys, adhesives, lubricants, valves, and pumps, as well as progress in miniaturization. More than 2,500 technical innovations applicable in industry, medicine, and other nonaerospace activities had resulted from 10 yr of nasa progress. In Christian Science Monitor, Neal Stanford said, “It is . . . science satellites and the new technology developed that are counted on to return to the tax-paying public the dividends that some say will make space the best investment man ever made.” (Marshall Star, 9/25/68, 5; Wilford, NYT, 10/1/68; CSM, 10/5/68) In Washington Sunday Star special report, “A Decade in Space,” John Lannan commented on NASA’s 10th anniversary: “. . . the space agency’s real promise for improving the general welfare of mankind as set forth in the Space Act which brought it into being has apparently been too slow in being fulfilled. The fact that the space investment is only now starting to pay off, and at an increasingly rapid pace, is going unnoticed in the glare of present problems, past mishaps and the imminence of the Apollo venture. Where NASA’s real goals lie are in the future—the near future and the near earth. Spin-off, the serendipity of technology, has long been used as a justification for the vast sums poured into space, but little beyond Teflon-coated frying pans have impinged on the tax-payer’s mind.” (W Star, 9/29/68, Al) NASA Assistant Administrator for dod and Interagency Affairs Jacob E. Smart wrote in Space Digest: “The tenth anniversary . . . marks the end of a decade of concerted effort across a broad front to advance the nation’s capabilities in aeronautics and space. It has been a decade of accomplishment that has few peers in this country’s history. . . . the good working relationships . . . between NASA and DOD have been of immeasurable benefit to them both, and the nation’s space effort is the stronger for it. . . . with the prospect of tighter budgets likely, the maintenance of such relationships—and their improvement—assumes an increasing importance. The need to stretch the appropriations dollars to the maximum may be partly met by fresh efforts to find common ground where cooperation will produce economies as well as mutual benefits.” (Space Digest, 10/68, 68—70) In Space Digest Gen. James Ferguson, Commander of afsc, described “A Decade of Cooperation—The Military-NASA Interface.” afsc’s FY 1969 NASA support expenditures “amounted to millions of dollars and thousands of man-years in effort. The sums of money, and, more important, the human technological resources we are currently expending on the nation’s space programs are of great consequence since they are the foundations of our future benefits. ... we are acutely aware that the fate of future generations lies in space. ... It is a sad commentary to state that technology has provided us with the means to conduct wars. But it is heartening to realize that one day technology will provide us with the means to prevent wars. {Space Digest, 10/68, 71-3)	_
At dedication ceremony attended by 19,000, USAF officially renamed Bunker Hill afb, Indiana, Grissom afb in honor of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom who died Jan. 27, 1967, in Apollo fire. {NYT, 5/13/68)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
msfc awarded $49,985 nine-month study contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. to assess possible radiation damage to film used on atm to record solar activity and to consider radiation hazards to astronauts in Saturn I orbital workshop, (msfc Release 68—43)
Nine astronauts participated in life support training for aircraft pilots at Perrin AFB, Tex. They were second astronaut group to attend USAF course, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 7/10/68)
Canadian Black Brandt IV sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Barreria. do Inferno Range near Natal, Brazil. It carried msc Space Physics Div. 80-lb South Atlantic Anomaly Probe (saap) experiment package containing speedometer, magnetometers, ion chambers, and heavy ion detector to 502-mi (806-km) altitude to provide fast response capability for measuring radiation dose and dose rate at orbital altitude over South Atlantic. Project, cooperative effort of NASA and Brazilian Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) in support of Apollo program, would use data to study dynamics of inner Van Allen belt and possible radiation hazard to astronauts on low-altitude missions, (nasa Releases 68—94, 68—97K; nasa Rpt SRL; SBD, 6/13/68, 213)
nasa was stopping work on Saturn IB vehicles 215 and 216 “to the extent possible without involving uneconomical terminations.” Contractors had been instructed to terminate work on long-lead-time items being procured for Saturn V vehicles 516 and 517; halt would cause time gap should decision be reached later to resume production. Boosters August 2; NASA introduced new fireproof Apollo spacesuits at press showing in Doner, Del. In earlier photo, test subject Ronald C. Woods wears integrated thermal micrometeorite garment (tmg) to be worn by astronauts during extravehicular activities, ilc Industries suit has back-pack life-support system developed by United Aircraft Corp. had been requested in NASA FY 1969 budget for follow-on utilization of Apollo capacity beyond manned lunar landing. Steps were taken after Congressional cuts in budget, in anticipation of final decisions on future production, (nasa Release 68—139; W Post, 8/3/68, A2)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart successfully completed checkout of Apollo spacecraft cabin flight equipment provisions under simulated mission conditions at North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., facility, (nar Skywriter, 7/26/68,1)
On nationwide “Meet the Press” TV interview, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., commented on NASA budget cuts: “We’ve built up a fantastic technology [but] talented people are starting to leave. ... We should let it be known that we are in this for the future, not just one flight.” Cost of manned missions was justified in quest for knowledge not only outward, but earthward, too. Astronauts were “looking at portions of the earth that had never been documented before. A crew can see something and respond to it, on earth or the moon.” Fellow Apollo 7 crewman R. Walter Cunningham said never had Soviet crewmen “functioned in the same operational conditions as we.” U.S.S.R. was putting fewer higher trained persons in orbit, “mainly as biological specimens.” (AP, W Post, 11/11/68, A2; AP, B Sun, 11/11/68, A5)
President Johnson announced promotion of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders (Maj., usaf) to lieutenant colonel under his policy of granting one-grade promotion to military astronaut after his first successful space mission. (Maynard, W Post, 12/29/68, A4; PD, 1/6/69, 5)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, addressing National Capital Area Chapter of American Society for Public Administration, praised U.S. space program for “unequaled competence and unlimited opportunity.” After 10 yr in space, he noted, U.S. had launched 514 spacecraft into earth orbit and 28 to moon and other planets. “The moon has been completely mapped, the composition and texture of its soil analyzed, and sites . . . selected for manned lunar landings. Our scientific knowledge of Mars and Venus . . . has been advanced tremendously by . . . unmanned, instrumented probes. . . . American astronauts, who have a total of almost 2,000 hours in space to their credit in the Mercury and Gemini Projects, will begin the third phase of manned space flight this year with the first manned launches in Project Apollo. These achievements in space, fruits of the advanced science and technology of our times, mark the first decade of the Space Age as one of the finest periods in American history. And they are forerunners of even greater discoveries and widespread applications to come during our second decade in space.” Dr. von Braun credited nasa Administrator James Webb’s direction with adaptation of systems approach to space research without which “we would never be able to go to the moon.” Approach, Dr. von Braun believed, could also be tested on river pollution and satellite communications. (Text; W Post, 3/21/68, H14)
Unexpected solar flares could cause serious radiation damage to sst passengers and lead to aircraft navigation errors, according to Dr. Adolph Razdow, President of Yardney Electric Corp., Razdow Laboratories Div. Global solar watch, he said, could provide 10-min warning of strong solar flares, enabling pilot to descend to safer altitude. NASA’s Solar Particle Alert Network (span) could give 20-min flare warning to unprotected astronauts on moon, who could then take shelter or take antiradiation drugs. Peak year in solar flare cycle would be 1969. (upi, NYT, 5/25/68, 59)
Chief Test Pilot Joseph S. Algranti successfully ejected from lunar landing training vehicle about four minutes into planned six-minute flight, when large lateral-control oscillation developed as he descended from maximum altitude of 550 ft. He ejected at 200 ft and landed by parachute while $1.8-million vehicle crashed and burned several hundred feet away. Flight was 14th for this Lt,TV. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, jr., was named chairman of board to investigate accident. (msc Special Releases; W Post, 12/9/68, 1; SBD, 12/10/68, 172)
New York Times editorial on U.S.S.R.’s Zond V mission: “Until the nation [U.S.] has a better idea of the progress achieved during this long interval between American manned flights, it is premature to conclude that the Russians have a significant over-all lead in space capability and that Soviet citizens will certainly paint their flag on the lunar surface before American astronauts. “In any event, as the Soviet rape of Czechoslovakia has recently reminded the world so dismayingly, a nation’s image and prestige depend primarily upon what it does here on earth, not on its feats in space.” (NYT, 9/23/68, 32)
Five ellipse-shaped, three- by five-mile lunar landing areas were selected for astronaut safety considerations by nasa Apollo Site Selection Board. First two sites were in Sea of Tranquility, third was in Central Bay, and fourth and fifth were in Ocean of Storms. Sites contained features of scientific, interest, including small craters, raw material ejected from craters, ridges, and faults. Criteria for selection were area smoothness, approach path, propellant conservation, countdown recycling time, free-retum trajectory, optimum lighting, and slope. Board had studied Lunar Orbiter high-resolution photos and Surveyor close-up photos and surface data. (NASA Release 68-25; AP, NYT, 2/5/68, 13) .
Solar Wind Composition Experiment, developed by Swiss scientific team headed by Univ. of Berne’s Dr. Johannes Geiss, was first foreign experiment accepted for NASA’s Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) . Swiss experiment would require astronaut to deploy on lunar surface aluminum foil sheet oriented toward sun to entrap solar wind ions; foil sheet would be packaged for return to earth by astronauts, providing in this one-pound experiment first opportunity to capture ions for earth analysis. Swiss National Committee for Space Research had already built prototype. NASA would provide qualification tests for prototype and construction and acceptance tests for flight hardware. (NASA Release 68—55; Marshall Star, 3/27/68,10)
Apoilo 7 and 8 flight crews sign memorial document for White House Treaty Room. Signers are Heft to right): Astronaut!, R, Walter Cunningham, Donn F. Eisele, Walter M. Sckirra, Jr. (Apollo 7); William A. Anders, James A. Lovell, Jr^ and Frank Borman (Apollo 8). Standing are Charles A. Lindbergh (ioho also signed), Mrs. Johnson, President Lyndon B. Johnson, retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb, and Vice President Hubert H, Humphrey. dons would be made by land surface stations 300 mi apart throughout world with exception of desert areas. Further data would be passed on by weather ships, upper-air sea stations, aircraft, and meteorological satellites. (W Star, 12/9/68, A8) Committee claimed single entity could make more balanced investment choice on whether to lay more cables or launch satellites and would eliminate need for duplicate transmission facilities. Conclusions were challenged in dissenting footnote to report by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC, who said merger would inhibit development of satellite technology and reduce technological competition between cables and satellites that could result in lower rates. Report also would recommend informal merger of postal and telegraph services, with Western Union Telegraph Co. permitted to operate in post offices; relaxation of fcc restrictions on cable TV to protect broadcasters; and Government sponsorship of experimental program to test TV’s usefulness in assisting minority groups. (Finney, NYT, 12/9/68, 1; 12/10/68, 1; Aug., W Star, 12/12/68, A13)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong ejected and parachuted to safety from NASA’s $2.5-million Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) while flying simulated lunar landing at Ellington afb, Tex. Vehicle, which had reached 500-ft altitude* crashed and burned on impact. Cause of accident was unknown. (C Trib, 5/7/68; B Sun, 5/7/68; msc Roundup, 5/10/68, 1)
Finnish professor Arrno Niini said photos of earth brought back by Apollo 8 astronauts might show tiny ring of small dust particles 200 to 350 mi above earth. It would be discernible only in pictures taken with sun behind camera and with sufficiently sensitive film, (upi, NYT, 12/30/68, 2)
Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved space rescue treaty providing for rescue and recovery of astronauts down in foreign lands. U.S.S.R. had given final approval along with 73 other nations. (AP, NYT, 9/25/68, 17; WSJ, 9/25/68, 1; upi, W Post, 9/25/68, A6)
