Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin was uninjured when faulty landing gear on T—33 jet trainer forced belly landing at Ellington AFB, Tex. (AP, W Star, 8/16/69, A2)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders, Apollo 8 astronaut, told Western Conference of Young Presidents’ Organization in Phoenix, Ariz., that U.S. lost $13 billion each year in agricultural production from insects, disease, and fire. Use of satellite sensors could improve surveys of agricultural and forest resources, aid mineral and petroleum prospecting, obtain better inventory of earth’s water sources, detect natural and man-made geography changes, sense ocean currents and temperatures to aid fishing industry and improve routing of commercial shipping, and study effects of environmental and water pollution. While NASA space expenditures were averaging about $4.5 billion annually— about 2/3 of 1% of GNP—nearly $4 billion was spent in U.S. for nondurable toys and sport supplies, $4.7 billion for foreign travel, and over $6.5 billion in amusements. Anders urged international harmony through space. “We travel through space on a small planet. The Earth looked so tiny in the heavens that there were times during the Apollo 8 mission when I had trouble finding it. If you can imagine yourself in a darkened room with only one clearly visible object, a small blue-green sphere about the size of a Christmas tree ornament, then you can begin to grasp what the Earth looks like from space. I think all of us subconsciously think the Earth is fiat or at least almost infinite. Let me assure you that, rather than a massive giant, it should be thought of more as the fragile Christmas tree ball which we should handle with considerable care. . . . From space, the earth is indivisible. There are no flags, no national boundaries. Let us on Earth then use the Communications Revolution to break down the barriers which separate us, so that all of Earth’s people will be truly brothers.” (CR, 10/6/69, E8190—2; nasc pio) *. Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and wives arrived at Las Palmas, Canary Islands, for two-day rest before proceeding to Madrid and meeting with Gen. Francisco Franco during 38-day goodwill tour. (AP, NYT, 10/6/69)
Apollo 12 prelaunch press conferences were held at ksc and msc. Operations were proceeding as planned toward launch from ksc at 11:22 am est Nov. 14. Astronauts were in good health and weather was expected to be within minimums for launch. Liquid-hydrogen tank that had leaked Nov. 12 had been replaced, liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been loaded, and conditions were all go. Launch azimuth had been expanded to 160° to provide 120 min additional time for liftoff and greater opportunity for launch on Nov. 14. (Transcript)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman received gold medal for “distinguished service to humanity” from National Institute of Social Sciences in New York. Institute President Frank Pace, Jr., said, “The great scientific adventure in which you extend the reach of man cannot equal for us the moments in which you expanded the human spirit.” Borman replied, “The awesome power of today’s technology undoubtedly terrifies many social scientists. But far from subjugating man, I think this technology, if properly applied, is the only chance to preserve the dignity of human life.” (AP, W Star, 11/21/69, A2)
President Nixon sent telegram to Apollo 11 astronauts: “On the eve of your epic mission, I want you to know that my hopes and my prayers—and those of all Americans—go with you. Years of study and planning and experiment and hard work on the part of thousands have led to this unique moment in the story of mankind; it is now your moment and from the depths of your minds and hearts and spirits will come the triumph all men will share. I look forward to greeting you on your return. Until then, know that all that is best in the spirit of mankind will be with you during your mission and when you return to earth.” President also telephoned astronauts: “. . . as you lift off to the moon, you lift the spirits of the American people as well as the world. . . . You carry with you a feeling of good will in this greatest adventure man has ever taken. . . .” {PD, 7/21/69, 997)
MSFC announced award of eight-month identical $400,000 contracts to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. and Bendix Corp. for preliminary design and definition studies of dual-mode lunar roving vehicles. DLRV would provide mobility for one astronaut on lunar surface and could be operated by remote control from earth while making automated, long-range traverses of large lunar areas. DRLV would be delivered to moon aboard Apollo lm. After astronauts left, it would be placed in remote control for geological and geophysical trips of 600 mi or more for one year, during which it would collect up to 200 lbs of lunar samples and measure lunar terrain. It would then rendezvous with manned spacecraft and transfer samples for return to earth for analysis. (msfc Release 69-110)
Astronaut Prank Borman repeated Apollo 8 reading from Genesis at White House service attended by President and family, Vice President, Cabinet members, Congressmen, and members of Joint Chiefs of Staff, and of diplomatic corps. During sermon, Dr. Paul S. Smith, President of Whittier College and member of Religious Society of Friends, said: “It was a philosopher . . . who, two thousand years ago, first recounted a voyage to the moon. Lucian called it The True History but confessed in the preface that he wrote ‘of things which are not and never could have been.’ It was a political satirist’s precautionary disclaimer because his real subject was the stupidity of human warfare. His lunar voyagers got caught up in internecine strife between the moonmen and the sunmen over the colonization of Venus! If there is something instructive in the thought, it may be the implication that after two millennia of philosophy men are still fighting over real estate and still dying in the name of philosophical abstractions, but that a voyage to the moon is just as feasible (though somewhat more expensive) as a trip to Timbuktu.” (Wiegers, W Post, 1/21/69, Bl; CR, 7/22/69, H6189—90)
In inaugural address following his taking oath of office as President of U.S., Richard M. Nixon said: “Those who would be our adversaries, we invite to a peaceful competition;—not in conquering territory or extending dominion, but in enriching the life of man. As we explore the reaches of space, let us go to the new worlds together—not as new worlds to be conquered but as a new adventure to be shared. . . . Only a few short weeks ago, we shared the glory of man’s first sight of the world as God sees it, as a single sphere reflecting light in the darkness. As the Apollo astronauts flew over the moon’s gray surface on Christmas Eve, they spoke to us of the beauty of Earth—and in that voice so clear across the lunar distance, we heard them invoke God’s blessing on its goodness. In that moment, their view from the moon moved poet Archibald MacLeish to write:
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced 1969 recipients of National Medal of Science, Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science, mathematics, and engineering, including: Purdue Univ. chemist Herbert C. Brown, for “discovery and exploration of hydroboration reaction and for developing it into a major and powerful tool in chemical synthesis”; Princeton Univ. mathematician William Feller, “for original and definitive contributions to pure and applied mathematics, for making probability available to users, and for pioneering work in establishing Mathematical ReviewsJack S. C. Kilby, Texas Instruments Inc., for “original conceptions and valuable contributions in the production and application of integrated circuits”; and Wolfgang K. fi. Panofsky, Director of Stanford Univ. Linear Accelerator Center, for “classic experiments probing the elementary particles of matter and for contributions to advancing the means of experimentation in this challenging field.” {PD, 1/5/70, 10-1) During December: NASA issued Apollo 11: Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP—214), summarizing scientific findings of first manned lunar landing mission July 16—24. In foreword Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “The concept of traveling across the vastness of space to new worlds has stirred the imagination of men everywhere. . . . The success of this mission has opened new fields of exploration and research . . . which will lead to a greater understanding of our planet and provide a new insight into the origin and history of the solar system.” Report included photographic review of Apollo 11 mission with observations by crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Descriptions of geologic setting of lunar material, soil mechanics investigation, passive seismic experiment, laser ranging retroreflector, and solar wind composition experiment were provided by principal investigators. In addition to major findings reported Sept. 15 in summary by NASA Preliminary Examination Team (pet), SP—214 reported passive seismic experiment package deployed on moon had operated satisfactorily for 21 days and had detected seismic signals from astronaut activity or lm motions. Whether actual lunar seismic events had been detected was uncertain. Laser reflector deployed on moon had been used as target for earth-based lasers and distance to moon had been measured to within four-mile accuracy. Future studies would be made on distance variation to study motion of moon and earth. Preliminary analysis had been made on part of aluminum foil and showed helium, neon, and argon; isotopic composition of each element had been measured. (Text; NASA Release 69—160)
During stop at Hickam AFB, en route to MSC from Apollo 11 splashdown, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman said it would be “helpful and hopeful for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to cooperate in space missions. He saw “indications” during his tour of U.S.S.R. that Russians would be interested, but “talk is cheap” and U.S.S.R. “is still supplying 85 per cent of the munitions to North Vietnam.” He said U.S. had gone “95 per cent of the way” toward promoting cooperation. It was up to U.S.S.R. to do the rest, (upi, NYT, 7/26/69, 12)
In Washington Post, Thomas O’Toole said nasa Administrator was “the last big Federal post President Nixon has left unfilled.” He asked, “Is it because he can’t find the man he wants? Is it because no man he wants wants the job? Or is Mr. Nixon playing with the possibility of appointing [Acting Administrator Thomas O.] Paine to the post of Administrator?” Washington “space watchers” felt job could not be kept vacant much longer, “if only because the program to land American astronauts on the moon is rapidly nearing its goal.” (W Post, 2/9/69, All)
Princeton Univ. scientists had observed sudden speedup in fastest and youngest pulsar, in heart of Crab Nebula, Walter Sullivan reported in New York Times. With second discovery of periodic phenomenon, astronomers had taken word “glitch” from electronic engineers and astronauts to describe sudden departure from normal pulsar behavior. {NYT, 12/8/69)
Apollo 10 mission would be launched from etr May 18 carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot), on eight-day lunar orbital mission. Final decision to fly mission as previously planned followed review of technical and operational data from ApoUo 9 (March 3—13). Mission would provide additional experience in combined system operation and, with exception of actual landing on lunar surface, was same as for lunar landing mission. While spacecraft circled moon at 69-mi (111.0km) altitude, Stafford and Cernan would separate lm from csm, pilot lm twice to within 10 mi (16.1 km) of preselected landing site, and return to csm. Crew would then make landmark sightings, take photos, and transmit live TV views of moon, earth, and spacecraft interior before returning to earth, (nasa Release 69—46)
Prearranged meeting at Paris Air Show between Apollo 9 Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart and Cosmonauts Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and Vladimir Shatalov and wives developed from brief technical exchange into what U.S. officials called an epic of all space meetings. After inspecting interior of Apollo 8 spacecraft and joining astronauts for drinks in VIP lounge at U.S. pavilion, cosmonauts escorted astronauts through U.S.S.R. pavilion, provided technical explanation of 1968 Soyuz missions, and entertained with vodka and caviar in Soviet trijet Yak-40 on display field and later in 500-passenger An-22. (NYT, 6/3/69, 78; AP, B Sun, 6/3/69, Al)
In telephone interview, evangelist and presidential religious adviser Billy Graham took issue with July 24 statement of President Nixon in welcoming Apollo 11 astronauts back to earth. Graham told upi, “. . . as a Christian, I would contend that there have been three much much greater days” than those of lunar landing and moon walk. They were first Christmas, day on which Christ died, and first Easter. While he did not wish to detract from “magnificent achievement,” he felt “President was speaking extemporaneously. And I’ve found from years of speaking extemporaneously that in the excitement and emotion of a moment, you don’t think through every statement you make.” Associated Press later quoted Graham as saying, “I know that President Nixon agrees that the greatest single event in history was the coming of Christ”; he was sure President Nixon meant moon walk was probably man’s greatest accomplishment. (W Post, 7/26/69, A10)
President and Mrs. Nixon watched Apollo 8 films at White House showing attended by Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Borman narrated. (Shelton, W Star, 1/31/69, Bl; PD, 2/3/69, 194)
Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and wife inspected container vessel American Astronaut in London and signed autographs for longshoremen. Mrs. Lovell had christened vessel in April. (Reuters, C Trib, 10/7/69)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said to press representatives in Houston he was “surprised and disappointed” by May 19 speech of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) suggesting slowdown in U.S. space program after lunar landing and exploration. “He is wrong,” Dr. Paine said. “The United States should not weakly yield technological supremacy in space to the Soviets. We should not ground our astronauts after Apollo.” He told press he did not want Apollo 10 astronauts in flight to moon to hear news of speech and would not include item in news reports sent up to spacecraft. (W Post, 5/21/69, A12)
Visiting Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov received Presidential pens and bronze inaugural medals from President Nixon .during brief stop at White House. Later they flew to msc, where they were honored at dinner by 30 astronauts. Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman showed cosmonauts NASA T—38 jet aircraft. (PD, 10/27/69, 1485; AP, W Star, 10/22/69, A3)
Lunar module was “first manned spacecraft ever built that’s not tough enough to survive a return to earth,” said Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post. Vehicle from which two astronauts would descend to moon’s surface in summer 1969 was 23 ft high, weighed 8,000 lbs, and carried 12 tons of propellant. It contained 25 mi of electrical wiring and more than a million parts, most of which had been designed “from scratch,” held together by 216,000 “pins.” Pin bent more than five degrees out of shape would have to be replaced. NASA had contracted for 15 LMs at total cost of $1.9 billion from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., which had taken six years to get it from drawing board to launch pad. (W Post, 2/9/69, B2)
Press conference on preliminary science results of Biosatellite III (launched June 28) was held at NASA Hq. Spacecraft, carrying male macaque monkey Bonny, had been launched on 30-day mission to investigate physiological problems during space flight but had been deorbited after 8% days when monkey’s condition deteriorated. John W. Dyer, Manager of Biosatellite Project Operations at arc, said all of automatically controlled functions performed “beautifully” after launch and spacecraft and instrumentation performed well throughout mission. “The animal was reported to be enthusiastically eating and drinking, and after four or five days, a routine operation capable of going the duration of on-board consumables was projected.” Clear data on Bonny and entire flight system were recorded at 16 stations in 180 intervals of 5 to 10 min each and good quality data were returned from onboard tape and film records recovered with capsule. Bonny remained alert until eighth day, providing much new information on cycles of sleep and wakefulness at zero g. Dr. W. Ross Adey of UCLA, principal experimenter, said one important discovery was alterations in circadian rhythms, daily rhythms in physiological functions. “At least it is clear that if there is not an actual prolongation of the rhythms there is a very significant phase shift so that the animal woke later and later each day.” Most interesting discovery about sleep patterns was that dream sleep, which constituted 20% of normal night’s sleep on earth and was characterized by rapid eye movements (rem), occurred in space. “It had never been clear in space whether man or animals have this REM sleep, and there is evidence that decreased gravitational inputs, or decreased inputs from the body will seriously disrupt it. So we were very interested to see that REM sleep in the monkey . . . that there was indeed a great deal of sleep of this rem type, and that it occurred in ... an intermediate stage of sleep.” One of first abnormalities noted in Bonny was pendular eye movement, swinging movement that occurred when vestibular mechanism in inner ear was disturbed. Fluid was moving in some fashion that might indicate pressure or cooling if it occurred on earth. “None of these conditions applied here. But the weightlessness would allow movements of the fluid which were probably unusual. . . . This is interesting because the Apollo astronauts who have now much more room to move around than in . . . the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft have . . . almost uniformly reported some degree of vestibular disturbances.” By eighth day, brain and body temperature and central venous pressure had dropped dangerously. Fluid loss by sweating and diuresis was high, apparently because of redistribution of blood in visceral pools from weightlessness. On recovery Bonny was semicomatose and his temperature was below 35°C. Immediate resuscitation measures with intravenous fluid were begun and monkey’s condition improved substantially. “The temperature came up to about 35.8, the heart rate stabilized, and the blood pressure came up. . . . And the animal was lifting his head . . . and making coordinated movements with all four limbs. And then quite suddenly, about twelve hours after recovery, a condition of ventricular fibrillation ensued. It came on very suddenly, and the heartbeat became totally disordered, And there was no recovery. This is a common occurrence in monkeys of this species when recovering from hypothermia . . . and death is almost a certainty.” Autopsy revealed 20% loss in body weight, much higher than 3%—8% reported for astronuats in early days of flights. Restraint, weightlessness, and decreased feedback from peripheral structures had decreased shivering response, and monkey had failed to respond to falling temperature with normal thermogenic response. Restraint and, particularly, weightlessness had led to pooling of blood in thorax and abdomen, raising central venous pressures and leading to loss of fluid through kidney and sweating. Dr. Adey said mission was “highly successful in revealing physiological effects of weightlessness in spite of the reduced duration of the experiment” and indicated “great value of carefully designed animal experiments in collection of important biomedical data relevant to manned flight.” Virtually every piece of information that could be drawn about manned space flight indicated similar changes in astronauts, though to smaller degree, he said. Scientists still did not know whether gravity was necessary for long-duration space flights. “Therefore, I think it is premature to consider the design of space platforms or the larger space stations until we know more from the biomedical point of view about what is absolutely necessary.” President’s Science Advisory Committee report to President Nixon, being printed, would say necessary biomedical basis for elaborate space platforms and space stations did not exist in NASA or in scientific community. (Transcript)
nasa released first of hundreds of photos and moving pictures taken by Apollo 10 crew. Pictures showed moon from variety of positions and csm as seen from LM. Photo of Triesneck Crater showed network of broad rifles which resembled tracks left by large snowballs rolled over snow-covered plain. Photo of Sea of Tranquility, prime landing site, had only few rugged features, including medium-sized Moltke Crater and Hypatia Rifle. Pictures showed striking resemblance to aerial photos of Antarctica. Films included scenes of moon taken from lm at pericynthian and of Astronaut John W. Young shaving in CSM. (AP, B Sun, 5/29/69, Al; W Post, 5/29/69, A4)
Creation of U.N. Space Institute was urged by Columbia Univ. law professor Richard N. Gardner in New York Times. It would be “center for the cooperative planning of space exploration in which all U.N. members would be invited to take part.” U.S. and U.S.S.R. could divide responsibilities for instrumented landings on different planets. There should be “United Nations Space Station” in outer space manned by astronauts from all U.N. nations and trained at U.N. Space Institute. It would gather information about solar system and universe and be used for practical earth applications. {NYT, 7/26/69, 24)
Investigating board headed by Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., reported primary cause of Dec. 8, 1968, crash of nasa’s lunar landing training vehicle (lltv) No. 1 was “that the vehicle entered a region of flight where aerodynamic moments overpowered the control system . . . such that attitude control was lost. The source of the control problem was not identified ... in time to add (use) a second control system which could have restored control capability.” Crash did not involve any malfunctions of systems. Adverse region of flight was entered because the aerodynamic limitations of lltv were not completely understood, wind conditions were insufficiently accounted for, and displays in lltv and support van Were inadequate for conditions. Board made 11 recommendations—including wind-tunnel tests to assess lltv aerodynamic characteristics—for improved safety, (nasa Release 69—87; AP, H Chron, 6/6/69)	.
President Johnson submitted to Congress report on U.S. Aeronautics and Space Activities for 1968. In transmittal message he wrote: “Our astronauts have now flown 18 manned space missions, during which they experienced 3,215 man hours in space flight. Together with the activities of the Soviet Union, this makes a total to date of 28 manned flights and 3,846 man hours in space. Through this investment we have obtained new products, services, and knowledge; we have enhanced our national security; we have improved our international relations; and we have stimulated our educational system. Our Nation is richer and stronger because of our space effort. I recommend that America continue to pursue the challenge of space exploration.” (Pres Rpt 68; CR, 1/17/69, H405, S524)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs to succeed Dixon Donnelly who had resigned in January. Nomination was submitted to Senate Dec. 2. (PD, 12/1/69, 1667; 12/8/69, 1702)
NASA released first photos taken by Apollo 12 astronauts on and near lunar surface, including color stills and 16-mm film showing solar eclipse, lm descent to moon, astronauts walking on moon, and lm separating from csm. Still photos showed closeup of Ocean of Storms, bleak, dull-gray area strewn with rocks and sprinkled with footprints and an astronaut inspecting Surveyor 111, with LM in background at top of crater rim. (AP, NYT, 11/28/69, 32)
Washington Sunday Star published Associated Press interview with Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations: While 4,514 hrs of weightlessness endured by U.S. astronauts in space had produced no serious medical problems, on moon “we will be placing men in an entirely new environment.” After four days of weightlessness, they would step onto surface where gravity field was one-sixth that of earth. At Mission Control Center in Houston, Dr. Berry would be watching Apollo 11 astronauts’ heart rate, oxygen consumption, and temperature of water that cooled spacesuits. Preflight physicals had enabled doctors to draw metabolic profile of each astronaut, including work capacity on earth at various heart rates, oxygen consumption, and body heat generated. “We know the heat production level which the portable life support system can handle without being overburdened. If it reaches that point for five minutes, we will tell the astronauts to stop and rest.” Because of spacesuits’ bulk astronauts would start with simple tasks and work up to tougher ones. Excitement could affect ability to sleep in four-hour rest period planned before lunar walk. “We might have to make a real-time decision on whether to give them a sleeping pill or perhaps a stimulant.” Apollo had taught one “amazing medical fact—that the loss of red-blood-cell mass apparently is caused by a pure oxygen atmosphere.” Results of using mixed nitrogen-and-oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft since January 1967 Apollo fire had indicated nitrogen apparently protected cells. (Benedict, AP, W Star, 7/13/69, A9)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman met in Moscow with Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and spent 40 min with U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny in talk which Borman said was “encouraging and beneficial” in efforts to achieve U.S.— U.S.S.R. cooperation in space. (AP, W Post, 7/10/69, A23)
At Smithsonian Institution ceremony attended by Apollo 11 astronauts, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, presented two-pound, gray, lunar rock of igneous, breccia type to Smithsonian Secretary, Dr. S. Dillon Riply, for Smithsonian collection. It would be sealed in nitrogen-filled container covered by three-foot glass bubble and displayed to public beginning Sept. 17 for indefinite period in Arts and Industries Building. At presentation, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., • said: “Every human being, every animal who has looked up into the heavens has seen that rock. It is a fortunate time for mankind to look up and be able to say, ‘here is the moon.’” (Smithsonian Release SI—150—69; Shelton, W Post, 9/17/69, Bl)
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., formally announced candidacy for Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate seat being vacated by Sen. Stephen M. Young (D-Ohio). (NYT, 12/12/69, 33) December 12; NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 80,000-ft altitude and mach 1.4 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of powered flight, 31st in series, was to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Konstantin P. Feoktistov, and Georgy T. Beregovy were among Soviet officials who met Astronaut Frank Borman and family on arrival at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo Airport at start of nine-day U.S.S.R. visit. Asked if Soviet cosmonaut might visit U.S., Borman said, “I’m sure that will be discussed. Cooperation in space activities is an important aspect of the space program.” Bormans breakfasted in Moscow and returned to airport for flight to Leningrad. Schedule called for visit to Zvezdny Gorodok—Star City—where cosmonauts lived and to space communications center in Crimea; nothing in program indicated visit to U.S.S.R. launching center at Baikonur in Kazakhstan. (AP, W Star, 7/2/69, A14)
Univ. of California’s Lick Observatory successfully recorded first hits on laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. Hits, which came after 2,000—3,000 unsuccessful attempts by Lick and Univ. of Texas’s McDonald Observatory, were made by Lick’s 120-in telescope — world’s second largest. Scientists fired 500 pulses with pure red beam of ruby laser. Each pulse lasted 15-20 billionths of a second, reached moon in 1.3 secs, and bounced back in same time. Target— 18-in-square panel of 100 three-faced prisms of fused silica—was hit about three-fourths of time, (gsfc Historian)
In Brussels, Astronaut Frank Borman and family attended dinner given in his honor at palace by King Baudouin and Queen Fabiola. Borman showed Apollo 8 film, (nasa Int Aff; AP, B Sun, 2/10/69)
At hearing on suit of atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair to ban broadcast of prayers by U.S. astronauts in space [see Aug. 16], U.S. Attorney Seagel Wheatley and NASA counsel asked dismissal of suit on grounds Mrs. O’Hair and her Society of Separationists lacked necessary legal standing to sue Government. Justice Dept. Attorney James Barnes said, “nasa has no plans to instruct astronauts what to say. The statements that the astronauts made are their own. . . . NASA has no intention of circumscribing . . . the astronauts’ rights in the free exercise of religion.” (upi, W Post, 11/25/69, A8)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., received Distinguished Service Medal at dod ceremony for service as Apollo 8 command module pilot. IW Post, 4/5/69, A7)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., dressed in full landing attire, rehearsed simulated lunar landing at msc for the 2 hrs 40 min they would spend walking and working on lunar surface in July. Astronauts practiced scooping rock and soil samples, unfurled umbrella-like antenna, and deployed seismometer to detect quakes and array of mirrors to serve as laser target for astronomers on earth. (Wilford, NYT, 4/19/69; upi, P Bull, 4/19/69)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins reported on Apollo 11 mission to joint session of Congress called in their honor. Astronaut Armstrong said: “Several weeks ago I enjoyed the warmth of reflection on the true meanings of the spirit of Apollo. I stood in the highlands of this Nation, near the Continental Divide, introducing to my sons the wonders of nature and pleasures of looking for deer and for elk. In their enthusiasm for the view they frequently stumbled on the rocky trails, but when they looked only to their footing, they did not see the elk. To those of you who have advocated looking high we owe our sincere gratitude, for you have granted us the opportunity to see some of the grandest views of the Creator. To those of you who have been our honest critics, we also thank, for you have reminded us that we dare not forget to watch the trail.” Astronaut Aldrin said: “Our steps in space have been a symbol of this country’s way of life as we open our doors and windows to the world to view our Successes and failures and as we share with all nations our discovery. The Saturn, Columbia, and Eagle, and the extravehicular mobility unit have proved . . . that this Nation can produce equipment of the highest quality and dependability. This should give all of us hope and inspiration to overcome some of the more difficult problems here on earth. The Apollo lesson is that national goals can he met where there is a strong enough will to do so.” Astronaut Collins said: “We have taken to the moon the wealth of this Nation, the vision of its political leaders, the intelligence of its scientists, the dedication of its engineers, the careful craftsmanship of its workers, and the enthusiastic support of its people. We have brought back rocks. And I think it is a fair trade. For just as the Rosetta stone revealed the language of ancient Egypt, so may these rocks unlock the mystery of the origin of the moon, of our earth, and even of our solar system,” Astronauts presented Congress with two U.S. flags which previously had flown over Senate and House of Capitol and had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (CR, 9/16/69, H7937—9)
Lee R. Scherer, Director of NASA’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, testifying on FY 1970 budget request before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described extravehicular activity (eva) planned for first lunar landing. Emerging on lunar surface, astronaut would acquire and seal bagful of surface material and place it in spacesuit pocket, inspect lm, and with geological tools, fill large sample container. Location would be photographed before and after sampling. Passive seismometer would be emplaced to measure “moonquakes” and permit estimates of moon’s internal structure for comparison with that of earth. Instrument, operated on solar power, would record and transmit lunar data to earth for about one year. Laser retroreflector would be emplaced to permit measurement of earth-to-moon distance and monitoring of distance variation. Measurements would be repeated several times daily for year or more and precise times determined by atomic clock. From data on relative motion of moon and earth and of each about own center of gravity, scientists could refine “knowledge of size and shape of the Moon, detect small movements that may occur between the Earth’s continents, and perhaps even test gravitational theories.” If time permitted, second sample return container would be filled more selectively, with greater effort to document and to pack samples individually. (Testimony)
Walter Rundell, Jr., of Iowa State Univ. Dept, of History described U.S. Government historical programs at National Convention of Southern Historical Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “NASA’s historical program began in 1959 under the leadership of Eugene M. Emme. Two years later Emme launched the official publications with his Aeronautics and Astronautics: An American Chronology of Science and Technology in the Exploration of Space, 1915—1960, This has been followed by similar annual chronologies and chronologies devoted to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo projects. Since 1966 the office has published several monographs, some written under contract by private scholars, rather than being undertaken by the permanent staff. A good example is This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, by Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander.” (Text) During October: The Atlantic commented on Apollo 11: “We enthusiastically join the rest of human kind in applauding the feat of the Apollo 11 astronauts and their NASA sponsors. It is an achievement far greater, even, than the construction and successful launchings of The Brick Moon, which happened in these pages exactly one hundred years ago.” Story, by Edward Everett Hale, had told of group of New Englanders who had constructed artificial moon of bricks and launched it into orbit to provide perpetual navigation aid for seamen. “So far as we can determine, the launching of The Brick Moon provoked considerably less public interest than the latest American lunar expedition.” (Atlantic, 10/69, 3)
Dept, of Interior announced grant of $100,225 for research into health, safety, and water pollution in coal mining operations. Island Creek Coal Co. would determine if miners equipped with self-contained breathing apparatus similar to astronauts’ could work efficiently in mines filled with nitrogen or other inert gas. (doi Release 17784-69)
In NASA-funded project U.S. Bureau of Mines was seeking way to get water and air from lunar rocks, build underground lunar shelters like mines, weld and melt lunar materials, and mine planets like Mars and Venus which might bear substances more valuable than those on moon, Associated Press said. First lunar mining would occur during Apollo 13 mission in March. Astronaut would bore 10-ft hole in lunar crust to determine what lay beneath and to test drill designed for NASA by Martin Corp. Scientists at U.S. Bureau of Mines research center in Bruceton, Pa., and at six other locations had been studying since 1965 possible use of lunar materials to build and support manned lunar station. Project Director Thomas C. H. Hutchinson had said, “Even if we found pure platinum on the moon, it would cost too much to bring it back.” Goal was to establish manufacturing processes on moon to speed exploration of planets. (AP, W Post, 11/20/69, A78)
Univ. of Chicago scientist Anthony Turkevich had found by analysis of data from three Surveyor spacecraft that roeks on lunar surfaee contained sufficient oxygen to maintain life without supplemental sources, UPI reported. In interview Turkevich had said that, with nuelear or solar power sources, oxygen extraction from moon might cost less than shipping oxygen supplies to moon from earth. Also, there was little danger that moon rocks and dust carried into LM by returning astronauts would create explosion hazard because of oxygen lack. He had been unable to determine whether moon had sufficient hydrogen to allow chemical creation of water by future colonists or valuable minerals in commercially exploitable quantities and had found no evidence of fossil fuel supplies. (W Star, 6/30/69, A5)
lrl technicians Ronald J. Buffum and George E. Williams, accidentally exposed to lunar samples when glove used to examine samples cracked, were placed in quarantine with Apollo 11 astronauts, 2 doctors, and 12 technicians, cooks, and other employees. (W Post, 8/2/69, A4)
msfc announced appointment of Saverio F. Morea, former manager of F—1 and J—2 engine projects, as manager of new lunar roving vehicle project. Small manned vehicle would weigh 400 lbs and would be carried on board lm in 1971 to provide lunar surface transportation for two astronauts, hand tools, lunar samples, and other equipment. (msfc Release 69-150) Explorer XLI was seventh in series of 10 IMP spacecraft planned by NASA. Two of six previously orbited satellites—Explorer XXXIII (imp—d), launched July 1, 1966, and Explorer XXXV (imp—e), launched July 19, 1967—were still providing scientific data, imp program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-89)
Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders returned to Houston, Tex., for biggest parade in city’s history, with quarter million spectators filling sky with ticker tape and balloons. Astronauts received city’s highest honors, bronze medals for heroism with motto “per aspera ad astra.” (AP, B Sun, 1/14/69, A8; upi, W Post, 1/14/69, A4)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew announced Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., would head $4.5-million summer day camp program for youth to be administered by National Collegiate Athletic Assn, under hew contract. (Text)
In telephone interview, ucla astronomer Dr. Samuel Herrick, Jr., said planetoid Geographos, due to pass earth at 5.6-million-mi distance Aug. 27, would be best site of all asteroids for eventual space station beyond moon and good spot for manned or unmanned spacecraft landing. Its farthest point from sun in given orbit was least distant from sun and from earth of all minor planets. But astronauts landing on it would have to “dig in and tie themselves down” since its estimated g was so slight “even a sneeze directed at the surface would propel a man off into space.” (AP, B Sun, 8/23/69, A3)
NASA released first photos taken by Apollo 11 astronauts on and near lunar surface, including four color stills and 16-mm film of LM descent. Film opened as lm swung low and curved slightly over area pocked with craters and rocks and showed dust being scattered by exhaust as lm touched down safely. It then showed Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong as he descended ladder to surface, took first step on moon, and deployed initial equipment. Still photos showed closeup of brownish surface sprinkled with footprints, silhouettes of lm and U.S. flag, Armstrong inside lm, and earth with Europe, Africa, and Asia visible. (Witkin, NYT, 7/30/69, 1; Cohn, W Post, 7/30/69, Al, A3)
Space program could provide tools and knowledge to help eliminate air pollution, NASC Executive Secretary William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut, said in speech before Governors’ Conference on California’s Changing Environment in Los Angeles. With remote sensors in aircraft “pilot can quickly and accurately map pollution levels over a wide area and range of altitudes.” Pollution map of entire U.S. could be generated each day. “Thus, aircraft and satellites with these remote sensors offer the unique advantage of being able to view large areas through new eyeballs very quickly and selectively. Further, by computer, the data can be reduced to formats that can be quickly and easily understood.” Aircraft and satellite surveys would provide “data which supplement surface techniques and which, in some cases, can’t be gathered in any other way.” Rather than fantastically expensive, satellite measurements could “be competitive with surface systems.” (Text)
“We are doing the planning for ... 10 vehicles beyond Apollo 11.” After first landing NASA would stretch out flight schedule to allow time to make modifications and to understand results, with about two or three landings per year. NASA had equipment for scientific payloads for first four Apollo vehicles—of which two would land in lunar maria and two in highland areas—which would provide capability for later pinpoint landings at points of unique scientific interest outside Apollo landing zone. NASA would emplace on lunar surface network of 10 seismographs, series of heat-measuring probes, cameras, and other geophysical instruments to determine environment of lunar surface. Astronauts would wear new, “constant volume” spacesuits which would enable them to move around lunar surface very freely to conduct experiments. (Transcript)
Senate passed S.J.R. 140, providing for striking of medals honoring American astronauts who had flown in outer space. (CR, 7/30/69, S8786)
On first day out of quarantine, Apollo 11 crew visited MSC offices, then enjoyed official day off. NASA spokesman said astronauts had requested their activities be kept secret, (upi, W Post, 8/12/69, A3)
H.R. 16, 17, and 204, bills to authorize award of Congressional Medal of Honor to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, were introduced during first session of 91st Congress. {CR, 1/3/69, H33—42)
Apollo 10 astronauts would each carry out about two hours of head exercises early in mission in attempt to prevent motion sickness which plagued previous Apollo astronauts, msc Deputy Director of Medical Operations, Dr. A. Duane Catterson, said. Exercises—which included nodding, rocking, and twisting head—would be done to point just below threshold of illness until normal adaptation occurred. Since pilots who regularly performed drastic maneuvers in aircraft seldom suffered motion sickness, astronauts had flown aerobatic jet flights in barrel rolls and high-gravity maneuvers during week before launch. (Cohn, W Post, 5/18/69, A8) Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot)—entered initial parking orbit with 118.1-mi (189.9-km) apogee and 114.6-mi (184.4-km) perigee. Checkout followed lunar trajectory insertion; then csm, code-named Charlie Brown, separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, codenamed Snoopy. Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm. Excellent quality color TV coverage of docking sequences was transmitted to Goldstone tracking station and seen on worldwide commercial TV. Crew extracted lm from S—IVB and conducted 1st sps burn. All launch vehicle safing activities were performed as scheduled and successful propellant dump provided impulse to S—IVB for slingshot maneuver to earth-escape velocity. On second day, first midcourse maneuver was not required. Crew conducted midcourse maneuver number two, which was so accurate that third and fourth maneuvers were canceled. Five color TV transmissions totaling 72 min and showing excellent views of receding earth and spacecraft were made during translunar coast. Spacecraft entered moon’s sphere of influence on fourth day, May 21, at 61:50 get. Crew conducted first lunar orbit insertion maneuver with 356-sec sps burn to reduce speed to 5,474 fps and place spacecraft in initial lunar orbit with 196.1-mi (315.5-km) apolune and 68.6-mi (110.4-km) perilune. Second loi maneuver, 13.9-sec sps burn, circularized orbit with 70.8-mi (113.9-km) apolune and 67.8-mi (109.1-km) perilune. Crew tracked lunar landmarks and transmitted 29-min color TV of lunar surface. Cernan transferred to lm at 81:55 get for two hours of housekeeping activities and communications test. On fifth day Stafford and Cernan entered lm and checked out all systems before firing sm reaction control system thrusters to separate csm and lm ahout 30 ft and again for 2.3-mi separation, lm descent propulsion system burn propelled lm to within 9.6 mi of lunar surface over landing site No. 2. Crew had no difficulty identifying landmarks and Stafford said, “It looks like all you have to do is put your tail wheel down and we’re there. . . . The craters [around No. 2 landing site] look flat and smooth at the bottom. It should be real easy” for Apollo 11 landing, lm crew took numerous photos of lunar surface and provided continuous commentary on their observations after cameras malfunctioned. Astronauts described volcanoes and light-colored craters that glowed as if lit by radioactive substance. Crew conducted lm radar test during low-altitude pass which indicated 47,000-ft pericynthian (lowest point in orbit), dps phasing burn raised apocynthian (orbital high point) to 218.6 mi (351.7 km). lm descent stage was jettisoned and Res separation maneuver and staging were accomplished. Anomaly in automatic abort guidance system caused lm ascent stage to undergo extreme gyrations. By taking over manual control, Stafford reestablished proper attitude. APS insertion maneuver burn at pericynthian established equivalent of standard LM insertion orbit of lunar landing mission (51.8 by 12.9 mi), where lm coasted for one hour. Concentric sequence initiation at apocynthian, constant-delta-height maneuver, and terminal maneuver were conducted. lm successfully docked with csm at 106:33 get, after eight-hour separation; and lm crew returned to csm. On sixth day lm ascent stage was jettisoned; its batteries burned to depletion and it entered solar orbit. Crew made 18 landmark sightings and took extensive stereo and oblique photos of moon. Two scheduled TV periods were deleted because of crew fatigue and crew rested and prepared for return to earth, sps burn at 137:36 get injected csm into transearth trajectory after 61.5 hrs (31 orbits) in lunar orbit. Maneuver was so accurate that two other scheduled midcourse maneuvers were not necessary. During return to earth astronauts made star-lunar landmark sightings, live color TV transmissions, star-earth horizon navigation sightings, and csm S-band high-gain antenna reflectivity test. Pictures of moon from receding spacecraft were spectacular. Scheduled 10- and 29-min color TV broadcasts of earth, moon, and spacecraft interior were later followed by unscheduled TV transmission, which provided beautiful pictures of earth and brought total color TV broadcasts to 19 transmissions totaling almost six hours. On eighth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from CM on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 10 splashed down in Pacific at 12:52 pm edt May 26, 3.4 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Princeton 192 hrs 3 min after launch and precisely on time. Crew was picked up and reached recovery ship at 1:31 pm edt. All primary Apollo 10 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor discrepancies, which were corrected. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits were continually evident. Accomplishments included evaluation of LM steerable antenna at lunar distances; demonstration of lunar landing mission profile; low-level evaluation of lunar visibility; inflight demonstration of Weslinghouse color TV camera; testing of landing radar in near-lunar environment; and manned navigational, visual, and photographic evaluation of lunar landing sites 2 and 3, and in addition other possible lauding sites in highland areas. Apollo 10 was seventh Apollo mission to date, fourth manned Apollo mission, largest payload ever placed in earth and lunar orbits, and first demonstration of lunar orbit rendezvous. Mission acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for Apollo 11 and subsequent missions and numerous visual observations and photos of scientific significance. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of manned LM to operate in space. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, M5FC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj OH; NASA Release 69-68; W Post, 5/19-27/69, Al; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/19-27/69, Al; W Star, 5/19-27/69)
Washington Post Federal Diary column noted Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong would receive $2-per-day travel allowance as civil servant during Apollo 11 mission. As GS—16 at NASA, Armstrong collected maximum per diem of $16 when traveling on duty. But for Apollo 11 mission, it had been ruled that he would be enjoying Government billeting and subsistence. (Clopton, Causey, W Post, 6/11/69, Bll)
U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts, in joint space efforts, could succeed in improving U.S.-Soviet relations where “tired old politicians” had failed, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said during visit to msc. “Maybe this would be a way to break through to the rulers of Russia. When you get professional people together—scientists, aviators . . . you find you have many common problems.” Sen. Goldwater said he hoped Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman would not seek Senate seat in 1970 but would wait awhile “and take mine.” (upi, NYT, 11/16/69, 79)
Worldwide audience focused on Apollo 11 launch: At summer residence, Castel Gondolfo, Italy, Pope Paul VI asked for prayers for U.S. astronauts a few hours before launch toward moon. U.S.S.R. radio and TV gave factual accounts of Apollo 11 launch but maintained third day of silence on Luna XV. Major Soviet news program at 8:30 pm Moscow time showed tape of Apollo 11 liftoff taken from live comsat coverage. In U.K. TV viewers saw launch via transatlantic satellite. BBC scheduled live coverage through July 24 splashdown and would relay broadcasts to continent by cable. London newspapers frontpaged Apollo 11. Daily Express headline read, “Ho Hum—Anyone for the Moon Today?” over report on Telaxed astronauts. Polish TV viewers saw launch via 45-min transmission directly from Cape Kennedy. Hundreds of Germans and Americans crowded Apollo 11 exhibit in Mannheim, Germany, department store. Swedish TV viewers were advised by state broadcasting company not to turn off sets Sunday night—so they could be awakened for scheduled moon landing Monday. Hippies in Iran held milk and honey pots in Teheran restaur ant to toast astronauts. In Egypt, Moslem world’s leading moon expert, Sheikh Ahmand Haredi said, “The Koran urges Moslems to look up from their earthly abode to what lies behind the moon and stars.” Japanese department stores featured models of Apollo command module. In Greece, Aspis-Pronoia insurance company issued first outer-space life insurance policy, to cover Apollo 11 crew at $10,000 each. In Spain people called event most interesting since Columbus discovered America.	• Israel’s state radio broadcast in Hebrew from Cape Kennedy while Israelis stood around TV sets and portable radios in streets. U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv and U.S. Consulate in Jerusalem opened Apollo 11 information offices. Apollo 11 reaction was “generally tepid” in Lagos, Nigeria. Radio Nigeria reported launch seven minutes into its morning broadcast. Later it became number one newscast item. Most of Latin America missed launch on TV because of failure of Intelsat-111 F—2 June 29. Latin American newspapers and TV correspondents traveled to U.S. to cover launch and were reported to be outraged by absence of TV coverage in their countries. In Colombia, government asked TV manufacturers to put sets in all town squares. Bogota students would have July 21 off to watch lunar landing. (NYT, 7/17/69, 21, 22; Bishop, C Trib, 7/17/69)
NASA announced addition of two lunar orbits to Apollo 11 flight plan, which would increase revolutions to 30 and total time in lunar orbit to 59 hrs 30 min. Addition of orbit before lm/csm undocking would improve communications during critical maneuver by bringing LM within radio sight of 210-ft dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station during its descent to lunar surface. Addition of orbit after redocking and before lm jettison would allow astronauts two more hours for decontamination of equipment exposed to lunar environment, (nasa Release 69—83A)
President Nixon, at White House ceremony, presented National Space Club’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Apollo 8 astronauts and announced nomination of Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to be NASA Administrator. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., accepted award for himself and Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders. Citation: “In an epic journey man for the first time in December 1968 soared out of the earth gravitational field, flew unerringly into a close orbit of the moon, then back to a precise and safe landing. This historic voyage performed at times before the largest television audience in history, and open for coverage by the world’s press, reflects the utmost credit on the United States Space Program, Congress, nasa, and thousands of companies and employees in industry representing all these, the courageous, competent crew of Apollo 8.” Following award presentation, President announced Dr. Paine’s appointment: “There has been a great deal of interest as to who would be the new head of NASA. ... we have searched the country to find a man who could take this program and give it the leadership that it needs, as we move from one phase to another. This is an exciting period, and it requires the new leadership that a new man can provide. But after searching the whole country for somebody, perhaps outside of the program, we found . . . that the best man in the country was in the program.” Dr. Paine in his response said: “I believe in the space program. I believe in this country, and I think that this country should indeed be the preeminent nation in space-faring, and ... I am sure that we can go ahead to . . . see that the NASA program in the second decade of space will even out-perform the accomplishments in the first.” (PD, 3/10/69, 369-71)
September 6: Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders were named winners of 1969 Harmon International Astronaut’s Trophy for December 1968 Apollo 8 mission. Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) was awarded Aviator’s Trophy for testing NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle. Harmon trophies were awarded annually to world’s outstanding pilots for feats of individual piloting skill, (upi, W Star, 9/7/69, A7)	.
Mexican President Gustavo Diaz Ordaz announced in Coahuila, Mexico, that President Nixon had accepted invitation for ApoUo 11 astronauts to start round-the-world tour in Mexico. He repeated congratulations to Government and U.S. people on Apollo 11 success: “The United States gave proof of its greatness when it achieved this triumph, but it became even greater when they understood it and accepted it as a triumph of all humanity.” President Nixon was in Mexico to attend dedication of Amistad Dam on Rio Grande. (PD, 9/15/69, 1241)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family ended official goodwill tour of Western Europe with lecture and luncheon in Lisbon. During final European news conference previous day, he had predicted U.S. would put man on moon in summer 1969 “if everything goes well.” (upi, W Star, 2/20/69, A8)
Apollo 11 astronauts discussed possible manned Mars landing by 1982 on CBS TV program “Face the Nation.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said, “I am quite certain that goals of the Mars variety are within our range, should we choose . . . that investment of our national resources.” First exploratory flights could be combined with earthorbiting spacecraft to develop long-term capability with same kind of spacecraft. It was “well within our capability” to be prepared for Mars launch in 1981. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said he was “not so sure . . . this is the time that we can accurately set a date like 1981.” Setting goal was worthwhile but as intermediate goals were reached “I believe we will be able to better define exactly what our longer term goals are in terms of ten years from now.” Astronaut Michael Collins said, “I don’t think 1981 is too soon. I think it is well within our capabality to do so.” Long-duration trip “requires careful design and testing of the equipment, which could easily be done in Earth orbit with a number of ancillary benefits.” He defended Bible reading in space and announced he would not fly in space again, because he found it increasingly difficult “to keep up year after year” with rigorous training required. (SBD, 8/19/69, 159; W Post, 8/18/69, A2; NYT, 8/18/69, 33)
Hours before lunar landing attempt by Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Pope Paul VI said at Castel Gon-dolfo, Italy: “In the ecstasy of this prophetic day, a real triumph for means produced by man for the domination of the universe, we must not forget man’s need to dominate himself. Admiration, enthusiasm and passion for instruments, for the products of man’s hand, fascinate us, perhaps to the point of madness. . . . This is the danger: We must beware of this worship.” (Schmick, B Sun, 7/21/69, A4)
Saturn V (left) thrust Apollo 11 spacecraft toward the moon, watched by former nasa Administrator James E. Webb (below at left), former President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Kennedy Space Center. In ksc Launch Control Center (above) mission officials relaxed after launch; left to right were Charles W. Matthews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr, George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and l/g Samuel C, Phillips, Apollo Program Director. was heading was in center of large, rugged crater with 5- to 10-ft-dia boulders. Consequently crew flew past crater to more suitable touchdown point by controlling attitude manually and adjusting descent rate and horizontal velocity. Officials later attributed change in course to malfunction in onboard radar and subsequent critical overload of computer, which caused warning alarms and could have aborted mission. lm landed on moon at 102:46 get (4:18 pm edt July 20) in Sea of Tranquility, 20,800 ft west and 4,000—5,000 ft south of center of planned landing ellipse. Landing-point coordinates were approximately 23,5°E and 0.64°N and site altitude was approximately 8,600 ft below moon’s mean radius. Armstrong reported: “Houston, Tranquility Base here—the Eagle has landed.” Mission Control replied: “Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We are breathing again. Thanks a lot.” Armstrong said landing area contained numerous boulders up to two feet in diameter, some apparently fractured by LM engine exhaust, and surface color varied from very light to dark gray. Crew immediately adapted to one-sixth (earth) gravity in lm and moved with ease. About two hours after landing astronauts requested and were granted permission to perform extravehicular activities (eva) on moon’s surface before sleep period—about 4Vs hrs earlier than originally scheduled. After postlanding checks, Armstrong opened LM hatch, descended lm ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera, which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Aldrin remained inside LM and recorded Armstrong’s descent with 16-mm Maurer camera. Armstrong took man’s first step on moon at 109:24 get (10:56 pm EDT July 20). Some 600 million viewers on earth—one-fifth of world population—watched live TV transmission and heard him describe feat as “one small step for a man—one giant leap for mankind.” Collins, orbiting moon alone in CSM Columbia, was unable to see landing and subsequent eva because csm was not equipped to receive TV transmission. Armstrong said moon had “stark beauty all its own"’ like desert in southwestern U.S. Lunar surface was “fine and powdery” and could be kicked up loosely- “It adheres like powdered charcoal . . . but I only go jn a small fraction of an inch. I can see my footprint in the moon like fine grainy particles.” Armstrong checked EM exterior and reported penetration of EM footpads into lunar surface was three to four inches and that strut collapse was minimal. Blast of descent engine had not formed crater in surface and about one foot of clearance remained between engine bell and lunar surface. He reported only problem was seeing his footing in darkness of lm shadow. He emplaced microdot containing messages from world leaders, collected contingency sample of lunar soil near lm ladder, and reported that, although surface consisted of soft loose material, material six or eight inches under surface was very hard and cohesive. Rocks were very slippery, apparently because vesicles (pores) were filled with powdery surface material. Armstrong photographed Aldrin’s descent to lunar surface at 11:15 pm edt and astronauts unveiled plaque mounted on strut behind ladder and read its inscription to tneir worldwide TV audience; “Here men from the planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.*’ Armstrong then removed TV camera from MESA, obtained panorama, and placed camera on tripod 40 ft from LM to view subsequent EVA, Aldrin experimented to assess mobility on moon by walking, running, leaping, and doing twofooted kangaroo hops between LM and camera. He indicated some difficulty in maintaining balance but said that his agility was better than expected and that he was able to move with great ease. Mass of backpack affected inertia and caused “slight tendency ... to tip backwards, If I’m about to lose my balance in one direction, recovery is quite natural and easy. You’ve just got to be careful landing in die direction you want to go in.” Aldrin deployed solar wind composition experiment in sunlight north of LM and joined Armstrong in erecting three, by five-foot American flag on eight-foot aluminum staff. Astronauts saluted flag and then talked by radiotelephone with President Nixon at White House in what President called “most historic telephone call ever made from the White House,” President said: “Because of what you have done the heavens have become a part of man’s world. As you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth. For one priceless moment in t	mn 1 rssi xh-e mi m First footsteps on H.-Kficn: TM* ■#* tLCtt UTI, EfMMK, JDIT H, I*, ’I.K JQTTWat LA UHIE GOHOIIi; 1g_ll*k u*w JtAVU *1 THE TIMES sS JMan takes first steps on the moon . |..rsn magnthg, r y«m\ && | ip- * l=ij s the whole history of man all the people on this earth are truly one— one in their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth.” Astronauts saluted President and expressed honor and privilege of representing U.S. and world on moon. Continuing eva, Armstrong collected bulk sample of assorted surface materia] and selected rock chunks, inspected lm, deployed passive seismic experiment package and laser ranging retroreflector, and collected two core samples and 20 lbs of discretely selected material. Throughout EVA continuous black-and-white coverage of crew activity provided live documentation, with telemetered data and voice comments. Lunar surface photography included both still and sequence coverage using Hasselbtad, Maurer data-acquisition, and Apollo lunar surface close-up cameras. Astronauts completed eva, transferred film and samples to LM, reentered LM and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by Hl:39 get (1:11 am edt July 21). Armstrong and Aldrin rested inside LM seven hours and checked out systems. At 124:22 get (1:54 pm July 21) lm successfully lifted off moon, after 21 hrs 36 min on lunar surface. All lunar ascent and rendezvous maneuvers were nominal. Eagle reported to Mission Control: “Eagle TOUm 0EU5MDE, YLtEOIMWA. JULY Jl, BMHTHIfJ! [ISSl RMlflBM	jiebUwJ ^LV¥~l* J_—
Apollo 11 astronauts on world tour arrived in Seoul, Korea, for overnight stay. They were treated as state guests and decorated in ceremony at presidential mansion. (AP, W Star, 11/3/69, A21)
Transfer of usaf mol officers to NASA astronaut corps [see Aug. 14] was criticized in Washington Sunday Star by William Hines: “With the initial moon landing now an accomplished fact, the pace of manned space operations has slowed down to three flights per year. This means that no more than nine men can fly annually, and with 54 astronauts now on board, this, in turn, means an average of six years between flights.” Though pace might accelerate in time and future space stations would increase annual number of crew assignments, “the glamor and glory of being an astronaut—particularly a nonflying one—no longer compensates for the enforced idleness imposed by the modified flight schedule.” (W Star, 8/24/69, D4)
Across U.S. on eve of Apollo 11 launch, newspaper editorials commented on lunar landing mission: Los Angeles Herald-Examiner; “It is with an almost breathless sense of awe that we await tomorrow’s blast-off from Cape Kennedy—the launching of three space explorers on the most ambitious and fearsome adventure in all human history. Mere words cannot capture the immensity of the flight of Apollo 11. Quite literally, man will be attempting a final break of the chains which have bound him to this earth.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/15/69) Newport News, Va., Times-Herald: “Now, this triumph of human courage and knowledge stands poised on the threshold of accomplishment. For a few fleeting moments, the attention of the world will follow the Eagle as it ferries its two astronauts toward a destiny until now only dreamed of in our history. Then, most probably, our attention will filter back to the pressing problems on earth.” (Times-Herald, 7/15/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Apollo 11 is providing insight into the meaning of life and the imperatives of human society. It is forcing us to face the grim paradox of exploiting human reason and the marvels of machinery to soar into the majesty of space while the world becomes fragmented into selfish national sovereignties—some armed, some arming, with the hideous capacity to end life itself.” (Milwaukee Journal, 7/15/69) Denver Post: “The Soviet attempt to send an unmanned spaceship to the moon in advance of Apollo 11 is a bold bid to draw attention to Soviet space prowess. But even if it succeeds ... in mechanically scooping up samples of the moon and returning to earth, the Soviet project will not overshadow the American mission. Instead, the Soviet flight will serve to underscore the expensive duplication of effort created by the space race. If the Russians and Americans had cooperated, rather than competed, the risks and the costs involved in landing a man on the moon would have been far less.” (Denver Post, 7/15/69) Washington Evening Star: Soviet Luna XV seemed strangely timed. During their Moscow discussions on space cooperation, U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny had not given Astronaut Frank Borman “slightest hint that the Kremlin was planning to send an unmanned spacecraft to the moon to coincide with the history-making Apollo 11 American mission.” Was it really possible “to work together in space exploration with a country that seems to be playing tricks with ours at a moment when we are engaged in a historic effort to land men on the moon?” (W Star, 7/15/69, A12)
At Geneva luncheon during meetings of Disarmament Conference, U.S. and U.S.S.R. opened exploratory talks on proposed treaty banning use of seabed for stationing nuclear weapons, (upi, W News, 3/20/69, 2) for “national program for the development of a permanent space station and a logistic support system in a way that will not only serve the needs and goals of the civilian space program, but will also be capable of supporting future defense research and developments as needs become clearly defined.” (Text) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator, said: “Although similar space technology is used in Apollo Applications and the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, there is no unnecessary duplication in the experiments planned. These activities require different equipment, different orbits and different timing. I believe that any attempt to combine the two programs would jeopardize the returns to each agency and would ultimately increase the cost. There is a distinct need to continue with manned space operations under both military and nonmilitary auspices. Cooperation between nasa and dod has been close, and will continue.” (Text) afa’s highest award, Henry H. Arnold Trophy, was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. NASC Executive Secretary, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, received Gill Robb Wilson Trophy for Arts and Letters for his part in interpreting aerospace role in modern society, afa’s Citation of Honor went to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) for his management of NASA Apollo program, and to Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) for “outstanding contributions to the Air Force and the nation for being the first to achieve hypersonic winged flight while piloting the X—15 aircraft to a speed of 4,534 miles per hour.” (afsc Newsreview, 3/69, 1; AFJ, 3/8/69, 30)
U.S. patent No. 3,420,471 was granted to John D. Bird, Howell D. Garner, Ernest D. Lounsberry, and David E. Thomas, Jr., LaRC engineers who assigned rights to NASA for jet shoes to enable astronauts to move in space. Wearer could rotate body by natural ankle and leg motions and control direction by turning body and aiming head in swimming motion. Previous devices for similar purpose required use of one or both hands or operation of complex arrangement of control jets and gyroscope sensors. Toe pressure in new shoes would release nitrogen through thruster in sole of each shoe. With electrical control, pressure would be applied to switch. Alternate method would be fluidic control, with toes pressing syringe. (Pat Off pio; NYT, 1/11/69, 39)
House adopted conference report on H.R. 11271, FY 1970 NASA authorization, and sent it to Senate for further action. Report retained Senate’s $3.716-billion authorization—$280 million below FY 1969 NASA authorization and $285 million less than $3,966 billion passed by House June 10. It accepted House amendment requiring astronauts to plant U.S. flag on any planet visited for first time on U.S.-financed mission, Senate amendment requiring public disclosure of names and salaries of employees who exchanged positions between NASA and aerospace industry, and House provision withholding funds to any college which barred military recruiters. (House Rpt 91—609; CR, 11/6/69, H10679-84)
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, both U.S. Naval Academy graduates, presented Academy flag carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft to brigade representing 4,000 midshipmen at Annapolis. (AP, B Sun, 4/3/69, All)
During “Meet the Press” interview shown on nbc TV Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said he thought Apollo 11 spacecraft would have crashed if Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong had not piloted it on final lunar approach. Quick reactions hy Apollo 12 crew had helped save mission from power failure on its launch. “I think that the [Apollo 12] launch would have been a success. But we felt a good deal better with the astronauts there.” Dr. Paine thought U.S.S.R. would attempt moon trips “in the next few years.” (W Post, 11/17/69, A3)
Edgar L. Piret, U.S. Embassy Scientific Attache in Paris, accepted Prix Pierre Guzman gold medals on behalf of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Award had been established by Mme. Anna Emile Guzman in 1889 for first persons “to find the means of communicating with a heavenly body—Mars excluded” [see Aug. 13]. (AP, W Post, 12/9/69, A23)
At White House press briefing President Nixon introduced Apollo 8 astronauts and announced that Astronaut Frank Borman would make eight-nation goodwill trip to Western Europe. Tour would point out “what is the fact: that we in America do not consider that this is a monopoly, these great new discoveries that we are making; that we recognize the great contributions that others have made and will make in the future; and that we do want to work together with all peoples on this earth in the high adventure of exploring the new areas of space.” Later, Press Secretary Ronald Ziegler announced Borman family would visit England, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, West Germany, Italy, Spain, and Portugal. {PD, 2/3/69, 189-90; AP, W Post, 1/31/69, A2)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman acknowledged that he had discussed possibility of running for Governor of Arizona or U.S. Senate with Rep. Morris K. Udall (D-Ariz.) but said he did not “foresee right now” that he would do so, Associated Press reported. (W Post, 6/4/69)
msc announced appointment of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper as Assistant for Space Shuttle Program in msc’s Flight Crew Operations Directorate. Cooper would be responsible for flight crew training program, astronaut inputs into design and engineering, and directorate’s part in hardware development and testing for Space Shuttle. He would remain on flight status and eligible for space flight, (msc Release 69/67)
Second official public display of lunar rock fragment retrieved from moon by Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled at MSc by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director. Exhibit included 12 photograph and text panels and four-foot-diameter opaque sphere with 20-in viewing port, (msc Release 69—73)
At msc news conference following Apollo 11 splashdown, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: . . we now stand at what is undoubtedly the greatest decision point in the history of this planet.” Apollo 11 had proved “that man is no longer bound to the limits of the planet on which for so long he has lived. We will return to the moon first in November and then at regular intervals in the coming year. But these trips are only the first step. . . . Will we press forward to explore other planets or will we deny the opportunity to the future? To me, the choice is clear. We must take the next step. . . . This is the time for decision. . . . The knowledge possessed by men is sufficient, the resources are adequate for the task of carrying out this next step. . . . “In this moment of man’s greatest achievement, it is timely for us to dedicate ourselves to the unfinished work so nobly begotten by three of us. To resolve that this nation, under God, will join with all men in the pursuit of the destiny of mankind will lead to the way to the planets.” In answer to questions, Dr. Mueller said next major step should be manned landing on Mars which would be possible “sometime after 1980.” l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo Program Director, told press Apollo team was “strongest team that’s ever assembled in the history of man. It has the strength of technical and engineering confidence, scientific competence, and management competence that’s unexcelled. It has the dedication that’s necessary to be able to tackle an almost impossible job and bring it through” and an exciting future in lunar exploration. Second manned lunar landing mission, Apollo 12, would be launched from ksc Nov. 14 toward touchdown on Site 7 in moon’s Ocean of Storms. Primary objective would be to deploy Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), explore and survey mare area, and return samples to earth. Secondary objective, if lm softlanded on target, would be to examine Surveyor III spacecraft (launched April 17, 1967), which was resting on moon near planned Apollo 12 touchdown point. Astronauts would have two periods for extravehicular activities (eva), during which they would explore surface and conduct experiments for over three hours and walk farther away from spacecraft than had Apollo 11 crew. Maximum lunar stay time would be 28—32 hrs. Schedule called for planning to fly follow-on missions through Apollo 15 at four-month intervals and missions after that at five-month intervals. (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong (commander), Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (lm pilot), and Michael Collins (cm pilot) held press conference at msc. Astronauts were seated 50 ft from nearest newsmen and were partially enclosed in plastic booth as part of plan to limit crew’s contacts during 21 days immediately preceding flight and prevent development of illness. Collins told press that from CM viewpoint, Apollo 11 should not be very different from previous manned Apollo missions. He did not feel “slightest bit frustrated” about going to moon without landing on it: “I’m going 99.9 . . . percent of the way there, and that suits me fine.” lm flight plan would pick up where Apollo 10 left off with phasing maneuver, Aldrin explained. There would be number of “firsts”: “the ultimate test,” actual touchdown; 1/6 g environment; new thermal conditions; two-man EVA on lunar surface; sleeping in LM on moon; star sighting technique with alignment telescope on lunar surface; and powered ascent from moon with seven-minute engine burn. One of important early activities after exiting from lm on moon would be determining best pace for moving about: “. . . there have been several different techniques employed in the partial zero gravity training. And, it looks like you can walk conventionally one foot after another. It also looks as though you can do a two-footed hop—kangaroo style.” In training in aircraft flown at 1/6 g, “a fairly rapid pace” appeared quite easy to perform. “It looks like we shouldn’t have too much difficulty in moving at something like 6, 8, or 10 miles per hour.” Armstrong said crew would use “somewhat hybrid methods of manual and automatic” for descent to moon. “The predicted method at this point, although we have a great deal of flexibility and choice, based on the situation at the time, would he to maintain manual control of attitude and automatic control of throttle through the final descent from an altitude of somewhere between 500 and 1000 feet until such time as the automatic throttle rated descent was unsatisfactory, at which time we’ll go full manual on the throttle ... flying it in a manner like a normal vtol machine.” Code names for cm and lm had been selected as “representative of the flight, the nation’s hope,” Armstrong revealed, lm would be called “Eagle” for U.S. national emblem, and cm would be called “Columbia” for U.S. symbol, statue on top of Capitol, and Jules Verne’s fictional spacecraft, “Columbiad,” which flew to moon 100 yrs ago. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 7/6/69, Al) Borman and family visited Star City, home of cosmonauts outside Moscow, where he presented color film of Apollo 8. Cosmonauts presented Borman with model of Vostok 1, first manned spacecraft. Later Borman toured major space tracking station at Eupatoria near Yalta in Crimea. (AP, W Star, 7/5/69, A13; UPl, W Star, 7/7/69, A2)
NASA announced it would conduct 26 major launches from etr and WTR during 1969. First launch was Oso V Jan. 22. Launches from etr would include five manned missions: Apollo 9, scheduled for Feb. 28, would place three-man crew in earth orbit for 11 days to flight-test lunar module; Apollo 10 would place three astronauts in lunar orbit and two would fly lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface; and Apollo 11 would land two members of three-man crew on lunar surface. Two additional lunar landings would be conducted if first landing was successful. Unmanned launches from etr would include two Intelsat III comsats, two Mariner-Mars missions, Tiros weather satellite, Biosatellite carrying monkey, Pioneer E interplanetary spacecraft, Applications Technology Satellite (ats), Orbiting Solar Observatory (oso), Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao), and two U.K. comsats. wtr launches would include three Tiros weather satellites, Explorer (imp—g), Canadian International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (isis), Nimbus weather satellite, and Thor-Agena (ogo—f) mission to test experimental ion-thruster, (ksc Release 19—69; NASA ossa)
NASA began distribution of IS pounds of lunar material to scientific investigators in the United States and eight other countries for on ay sis. The rock above, one of the samples collected by Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, ft., on the moon July 29, teas studied at msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory. stroyed during experiments; residues and remaining 5.1 kgs would be returned to NASA. Results of analyses were to be reported early in 1970. Among measurements to be made were those of physical properties of rocks or soil to help in understanding optical observations of moon from earth and future seismic experiments; mineralogy and petrology to show mineral content, amount of water present when rocks crystallized, and how surfaces were eroded by particles; chemical composition of rocks and fines to determine concentration of 92 elements occurring on earth and in meteorites, times of crystallization of igneous rocks, and periods rocks had lain on lunar surface. Studies of rare gases in soil would furnish first data on isotopic compositions of solar materials. Biologists and organic chemists would determine structures and abundances of carbon compounds in and on lunar surface and their origin, catalog microstructures in terms of organized elements and microfossils, and define presence or absence of viable lunar organisms. {NASA Release 69—130)
New York City held ticker-tape parade for Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, followed by presentation at City Hall Plaza of Medals of City of New York, luncheon at Lincoln Center, appearance at U.N., and Waldorf-Astoria dinner attended by 2,500 political leaders and guests. (NYT, 1/10/69, 30; Aarons, W Post, 1/11/69, Al; AP, B Sun, 1/11/69, A4)
Apollo 11 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility (mqf) , arrived at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, where they were greeted by 12,000 cheering people and Mayor of Honolulu Frank F. Fasi. MQF was then transported to aircraft which would carry it to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. At lrl, scientists opened first of two boxes of lunar samples and made preliminary examinations of samples in one box. (Wooten, Wilford, NYT, 7/27/69, 47, 1)
Dept, of Commerce, dod, Dept, of Interior, DOT, AEC, NASA, and nsf released News from BOMEX, report of Barbados Oceanographic and Meteorological Experiment to be conducted in May, June, and July in cooperation with government of Barbados. Scientific study of joint behavior and interactions of atmosphere-ocean system in subtropical and tropical waters was part of Federal Air-Sea Interaction Research Program and major U.S. contribution to Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp). bomex would study continuous exchange of energy, momentum, gases, particulates, and electrical charges at air-sea interface and study ways in which energy and other properties were transported from area by atmosphere and ocean. NASA would test concepts of satellite sensors for weather and oceanographic observations. Its experimental weather and communications satellites (Ats III, Nimbus III, and essa satellites) and devices being developed under Earth Resources Survey Satellite program would be directly engaged in bomex. Photos taken by Apollo 9 astronauts with hand-held Hasselblad camera of 900 sq mi of equatorial Atlantic Ocean off Barbados would be used in project. (Text; NASA News; Science, 3/28/69, 1435-6)
Welcome back to earth: Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left to right inside the mobile Quarantine facility), were greeted by President Nixon aboard the V.S.S. Hornet after their splashdown. is back in orbit, having left Tranquility Base, and leaving behind a replica from our Apollo 11 patch with an olive branch.” LM docked with CSM at 128:03 get. Crew transferred with samples and film to csm, and LM ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit. SM reaction-control-system separation maneuver placed CSM into orbit with 72,0 mi (115.9-km) apolune and 63.0-mi (101.4-km) perilune, where crew rested and prepared for return to earth. cm separated from SM on schedule at 194:49 GET. Because of deteriorating weather in nominal landing area, splashdown point was moved 247.4 mi downrange, where weather was excellent. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 11 splashed down in mid-Pacific at 12:51 pm edt July 24, 15 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Hornet, 195 hrs 19 min after launch. Swimmers attached flotation collar and seven-man raft to spacecraft and helicopter dropped biological isolation garments, which were donned by astronauts inside CM and by one swimmer. Two other swimmers moved upwind of CM on another large raft. Postlanding ventilation was turned off and CM powered down, and astronauts climbed out and helped swimmer close hatch. Swimmer then decontaminated all garments, hatch area, flotation collar, and area around postlanding vent valves with Betadine disinfectant. Helicopter carried astronauts to recovery ship, where they entered 32-ft-long mobile quarantine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. They were congratulated by President Nixon and Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, who were on board ship. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory (lRl) in Houston July 27. cm was retrieved, placed in dolly on board recovery ship, moved to MQF, and mated to transfer tunnel. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, mqf engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to lrl. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Johnston Island and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 11 mission objective—to perform manned landing on moon and return—and all detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor, corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits and proficiency were major factors in mission’s success. Accomplishments included first manned lunar landing and return; first lunar surface EVA; first seismometer, laser reflector, and solar wind experiment deployed on moon; first lunar soil samples returned to earth; largest U.S. payload ever placed into lunar orbit (72,037.6 lbs at lunar orbit insertion); acquisition of numerous visual observations, photos and TV transmissions of scientific and engineering significance; and first operational use of mqf and lrl. Apollo 11 was eighth Apollo mission to date, fifth manned Apollo mission, and first manned lunar landing mission. Mission acquired major quantities of data for subsequent Apollo flights. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distance and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of lm to operate in space under manned conditions. Apollo 10 (May 18—26, 1969) had successfully operated complete Apollo spacecraft on lunar orbital mission and had provided major quantities of scientific and training materials for Apollo 11. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-83K; NYT, 7/16-25/69; W Post, 7/16-25/69; W Star, 7/16-25/69; B Sun, 7/16-25/69; PD, 7/28/69, 1016)
In telephone call to Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong on eve of, Apollo 11 astronauts’ round-the-world tour, President Nixon asked astronauts to invite foreign countries to become “partners in space” with U.S. He also invited astronauts and wives to White House dinner Nov. 5. (upi, W Star, 9/29/69, A3)
In Sydney, Australia, during world tour of Apollo 11 astronauts, Astronauts Michael Collins said NASA might someday send women on space flights, “nasa has never barred women,” he told news conference. “Flying background is usually what has prevented the young ladies from participating.” (AP, W Post, 11/2/69, 18)
In fourth big city welcome within one week, Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders received tribute from estimated 1.5 million persons in Chicago reception at which they were made honorary citizens of city, (upi, NYT, 1/15/69, 1)
In international reaction to Apollo 12 moon walk Moscow Radio announced landing eight minutes after touchdown, followed with brief progress bulletins, and broadcast seven-minute film on event seven hours after lm landed on moon. Foreigners in Moscow said BBC broadcast was jammed by two stronger stations just before lunar touchdown. Pope Paul VI at Vatican watched astronauts on TV, then knelt for short prayer. He sent message to President Nixon: “Many, many congratulations to you and the American nation on yet another magnificent step for the human race.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, saluted “precision and accuracy” of Apollo 12 lunar landing. He said, “Until the Russians achieve a rocket with the thrust of the order of Saturn 5, or greater, it is unlikely they will be able to stage any manned flight comparable with Apollo.” London’s morning newspapers put Apollo 12 story well down on front pages in contrast to Apollo 11 banner headlines. In Helsinki, Finland, Soviet diplomats attending strategic arms limitation talks toasted Apollo 12 crew. Tokyo TV dealers expressed unhappiness because repeat of run on color sets after Apollo 11 landing failed to materialize. West German Foreign Minister Walter Scheel said Apollo 12 was an invitation to Europe to organize its own space potential. Egyptian newspapers gave Apollo 12 second billing to continuing conflict with Israel. In Poland millions watched lunar landing by direct TV transmission. In Sweden TV reception was poor and viewer interest lagged. Former Argentine President Arturo U. Illia, in Buenos Aires, called lunar landing “a victory for democracy.” Australians watched landing 10 secs before U.S. because of time lag. In France many viewers were unable to watch landing because of electric utility strikes. Moon walk was one of few programs shown on Italian TV during day of general strike. Shah of Iran sent congratulations to President Nixon and Apollo 12 crew for “untiring endeavor.” Landing was shown live on Iranian TV. West Germany’s Wickert Public Opinion Institute estimated 82% of German adults watched TV shots of lunar landing, 92% watched Apollo 11. It concluded Apollo 12 lacked suspense that attended first moon shot. (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 30; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
naa announced Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders would receive 1968 Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics, as representatives of “entire United States space flight team for the successful and flawless execution of the first manned lunar orbit mission in history.” Trophy would be presented by President Nixon at Washington, D.C., luncheon May 7. (naa Release)
President Nixon announced appointment of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong as Chairman and member of Peace Corps National Advisory Council to succeed W. Thomas Johnson, Jr., who resigned May 27. (PD, 12/8/69, 1696)
Astronauts Alan L. Bean, R. Walter Cunningham, and Joseph P. Kerwin were grounded by NASA for 30 days for minor infractions of aircraft flight rules. Groundings—apparent attempt by NASA to emphasize importance of safety during jet training flights—were first for astronauts ; in past, infractions had been discussed at weekly pilot meetings. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/7/70, A3)
In response to telephone inquiry by Astronaut Frank Borman, Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, sent telegram guaranteeing that Luna XV, orbiting moon, would not interfere with Apollo 11 mission and assuring Borman that he would be notified of any changes in spacecraft’s course. Under 1967 U.N. Outer Space Treaty, U.S. and U.S.S.R. were bound to furnish each other this kind of information. (Wilford, NYT, 7/19/69, 1)
McDonald Observatory in Texas successfully recorded its first hits on laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts at 9:30 pm cdt. Scientists said distance at that moment was 232,271.406 mi and moon was 131.2 ft farther from earth than previously believed. Lick Observatory in California had recorded first hits Aug. 1 and had estimated earth-moon distance to be 226,970.9 mi at that time. (AP, W Star, 8/21/69, A3)
msc announced Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had been cleared medically for return to space flight status following correction of inner ear disorder which had grounded him in 1963. (NYT, 5/8/69, 2; W Post, 5/8/69, A7)
Controversy was building up over astronauts’ future, Apollo program, and manned space flight generally, Harry Schwartz said in New York Times. Three major debates were over whether engineer-astronauts or scientist-astronauts should be sent on future Apollo missions; who should control mission schedules and astronaut activities, “nasa hierarchy” or ground-based scientists in NASA; and whether U.S. should emphasize unmanned probes or crash program to put men on Mars in early 1980s. “The fact that it is the scientists who have been resigning while astronauts with test pilot backgrounds have been receiving unprecedented public acclaim makes it evident where the balance of power lies for the moment within nasa. But the issue is far from settled, since NASA itself must and does use the prospect of scientific advances as a key argument in seeking appropriations for space activities. Hence the dissident scientists could have substantial leverage if they teamed up with Congressmen and others who oppose the space appropriations for other reasons. It would not be surprising ... if nasa sought to ease the scientists’ irritation by satisfying some of their demands.” {NYT, 8/17/69, D2)
U.S. Patent Office issued patent No. 3,456,387 to Clyde A. Tolson, Associate Director of Federal Bureau of Investigation, for equipment to operate emergency windows and exits in aircraft and space vehicles. Without action of occupants, sensors would detect abnormal conditions and computer would weigh considerations before opening appropriate escape exits. Patent No. 3,456,445 was issued to Curtiss-Wright Corp. for improved version of astronaut maneuvering unit, Cap Pistol, intended to propel man outside space vehicle by capsules spaced along tape strip and fired by engine in pistol fashion. Inventors were Joseph F. Loprete, Max Beniele, and Richard E. Biehl. (Pat Off PIO; Jones, NYT, 7/26/69, 31)	'
Atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair—on behalf of herself, her husband Richard O’Hair, and her “Society of Separationists”—filed suit in Austin, Tex., District Court against NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to prevent U.S. astronauts on duty from practicing religion on earth, in space, or “around and about the moon.” She objected specifically to Apollo 8 Christmas Eve 1968 Bible reading by Astronaut Frank Borman and placing by Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., of disc containing microfilmed prayers on moon July 20. (upi, W Post, 8/7/69)
Apollo 11 astronauts and wives on world tour had private audience with Pope Paul VI at Vatican and later met with bishops from around the world. During Papal audience, 200 dissident bishops attending “shadow synod” near Vatican issued denunciation of meeting. Pope had previously refused to see them. Priests said poor people of world would interpret astronauts’ audience with Pope to mean “that the Church is ready to link itself with power, of which the astronauts are the symbol, and that she refused to accept direct contact with weakness, of which our modest assembly is a symbol.” (AP, P Bull, 10/16/69)
Approximately nine hours of satellite time had been booked for TV coverage abroad of Apollo 11 astronaut events during coming week, ComSatCorp said. They included more than two hours live coverage of Aug. 12 MSC news conference, to be relayed via Intelsat-III F—2 to Western and Eastern Europe and, in part, to Tokyo and Sydney via Pacific Intelsat-Ill F—4. Nearly two hours coverage of New York ticker-tape parade and visit to U.N. would be transmitted to Europe Aug. 13. Ceremonial dinner in Los Angeles, later in day, would be taped for transmission to Europe Aug. 14. (ComSatCorp Release 69-50)
NASA named Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong (.commander), Michael Collins (cm pilot), and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (lm pilot), as prime crew of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission scheduled for summer 1969. Backup crew would be Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (commander), William A. Anders (cm pilot), and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (lm pilot), (nasa Release 69—9)
Scientists at Lick Observatory in California unsuccessfully tried for third consecutive night to bounce ruby laser beams off reflector left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts. They admitted difficulty in pinpointing reflector’s exact location and speculated that it might have been knocked down by lm exhaust during ascent. (AP, W Star, 7/23/69, A7)
Catastrophic contamination of earth by returning Apollo 11 astronauts and lunar samples was “extremely unlikely,” Philip H. Abelson explained in Science. “One argument is that a form of life adapted to the absence of H2O, O2, and organic compounds could scarcely be expected to survive on earth, much less infect earth’s creatures. The most compelling argument, however, is that the lunar-return experiment has been conducted many times in the past. It has been estimated that millions of tons of unsterilized lunar material have reached the earth as a consequence of meteor impact. . . . Sterile containment of lunar specimens during the journey to Houston is assured. . . . “Procedures involving the astronauts are more controversial. Careful effort to keep to a minimum the amount of adventitious material returned to earth is a substantial factor in the procedures that have been adopted. The astronauts face a difficult and dangerous mission. Were their procedures to be made even more complex because of panicky, last-minute objections, their chances of a safe return could he needlessly jeopardized.” (Science, 6/13/69, 1227)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
Associated Press said Astronaut-Aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) would retire from usn July 1 to enter private business in oceanography field. He was second U.S. astronaut to orbit earth, during May 24, 1962, Mercury mission in Aurora 7. (W Post, 5/10/69, A3)
aec’s SNAP—3A nuclear generator, launched on board usn’s Transit IV—A navigational satellite June 29, 1961, completed eight years in orbit—three years longer than five-year design lifetime—after circling earth 40,530 times and traveling more than 1 billion mi. First nuclear generator to operate in space, 5-in-dia, 5]/>-in-high SNAP—3A converted heat given oft by plutonium directly into 2.7 w of electricity. Five snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) generators had been launched to date, including two on NASA’s Nimbus III (launched April 14). Atomic-fueled generator would be placed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts to power instrument package, (aec Release M—150)
Senate confirmed nomination of former Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to be Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs. (CR, 12/12/69, D1201)
Former astronaut and aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter announced he would become President and Chief Executive of Sea Sciences Corp., private enterprise formed to develop underwater projects. Prince Bernhard of The Netherlands would be board chairman, (upi, W Star, 10/30/69, A16)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., appeared in nationally televised press conference. Interview with four newsmen was conducted over closed-circuit TV, with astronauts at ksc and press 15 mi away. TV cameramen allowed in auditorium with crew had undergone thorough medical examinations. Armstrong, mission commander, said that after decade of planning and hard work astronauts were “willing and ready to attempt to achieve our national goal. This is possible because very many Americans across the nation have dedicated themselves to quality craftsmanship and ingenuity.” In response to question on astronauts’ attitudes toward mission, Armstrong said fear was not unknown, but added: “Fear is characteristic particularly of a knowledge that there may be something that you haven’t thought of and feel that you might be unable to cope with. I think our training and all the work that goes into the preparation for a flight does everything it can towards erasing those kinds of possibilities and I would say that as a crew we . . . have no fear of launching out on this expedition.” (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/69, 1, 20)
Climaxing day of cross-country celebrations, President and Mrs. Nixon hosted formal state dinner at Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles to honor Apollo 11 astronauts, their wives, and “historic achievement of the first manned landing on the moon.” Guests included other astronauts and wives; widows of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H.	White II; Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard; NASA and other space program officials; U.S. and international aviation pioneers; Cabinet members; Chief Justice and Mrs. Warren E. Burger; governors of 44 states; members of Joint Chiefs of Staff; Diplomatic Corps members representing 83 nations; Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower, widow of former President; former Vice President and Mrs. Hubert H. Humphrey; and Congressional leaders. President asked NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to read citation of posthumous awards: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration awards posthumously to Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee the NASA Distinguished Service Medals for professional skill, courage, and dedication to duty in Project Apollo. They gave their lives in their country’s historic undertaking to realize the goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth.” President also asked Dr. Paine to read citation of NASA Group Achievement Award to Apollo 11 Mission Operations Team “for exceptional service in planning and exemplary execution of mission operational responsibilities for . . . first manned lunar landing mission.” Award was presented to Apollo Flight Control Engineer Stephen G. Bales, who bad made decision to proceed with lunar landing when computers failed just before Eagle’s landing on Sea of Tranquility, on behalf of 400,000 persons who had contributed to Apollo program success. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, as nasc chairman, presented Medal of Freedom, nation’s highest civilian honor, to Apollo 11 astronauts for participation in “a unique and profoundly important adventure. The accumulated scientific knowledge and technological ability of mankind made man’s first step on the moon practicable; the courage and skill of men like these made it possible. Their contributions to this undertaking will be remembered so long as men wonder and dream and search for truth on this planet and among the stars.” Replying to honors, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said: “What Apollo has begun we hope will spread out in many directions, not just in space, but underneath the seas and in the cities, to tell us unforgettably that we can do what we will and must and want to do.” During evening orderly crowd of peace and antipoverty protesters gathered outside hotel. (PD, 8/18/69, 1141—2, 1148—51; Roberts, NYT, 8/15/69, 14; B Sun, 8/14/69, Al)
nasa announced selection of United Aircraft Corp. for $4-million, threeyear contract to design and develop life support and environmental control systems to sustain astronauts for long-duration earth orbital space flights. (WSJ, 6/5/69)
President Nixon addressed U.S. Embassy staff in London during eightday goodwill visit to European heads of state: “You have had a very distinguished visitor to this country, Frank Borman, a few days ago. .. . I recall when I was at the White House I was congratulating him in a toast for what he and his fellow astronauts had done. ... He said, ‘We appreciate the remarks you have made about us.’ But, he said, ‘I want to point out that there are 400,000 Americans who, in one way or another, contributed to the building of the Apollo spacecraft and to this program.’ He said, ‘I want to point out that there are 2 million parts in an Apollo spacecraft. So, if something went wrong with one of those parts, which had been created by these 400,000 Americans, that tremendous, exciting journey around the moon could not have been possible.’ That, of course, is what government is about.” {PD, 3/10/69, 341-2)
Apollo 11 booster, spacecraft, and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., completed final countdown rehearsal test. Astronauts achieved simulated liftoff at 9:32 am edt—exact time of scheduled July 16 launch. Final countdown for manned lunar landing mission would begin July 10. (AP, B Sun, 7/4/69, A10)
Pope Paul VI received Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family for 17-min audience in Papal library. Pope said in English, “Man’s reaching out to unravel the mysteries of the universe reveals more and more the wonders of God’s work and shows forth His glory.” Pope Paul sent personal greetings to Astronaut James W. McDivitt who had audience in 1967. (upi, W Star, 2/16/69, C5)
NASA named flight crews for Apollo 13 and 14 lunar landing missions. Prime crewmen for Apollo 13 were Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (commander), Thomas K. Mattingly II (cm pilot), and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (lm pilot). Backup crew was composed of Astronauts John W. Young, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Apollo 14 prime crewmen were Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Joe E. Engle. Both missions would include lunar exploration and deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiment packages (alsep) . Total lunar surface stay time would include two EVA periods of three hours each and would not exceed 35 hrs. Flights would be first for Astronauts Mattingly, Haise, Roosa, and Mitchell, (nasa Release 69—115)
In Paris during world tour Apollo 11 astronauts were made chevaliers of French Legion of Honor by Premier Jacques Chaban-Delmas and met with French President Georges Pompidou. Paris Mayor Etienne Royer de Vericourt presented them with city’s Gold Medal, (upi, C Trib, 10/9/69)
SNAP—27 nuclear generator placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts had continued to operate during first 28-day-and-night lunar cycle despite temperatures from —291 °F to +283°F, AEC announced. It was producing more than 70 w of electricity to power five instruments deployed Nov. 19 to transmit lunar data, (aec Release M-274)
nasa announced new quarantine procedures for Apollo 12 lunar landing mission scheduled for launch Nov. 14. Procedures had been recommended by Interagency Committee on Back Contamination. If astronauts’ condition was normal at splashdown they would don fresh flight suits and oral-nasal masks instead of biological isolation garments (big) used on Apollo 11. big would be available in case of unexplained crew illness. Swimmer would swab hatch and adjacent areas with liquid decontamination agent and crew would be carried by helicopter to mobile quarantine facility (mqf) on board recovery ship. Subsequent crew quarantine procedures would be same as for Apollo 11. Spacecraft would be returned to Hawaii by recovery ship, where team would deactivate pyrotechnics and flush and drain fluid systems (except water). It would then be flown to Lunar Receiving Laboratory for storage in special room until release from quarantine Jan. 7, 1970. (nasa Release 69—148A)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in by Vice President Spiro T, Agnew ,as NASA Administrator in ceremony in Vice President’s office. Dr. Paine said: “I am particularly anxious to see that in the second April 3; Dr. Thomas O. Paine (right) was sworn in as Administrator of the National Aeronautics anil Space Administration by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. decade of space we bring down to the people on earth more of the benefits that can be obtained from this wonderful new technology. . . . Such areas as navigation, communications and particularly earth resources are things that are very much on our minds as we look out to the moon and beyond.” (nasa Hq WB; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/4/69; AP, W Post, 4/4/69) * National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal for research, exploration, and discovery was presented by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A, Anders in Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C. Vice President Agnew said: “The possibilities of space exploration are so infinite they overwhelm the mind. The speed with which we have reached this new threshold of hope itself is awesome. Less than half a century has passed since the Hubbard Award was presented to Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh for his solo flight from New York to Paris. Less than a decade has passed since Colonel John Glenn was awarded the first Hubbard Medal for exploration in space.” Award, one of Nation’s highest honors, had been given only 24 times in 63 years, for outstanding achievement in geography and exploration. First medal had gone to Robert E. Peary in 1906 for Arctic explorations. Earlier in day at National Geographic headquarters, Apollo 8 astronauts had received General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1968, awarded to military or civilian usaf member making most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release )
First decade in space corresponded with early years of aviation following Wright brothers flight at Kitty Hawk, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, told Annual Kiwanis Dinner in Milledgeville, Ga. “I recently calculated the costs per seat mile of their first flight for comparison with our Apollo flight to the moon. They probably had ten thousand dollars invested in first Kitty Hawk flight that went one fifth of a mile, giving a cost per seat mile for Orville of fifty thousand dollars. We will have about twenty-four billion dollars invested in our first five-hundred-thousand-mile trip for three astronauts to the moon, giving a cost of only about sixteen thousand dollars per seat mile. We are ahead of the Wright Brothers— but we have a long way to go to catch up with the DC—8 or 707. If subsequent flights to the moon cost two hundred million dollars each, that’s less than one hundred and fifty dollars a seat mile, so we are going in the right direction.” (Text)
In Houston, Tex., press interview Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Capt., usn), said he had turned down offers for Naval promotion to admiral and NASA Hq. executive position, to become president of Regency Corp. in Denver, Colo., financial complex leasing industrial equipment worldwide. One of original astronauts and only veteran of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions, Schirra said he did not want to “stick around as a half astronaut.” He had rejected aerospace offers because “I might be limiting the contribution of which I feel I’m capable.” (AP, W Post, 3/12/69, A8)
Senate Committee on Banking and Currency favorably reported S.J.R. 140 with amendments, providing for striking of medals honoring U.S. astronauts who had flown in outer space. (CR, 7/28/69, D681)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders as Executive Secretary of nasc to succeed Dr. Edward C. Welsh. It was highest Government post ever offered to an astronaut. {PD, 5/19/69, 705; Kirkman, W Post, 5/15/69, A25)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and his first-grade school teacher, Mrs. Peggy Crowley, would receive 1969 Golden Key Awards from six national school organizations at annual convention of American Assn, of School Administrators, Atlantic City, N.J., Feb. 15, Parade reported. Awards had been founded to dramatize teacher’s role in U.S. life. (Parade, 2/9/69, 4)
President Nixon’s post -Apollo 11 tour of Asia and Romania July 25— Aug. 3, plus his remarks and reactions aboard U.S.S. Hornet at splashdown and during welcoming ceremony for astronauts, were recorded in New York Times Magazine article by Max Frankel and Robert B. Semple, Jr. Authors were among press accompanying President and Mrs. Nixon on tour. President and party had basked “in reflected moonglow.” When President walked toward reviewing stand in Guam, spectator had remarked, “that’s his moon walk.” Apollo 11 had given President “new exuberance.” [NYT Magazine, 8/17/69, 26—9, 76—80)
New York Times editorial on Aug. 12 Apollo 11 news conference in Houston: “What came through most clearly in yesterday’s enthralling first-hand report by the Apollo astronauts was the infinitesimal margin by which Eagle escaped either catastrophe or a decision to abort the moon landing. Either of the two major problems that emerged in those nerve-wracking moments before touchdown—the overburdened computer and the near-exhaustion of their fuel supply before Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin found a suitable landing spot—might have forced a very different ending to the historic mission. That all turned out perfectly is a tribute to the astronauts’ skill, courage and poise as well as to the ability of the back-up personnel at Mission Control in Houston.” (NYT, 8/13/69, 40)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced H.R. 465 “providing for the establishment of the Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct and erect with funds a memorial in the John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, or the immediate vicinity, to honor and commemorate the men who serve as astronauts in the U.S. space program.” (CR, 2/19/69, H1087)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Co. Aerospace Group to receive 119million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to design, develop, test, and deliver four flight-qualified lunar roving vehicles and related test and training equipment. Four-wheeled vehicles would be carried on board Apollo lm descent stages in 1971—72 to transport astronauts on lunar surface and store equipment and lunar samples, (nasa Release 69—147)
At gsfc, satellite mapping authority Dr. John A. O’Keefe was preparing first precise maps of Tibet using photographs taken from 100-mi altitude by U.S. astronauts and data obtained between 1890s and 1935 by Swedish explorer Sven Hedin during only extensive survey of area by outsider. Expedition’s survey sightings on mountain peaks were being applied to numerous photographs from space. Revised maps would be published in Sweden. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/13/69, 14)
At White House, President Nixon proclaimed July 21 National Day of Participation. “Apollo 11 is on its way to the moon. . . . Never before has man embarked on so epic an adventure. ... As the astronauts go ... we on earth will want, as one people, to be with them in spirit . . . and to support them with prayers that all will go well.” All Executive departments and Government agencies would be closed and U.S. flag would be displayed on public buildings. With many members at Cape Kennedy, Senate and House met briefly and conducted only routine business. Congressional Record was filled with comments on Apollo 11 and wishes for Godspeed to astronauts. (PD, 7/21/69, 997-8; CR, 7/16/69)
NASA was allowing Apollo 12 crew and colleagues to take part in Jewish National Fund dinner Dec. 14 in Houston “after years of guarding against the use of its astronauts as fund-raisers,” Associated Press said. Proceeds of $100-a-plate affair honoring Apollo 12 and other astronauts would be used to plant trees in Israel. (AP, W Post, 12/13/69, A12)
From summer residence, Castel Gondolfo, Pope Paul VI asked Christians worldwide to pray for Apollo 11 astronauts and said mission showed man was a “giant.” (AP, B Sun, 7/14/69, A5) At White House religious service the Rev. Paul H. A. Noren of Mount Olivet Church in Minneapolis led 300 people in prayer: “We ask Thy divine protection for our space pioneers who will soon make footprints on the moon.” (AP, NYT, 7/14/69, 23)
White House announced Apollo 11 astronauts would make 22-nation tour starting Sept. 29, to stress U.S. willingness to share space knowledge. Itinerary would include Mexico City; Bogota, Colombia; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Las Palmas, Canary Islands; Madrid; Paris; Amsterdam and Brussels; Oslo; Cologne, Germany; Berlin; London; Rome; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; Ankara, Turkey; Kinshasa, Congo; Teheran, Iran; Bombay, India; Dacca, Pakistan; Bangkok, Thailand; Darwin and Sydney, Australia; Guam; Seoul; Tokyo; Honolulu; and return to Houston, Tex., Nov. 5. Additional trip to Ottawa and Montreal, Canada, was planned for December, (upi, NYT, 9/20/69, 5)	_
San Francisco Board of Supervisors had voted to negotiate with Texas millionaire Lamar Hunt on lease of 22-acre Alcatraz Island, United Press International reported. Hunt planned underground museum in tribute to Apollo 11, while restoring island’s historic buildings. (W Star, 10/20/69, B4) weather satellite itos that would be launched in prototype by NASA later in 1969 and in operational form by ESSA in early 1970. “It combines in one spacecraft both the stored-data and direct readout cameras of the present two-satellite [tiros] arrangement. Fewer launches will be required to keep the system in operation. The design allows for growth and the capacity to accommodate a variety of instruments to meet new and developing needs.” System would contain high-resolution infrared radiometer for “nighttime observations approaching daytime pictures in resolution and quality” thus providing 24-hr weather satellite coverage. “This step will enable us to meet fully the first national program objective—providing twice-daily observations of the entire earth, both by stored and direct readout systems, day and night.” (Text) Fifty years of transatlantic flight—from usn NC—4 flying boat’s Lisbon arrival May 27, 1919, to June 3, 1969, maiden Atlantic crossing of Boeing 747—was traced in paper by Dr. Richard K. Smith, Ramsey Fellow at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. During “the Heroic Years on the North Atlantic between 27 May 1919 and 27 May 1939, there were 175 flights across the Atlantic; 142 were by airplanes, 33 by airships. ... It is confidently believed that all the persons who flew the Atlantic by airplane during that period could be accommodated aboard a 747, perhaps with some seats to spare. However, at least three more 747s would be required to lift those persons who flew by airship during 1919—1937!” (Text) msc Flight Operations Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said Apollo program might be extended to 1973 to allow NASA to fly three space station training missions in 1972. “It’s going to be some time before we settle it. But it’s going to be difficult to handle both Apollo and Apollo Applications from an operational point of view as well as a people point of view in 1972.” Revised launch schedule set Apollo 19 landing back to November 1972 and Apollo 20 to May 1973. Between Apollo 18 launch Feb. 11, 1972, and Apollo 19 were three orbital flights preparatory for establishment of first U.S. permanent space station in 1975. These flights could come just after Apollo 18, in May 1972 and in September 1972. Further reason for Apollo landings delay was possibility they would be made in remote lunar areas like crater Tycho, almost 1,000 mi below moon’s equator and rated among top-priority landing sites. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/23/69, A21) Dr. Arthur D. Code, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer, reported discovery that relatively young stars in constellations Orion and Scorpius were generating heats of 45,000°F—5,000° hotter than had been thought. Finding, from data obtained by NASA’s Oao II satellite (launched Dec. 7, 1968), suggested young stars might be more massive and maturing faster than originally believed and supported theories of thermonuclear processes in stars’ interiors that generated such heats. Oao II data also showed younger stars had more complex chemical composition than stars formed near universe’s beginning. They contained fairly large amounts of carbon, silicon, magnesium, and heavier elements, as well as predominant hydrogen and helium. Other Oao II data indicated particles in interstellar space were variety of complex matter, much of which might be debris ejected from stars. (Wilford, NYT, 10/21/69, C19) msc Director of Engineering Development Maxime A. Faget outlined concept of space vehicle with two reusable stages—booster rocket and orbiter craft—both with fixed wings, long fuselages, and rear rocket engines. Vehicle would be 225 ft high and weigh 2.5 million lbs at launch. Orbiter vehicle, capable of carrying 25,000 lbs of cargo and passengers, would be attached pickaback to booster stage’s upper half. Booster, burning liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, would elevate orbiter to fringe of space, separate, drop away, and cruise to landing like jet airliner. Booster probably would be piloted by two astronauts. Orbiter would ignite rocket engine to continue upward to space station orbiting at 300-mi altitude. After link-up with space station, transfer of cargo or 12 passengers, and pickup of new load, orbiter would be steered by pilot into atmosphere and controlled glide to landing on 10,000-ft runways used by aircraft. Key to reentry would be orbiter’s “angle of attack” when hitting atmosphere. Faget proposed 60° angle with nose up, so flattened bottom would catch airflow to slow descent. Small jet engines would be fired to help control final descent phases of both orbiter and booster. Outer surface of vehicles would be made of metal alloys that could sustain temperatures to 2,700°F. (Wilford, NYT, 10/24/69, 43) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed dod space activities: “In communications, meteorology and surveillance . . . we are actively pursuing increased capability. . . . Tactical communications using satellite relays are presently being intensely tested and show great promise in improving control of field units and increasing . . . cooperation between land, sea and air forces. In surveillance, our efforts have produced results. Of first importance is a new satellite early warning system that will do a great deal to further insure our ability to deter nuclear attack.” Savings in space travel costs “must be linked to the recovery and reuse of space vehicles. . . . Since major improvement in our ability to use space environment would be of direct assistance to both NASA and the military, we are jointly planning our research and development towards this objective.” (Text) Major aiaa awards presented included Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to George M. Low, former Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, currently on special assignment to msc Director, for “his leadership role in bringing the Apollo Program to fulfillment, and to the thousands of engineers who dedicated their careers, without public recognition, to the conquest of space.” Daniel Guggenheim Medal for 1969 was presented to retired arc Director H. Julian Allen for “personal contributions to outstanding research and development leading to vastly improved re-entry bodies, missiles, satellites, and spacecraft, and for leadership in directing and inspiring a large group of research men at Ames Laboratory.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given Edgar C. Lineberry, Jr., Chief of Orbital Mission Analysis Branch, msc, for “significant advancement in the field of rendezvous mechanics through his development of the space maneuver logic and associated control techniques, and his formulation of the mission plans which contributed decisively to the success of all rendezvous operations conducted during United States manned space flights.” De Florez Training Award was given to Gifford Bull, Principal Engineer and Engineering Pilot at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, for “establishing the use of variable stability airplanes as flight dynamics training vehicles for engineering test pilots.” New aiaa Award for Spacecraft Design was awarded Otto E. Bartoe, Jr., Vice President, Aerospace Div., Ball Brothers Research Corp., for “concept and preliminary design of the Orbiting Solar Observatory spacecraft configuration and control systems, the first embodiment of the spin-despin design.” Aerospace Communications Award was awarded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency and former JPL Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, for “development of phase lock systems for space communications, guidance and control, and for contributions to the design, development and operation of NASA’s Deep Space Network.” (msc Release; aiaa Releases; aiaa Booster, 10/20/69) Honored as new Honorary Fellows at Honors and Award Banquet Oct. 23 were Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Among 29 new Fellows were: Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, Deputy Director, Flight Crew Operations Directorate, msc; former gsfc Director, Dr. Harry J. Goett, Chief Engineer, Space and Re-Entry Systems Div., Philco-Ford Corp.; Najeeb E. Halaby, President, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Samuel L. Higginbottom, Vice President, Operations Group, Eastern Airlines, Inc.; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director; John G. Borger, Chief Engineer, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Walter Haeussermann, Director, Astrionics Laboratory, MSFC; Dr. John C. Houbolt, Vice President and Senior Consultant, Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, (aiaa Release) During third aiaa President’s Forum, Under Secretary of Interior Russell E. Train said, “Photographs of Earth, taken by our astronauts from the vicinity of the Moon, bring home more forcefully than the words of all scientists of all times the fact that we live on a finite planet with finite but poorly known resources.” (A&A, 2/70) October 21: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCIV into orbit with 760-km (472.2-mi) apogee, 742-km (461.1-mi) perigee, 99.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69)
In Madrid during European goodwill tour, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman placed wreath at statue of Columbus and met Cristobal Colon de Carvajal y Maroto, 17th duke of Veragua and hereditary “admiral of the ocean sea,” title created in 1537 for explorer’s son, Diego Columbus. (AP, C Trib, 2/18/69)
President Nixon welcomed returned Apollo 11 astronauts aboard U.S.S. Hornet: “I think I am the luckiest man in the world . . . not only because I have the honor to be President of the United States, but particularly because I have the privilege of speaking for so many in welcoming you back to earth.” Washington had received messages from more than 100 foreign governments: “Emperors, Presidents, Prime Ministers, and Kings, have sent the most warm messages that we have ever received. They represent over 2 billion people on this earth, all of them who had the opportunity, through television, to see what you have done.” Week of mission had been “the greatest week in the history of the world since the Creation, because as a result of what happened in this week, the world is bigger, infinitely, and also, as I am going to find on this trip around the world ... as a result of what you have done, the world has never been closer together before.” (PD, 8/4/69,1032-3)
NASA’s 363-ft-tall Saturn V launch vehicle, tipped with Apollo 12 spacecraft scheduled to carry astronauts toward moon Nov. 14, was placed on launch pad at KSC. (AP, W Post, 9/9/69, A2)
White House announced Apollo 11 crew on way to moon was carrying Soviet commemorative medals brought back to U.S. by Astronaut Frank Borman, who had received them from widows of Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Vladimir M. Komarov during his Moscow visit. Apollo 11 also carried Apollo 204 crew patch and commemorative medals struck for families of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee before astronauts died in Jan. 27, 1967, fire. President Nixon said, “The names of Gagarin and Komarov, of Grissom, White, and Chaffee, share the honors we pray will come to Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. In recognizing the dedication and sacrifice of brave men of different nations, we underscore an example we hope to set: that if men can reach the moon, men can reach agreement.” (PD, 7/21/69, 999)
Recording by seismometer on moon of seven external impacts near Apollo 12 landing site since astronauts left moon Nov. 20 was reported by Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo program’s seismic research. Each impact had produced tremors. Dr. Latham said meteors might have struck Ocean of Storms, whose surface resonated when hit. Lack of internal quakes indicated moon had not been heated substantially for about 4.6 billion yrs. (AP, W Star, 12/9/69, A6)
President Nixon, accompanied by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, visited dod employees at Pentagon. President recalled reference made by Astronaut Frank Borman at White House Apollo 8 briefing Jan. 30 to “400,000 men and women in the Nation who at one time or another had played a part in making this great, spectacular feat possible.” President said, “I was glad to see Colonel Borman bring it home that way. Four hundred thousand made it possible for this magnificent achievement to occur. I trust that all of you can convey that kind of spirit to those who work in the Defense Department.” {PD, 2/3/69, 194)
Electrostatic zero-gravity workbench experiment by Chrysler Corp. at Michoud Assembly Facility might provide substitute for gravity in small space-station area, NASA reported. If successful, experimental equipment—three-foot-square workbench with coated metal top, high voltage and variable power supply, and ion source with interconnected cabling—would enable astronaut to manipulate loose objects like tools in weightlessness of orbiting space station. Ion source and high-voltage power supply, directed downward, would create force field to hold tools to bench top. Ground experiments would be completed in six months. (NASA Release 69—58)
usaf promoted Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to full colonel. In congratulatory message Gen. John P. McConnell, Air Force Chief of Staff, said Apollo 11 mission was “indeed a momentous achievement” and promotion was “token of appreciation for the part you played.” (upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 28)	<
Europeans were “as excited as many Americans” about Apollo 11 launch, New York Times reported. But “only the sharpest observer of the Soviet news media could guess, as he went to bed tonight, that Americans will try to send men to the moon tomorrow,” according to Baltimore Sun. Last mention of Apollo 11 in Soviet press had been July 9 meeting of President Nikolay V. Podgorny with Astronaut Frank Borman. In U.K., bbc and commercial TV were planning extensive Apollo 11 coverage, some live via comsat. British newspapers were competing with special space supplements and guides. Exceptions to generally “adulatory” reportage was The Times of London article in which philosopher Lord Russell had said: “Men will not be content to land upon the moon and try to make it habitable. They will land simultaneously from Russia and the United States, each party, complete with H-bombs and each intent upon exterminating the other.” American Embassy in Warsaw was packed every day with Poles viewing space films. Spain’s Evening Daily Pueblo had sponsored contest to send 25 readers to Apollo 11 launch. In France 22-page space supplement issued by France-Soir had sold 1.5 million copies at $1 each. Bild Zeitung in Germany had noted 7 out of 57 Apollo supervisors were of German origin. Austrian press had lionized Dr. Wernher von Braun during recent visit to Salzburg. Volume of Western European newspaper space devoted to lunar landing mission rivaled that in U.S., New York Times said, and “the whole story of the moon effort is improving the ‘prestige’ of the United States. . . . But. .. respect voiced by individuals is often for America’s technological power, not her humanity or civilization.” (Lewis, NYT, 7/16/69, 20; B Sun, 7/16/69, A8, Mills, A9)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean achieved mock liftoff at 11:22 am edt-—exact minute planned—completing final phase of initial countdown demonstration test (cddt) for Nov. 14 launch to moon. No major problems arose in spite of gusty winds and rain that would have delayed actual launch. (W Post, 10/30/69, A8)
Astronaut Alan L. Bean described plans for Apollo 12 extravehicular activities to press at KSC. Mission, to begin Nov. 14, would include two 3Vs>-hr eva periods on moon. For first EVA main objective was to deploy alsep, deploy TV camera and take photos, deploy lunar equipment conveyor, take contingency sample, deploy S-band antenna and solar wind experiment, and collect lunar material. After rest in lm astronauts would return to lunar surface for second eva period, to collect good documented sample and document geologically interesting features with photographs, samples, and description. “There’s not going to be a lot of time to pick up a rock and think about it . . . but there’s going to be time to look at the craters and try to determine what kind they are and where they came from, if this one’s different from that one, what part of the crater you want to sample. . . . We’re going to take photographs as we see all of it. And when this is finished we’re hopefully going to be over near Surveyor.” Examination of Surveyor 111 (launched April 17, 1967) was second objective. Crew would retrieve parts for evaluation of how materials withstood long-term exposure in space. Final surface experiment would be conducted after liftoff from moon when crew crashed LM ascent stage onto surface. Crash would be recorded by seismometer and was expected to provide data from which scientists could make inferences about moon’s internal structure. (Transcript)
Report of President Nixon’s Task Group on Space [Sept. 15] and Apollo astronauts’ speeches to Congress [Sept. 16] had brought some “rationality back to the discussion of whither the space program,” Washington Post editorial said. Acceptance by President of recommendation “would eliminate talk of abandoning manned space flight, which would be a foolish course of action, or of proceeding toward Mars in a crash effort to get there as quickly as possible.” It was important “for the nation to push ahead on the immediate recommendations of the Task Group— exploring the moon, developing the tools that are needed for systematic exploration of our space travel capability, and extracting from the space program more benefits for those of us who are earthbound.” (W Post, 9/19/69)
Apollo 9 mission had gathered new evidence of clearer visibility-in space and “marvelous” acuity of human eye, Associated Press reported. Astronauts had told officials onboard recovery ship after splashdown they could see much farther in space than in earth’s atmosphere—both with telescopes and with naked eye. They had tracked several orbiting space objects up to 1,600 mi away with telescope and had tracked jettisoned 2%-ft-long, 14-ft-dia LM ascent stage to 1,000 mi. (W Star, 3/17/69, A4; W Post, 3/17/69, A4)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., quarantined in lrl, discussed lunar surface activities with about 40 scientists and geologists over closed-circuit TV. Astronauts said lunar surface was rich with interesting rocks. They described small, lyalnut-size fragments which appeared translucent or transparent, with reflecting surfaces like quartz crystals; spatters of glass on rocks, especially on rocks on bottom of craters; and rocks shaped like automobile distributor caps, which appeared to be weathered or eroded and sculptured at top in cylindrical shape. Astronauts said they regretted not being able to retrieve more lunar rocks and suggested that future Apollo astronauts be equipped with extra pocket or shoulder bag so they could collect interesting rocks as they saw them. (W Post, 8/7/69, A4; AP, B Sun, 8/7/69, A8)
President Nixon approved H.J.R. 775, to authorize President to award Congressional Space Medals of Honor to astronauts [see Sept. 15]. (CR, 10/6/69, 1362)
“We have entered a new era,” Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press in Houston following Apollo 11 lunar landing. “The significance of the trip is that mankind is going to establish places of abode outside of his planet earth.” In telephone call to White House, Dr. Paine had told President Nixon, “It is my honor on behalf of the entire NASA team to report to you that the Eagle has landed on the Sea of Tranquility and our astronauts are safe and looking forward to starting the exploration of the moon.” Dr. Paine said President Nixon had spoken with “excitement and awe in his voice” and mood was that of “considerable tension relieved.” NASA planned tentative six additional manned lunar missions over next few years. Dr. Paine praised U.S.S.R.’s cooperation in providing Luna XV information to Astronaut Frank Borman [see July 18]. He also said if Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong had not assumed manual control of lm to steer it from crater during lunar landing, “we might . . . have had considerable- difficulty.” (McGehan, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al)
Apollo 11 astronauts on world tour arrived in Tokyo. Tight security measures prompted by fears of possible attack by radical students protesting Japan’s defense treaty with U.S. permitted public exposure for only half hour. Police estimated 120,000 people watched brief parade down Ginza, Tokyo’s main street. Later astronauts and wives were received by Emperor Hirohito and Empress Nagako. Astronauts were presented cultural medal by Prime Minister Eisaku Sato—first time medal had been presented to foreigners. (Pepper, B Sun, 11/5/69, A2)
At Andrews afb, on return from world tour, President Nixon said: “In Bucharest I noted that so many, particularly of the young people, held up a newspaper picture of the astronauts landing on the moon, and everywhere we went it was the same. Some way, when those two Americans stepped on the moon, the people of this world were brought closer together. ... I really feel in my heart that it is . . . the spirit of Apollo, that America can now help to bring to all relations with other nations. The spirit of Apollo . . . can bring the people of the world together in peace.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1071—2)
Hungary and Romania had issued souvenir stamps commemorating Apollo 8 mission and astronauts, U.S. newspaper philatelic columns announced. Photograph taken from Gemini IV of Arabian coast provided design for new stamp in sultanate of Muscat and Oman. (Faries, W Star, 2/9/69, D10; AP, W Post, 2/9/69, K8)
Glazing discovered on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts was analyzed in Science by Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., senior investigator for close-up photography. Glossy surfaces similar to glass found clumped in centers of small lunar craters appeared to have been swept in after craters had been formed. Glazed areas were also concentrated toward tops of protuberances and, in some cases, droplets appeared to have run down inclined surface and congealed on sides. Glazing might have originated from effect of exhaust of lm descent stage, splashing of liquid drops from larger impact elsewhere, shock heating or volcanism on moon, same impact that created craters in which glazing was found, or intense radiation heating. Intense radiation was most probable cause, Gold said. Source could have been impact fireball on moon, impact fireball on earth, or most likely, solar outburst in geologically recent times. (Science, 9/26/69, 1345—9)
Time-Life, Inc., would pay minimum of $400,000 for exclusive book rights of lunar landing story to the combine established by NASA astronauts in 1959, Don Kirkman said in Washington Daily News. Money would be split equally into 60 shares for 52 active astronauts and widows of 8 deceased. (W News, 7/2/69, 7)
Apollo 11 launch brought mood of reflection across Nation, New York Times said. Dawn was breaking in western U.S. when blastoff occurred. Workers in San Francisco’s open air fish markets stood in silence to hear radio report. In San Diego motorists crossing U.S.-Mexican border listened to countdown on car radios. In mid-America, classes were postponed at Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colo., while cadets watched launch on TV. Cowhands at northern Wyoming ranch, inaccessible to radio or TV, interrupted work to honor Apollo 11. Ranch owner Dr. Oakleigh Thorn II said, “We feel so close to the moon shot out here, because we’re so close to the stars and sky.” In Biloxi, Miss., harbor fishermen paused on wharf to hear countdown. In Tennessee, tobacco farmers listened to transistor radios in fields. Washington, D.C., schoolteacher said, “The astronauts didn’t just go to the moon. All our minds went to the moon and intellectually man’s horizons have jumped leaps and bounds beyond the historical situation they’ve always been confined to.” (Fosburgh, NYT, 7/17/69, 1)
Royal Crown Cola International announced former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had become its president. He had been chairman since January 1967. (NYT, 2/8/69)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., practiced splashdown and anticontamination procedures they would use after return from moon in July. Astronauts donned plastic-coated biological isolation garments and sprayed each other with Betadine disinfectant before leaving dummy spacecraft in Gulf of Mexico, (upi, W Star, 5/25/69, A6)
On arrival in Saigon, Republic of Vietnam, President Nixon said: “I am happy that the moon landing, which in its universality signifies a symbolic drawing together of all mankind, has provided an occasion for me to meet with President Thieu in the capital of his country.” Later, after discussions with President Nixon, President Nguyen Van Thieu said, “The Vietnamese people fully concur in the message of peace which the three brave American astronauts deposited on the moon for all mankind.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1051—4)
Apollo 9 commander James A. McDivitt was appointed Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, replacing George M. Low, who was temporarily on special assignment to msc Director to plan future msc programs and work on organizational matters, (msc Release 69-66) *	East Germany’s People’s Chamber unanimously ratified nuclear nonproliferation treaty. West Germany had not yet signed. (P Inq, 9/25/69) *	House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably S. 1287, which authorized appropriations for FYs 1970, 1971, and 1972 for metric system study. (CR, 9/25/69, H8488) Lee B. James, Director of Program Management at msfc, said next moon flights could suffer from lack of proper employee motivation. “We are completing [rocket] stages with welders who know they are going to be laid off.” Sheet metal workers in plants with termination papers were working on vital space hardware. Twenty defects attributed to human error had been uncovered in single rocket. Apollo Program Director Rocco Petrone said future moon landings would be even more demanding than first, with astronauts spending 54 hrs on moon during some. To make missions successful, workers must be motivated to pay greatest attention to detail. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said NASA hoped to cut payload launch costs to $200 per pound and reduce number of workers on Saturn V launches from 20,000	to about number required to get Boeing 747 off ground, (msc Release 69—65; Maloney, H Post, 9/26/69)	•	v
Sequence of five color photos of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., performing extravehicular activities on lunar surface were released by NASA. Vivid sequence showed Aldrin descending ladder to surface, walking near LM, posing near U.S. flag, deploying seismometer, and walking with Armstrong’s reflection visible in his visor. NASA also released two-part 16—mm film which showed moon fading away as LM ascended and Lm’s rendezvous with CSM in lunar orbit. It also showed Astronaut Michael Collins shaving inside CSM. (W Post, 8/1/69, A7; Witkin, NYT, 8/1/69, 16)
Apollo 11 preparations were proceeding well toward launch to moon at 9:32 am edt July 16, Apollo Mission Director George H. Hage told Washington, D.C., press conference. Hypergolic propellant loading would begin June 18, wet phase of countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin July 1, and crew participation in cddt without propellants would begin July 2. After landing on moon astronauts would descend ladder to lunar surface. When Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong reached second rung of ladder, he would pull D-ring to activate camera for TV coverage of descent to lunar surface. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., would descend about 15 min after Armstrong. Entire 21/£-hr period during which astronauts explored lunar surface, set up experiments, and collected lunar samples within 100 ft of landing site would be telecast live to TV viewers on earth. (Transcript)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong would be first man to step on moon, according to NASA plans for July 16 Apollo 11 mission, Apollo Program Manager George M. Low told msc press conference. Armstrong, mission commander, followed by Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., lm pilot, would leave LM and spend 2 hrs 40 min walking on lunar surface, gathering rock samples, setting up experiments, and taking pictures within 100 ft of LM. Astronauts would not go farther, Low said, because “all that we need to carry out in deploying the experiment in doing all of the activities that we have to do on the surface the first time . . . can be done within the first 50 or 100 ft from the LM and we see no reason to go any further and use up a lot of energy walking as opposed to doing those things that we would like to do. . . .” (Transcript)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1968 was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A, Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Statler Hilton Hotel ceremony in Washington, D.C. National Aeronautic Assn, award was made annually for greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. toward improving performance, efficiency, and safety of air or space vehicles, (naa News; W Star, 5/8/69, A3)
Apollo 11 astronauts lunched with King Olav of Norway in Oslo before spending weekend at cottage of Norwegian Defense Minister Otto Greig Tidemand during world tour, (upi, W Star, 10/10/69, A9)
NASA announced resignation of Astronaut F. Curtis Michel, effective Aug. 18. Dr. Michel, who had been on one-year leave of absence from NASA to do scientific research at Rice Univ. in Houston, said that—although he was reluctant to leave NASA and prospect of flight in space—he wanted to devote full time to research at Rice. Resignation reduced number of NASA astronauts to 48. (msc Release 69—55)
AFSC Neuisrevieui editorial commented on Apollo 11: “If, like the early Vikings or Columbus at the shores of the New World, Amundsen at Antarctica, Hillary at the peak of Mt. Everest—our astronauts stood alone with their thoughts on unknown soil, they were not alone. With them was the invisible presence of the most extensive, highly trained, professionally competent, and thoroughly dedicated task force we have known. We in the Air Force Systems Command salute the astronauts on their accomplishment. We are proud that we have been able to contribute to their magnificent achievement.” (afsc Newsreview, 8/69, 2)
Apollo 11 astronauts were welcomed by estimated 100,000 persons in Bangkok, Thailand, after flight from Dacca, Pakistan, during world tour. (C Trib, 10/29/69)
Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov told press conference at MSC they had declined invitation to visit Cape Kennedy because they could not reciprocate and invite U.S. astronauts to Soviet launch facilities. (C Trib, 10/24/69)
Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham was named a director of American Systems Inc., Los Angeles electronics firm. Cunningham, lm pilot on Oct. 11—22 Apollo 7 mission, would continue duties as astronaut. (Reuters, W Post, 4/10/69)
Scientists at msc, monitoring seismometers left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts, recorded five-minute tremor they said could have been internal activity—moonquake—or meteoroid strike on surface. Scientists expressed concern that seismometer was overheating, probably because of damage to protective cover from lm exhaust, and might not survive heat of lunar moon. (McGehan, B Sun, 7/23/69, Al; Cohn, W Post, 7/24/69, A15)
Apollo 11 astronauts placed wreath at Christopher Columbus monument in Madrid and later met Gen. Francisco Franco and Prince Juan Carlos during world tour, (upi, W Star, 10/7/69, A6)
Apollo 12 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility, arrived at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, where they were greeted by huge crowd, Marine band, civic and military officials, and hula troupe. (Rossiter, W Post, 11/29/69, A3)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received first Pere Marquette Discovery Award of silver medal from Father Marquette Tercentenary Commission of Marquette Univ. (CR, 12/4/69, E10223)
Plans for proposed $l-million Neil A. Armstrong Aerospace Museum at Apollo 11 astronaut’s birthplace, Wapakoneta, Ohio, called for completion in 1970, Ohio Historical Society Director Daniel R. Porter said, (upi, W Post, 7/26/69, B7)
NASA program of returning man from lunar landing was based on conclusion there was no risk, Stanford Univ. geneticist Dr. Joshua Lederberg said in Washington Post. “We could not mount an effective quarantine against a real peril of global infection unless we were prepared to sacrifice the astronaut, which is unthinkable.” Arguments for zero risk were “quite persuasive”—lack of atmosphere on moon, “an absolutely necessary condition for life to flourish,” and fact that earth had experienced lunar material samples from secondary meteorites. Main purpose of quarantine was “to protect the samples from earthly contamination—not altogether successfully, in view of the exhalations from the landing rocket and from the astronauts’ space suits. It was then reasonable to add on whatever additional precautions against back-contamination were possible without impeding the mission.” Project had helped show lunar arrangements would be “quite inappropriate to a real risk, for example a sample return from Mars.” For Mars program, “we must learn a great deal more by instrumented observations left there, before we can begin to design the precautions needed for samples, or men, returned to earth.” (W Post, 7/12/69, A15)
Meteor Crater, Arizona, 640-acre site containing crater three miles in circumference and 570 ft deep, was attracting 200,000 visitors annually as “finest example on earth” of what Apollo 11 astronauts found on moon. (Arline, W Star, 10/16/69, A21)
Eleven scientists and technicians joined Apollo 12 astronauts in quarantine at Lunar Receiving Laboratory after accidental exposure to lunar samples, (upi, NYT, 12/2/69, 49)
Scientist Dr. Edwin C. T. Chao, quarantined with Apollo 12 astronauts at LRL, said mound on moon photographed by Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., during Apollo 12 moonwalk could be crushed rock ejected from crater, msc geologist Dr. Robin P. Brett said 1.5-lb rock among Apollo 12 samples had been formed far beneath surface and could be deepest piece of lunar material man had yet studied, (upi, NYT, 12/4/69, 17)
Estimated 1.5 million persons lined streets of Bombay, India, to welcome Apollo 11 astronauts. It was largest reception given to astronauts and wives during 22-nation tour. (AP, B Sun, 10/27/69, A3)
Apollo 9, carrying Astronauts James M. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39A at 11:00 am est Feb. 28, NASA announced. The 10-day earth orbital mission would include simulated translunar insertion; CSM separation, transposition, and docking with LM; onboard LM systems evaluation; extravehicular maneuvers between lm and CM; manned LM active rendezvous; and six sps burns, (nasa Release 69—3)
Apollo 11 astronauts and wives arrived in Mexico City for start of 39-day tour of 22 countries [see Sept. 19]. (AP, B Sun, 9/30/69, Al)
Senate passed H.J.R. 775, “to authorize the President to award, in the name of Congress, Congressional Space Medals of Honor to those astronauts whose particular efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind have been exceptionally meritorious.” (CR, 9/16/69, S10630)
Univ. of Texas astronomers reported second unsuccessful attempt to bounce laser beam off reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. McDonald Observatory Director, Dr. Harlan Smith, said he expected eventual success. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69, A8)
While spaceborne, Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt was selected to receive Ancient Order of Hibernians’ John F. Kennedy Medal for National Civic Service. Award would be presented by Irish-descent society in Newark, N.J., May 10. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/10/69, Al; W Post, 3/10/69, A5)
Economist commented on lunar investigation: “Scientists, unlike engineers, are not at this stage interested in whether the moon can be made habitable; but this, rather than its age, or peculiarities of its composition, is what the astronauts went out to the moon to find. The results are more encouraging than anyone but the confirmed star gazers could have hoped. Space is not unfriendly; nor is the moon, superficially barren though it looks. What we need are more assurances about sources of water which space planners continue to be convinced is trapped in, and can be extracted from, the rocks. Also more data on those surprising experiments where plants have thrived on moon soil. . . . And some idea about whether it will be possible to protect man from ultraviolet radiation up there, without having to put him in a protective pressure suit.” (Economist, 9/20/69, 17)
Press in U.S. and around the world underscored Apollo IPs landing on moon and man’s first steps on another planet. St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “There is no doubt that the United States should continue to support a substantial spacefaring program. Anything else would be a denial of the scientific spirit of the century and the qualities that have made America what it is. But its scope should be measured by findings and probabilities—and one other factor. Future spacefaring ought to be a co-operative effort of all nations able to participate, with the benefits to be shared by all.” (St. Louis P—D, 7/20/69) Washington Sunday Star: “A creature that can stand where Armstrong and Aldrin stand tonight—that can, in the future, move among the spheres and literally explore new worlds ... is unlikely to give up on the hard task of perfecting himself and his life in his natural environment on earth. The God who brought him thus far from a blob of squirming protoplasm ... is unlikely ... to let man blow it all now. Here . . . must be the answer to the national debate as to whether we go ahead in space, or whether we tend to our knitting at home. We are bound to do both. . . . The progressive expansion of the physical and spiritual domain of man inevitably will intensify our determination and ability, in concert with other nations, to build a home world where hunger, fear and violence no longer have a place.” (W Star, 7/20/69, Gl) William Hines in Washington Sunday Star: “One cannot question the majesty of conception or magnitude of effort that made Apollo 11 possible.” But one could ask, “Is this trip really necessary?” One saw in Apollo “that fundamental failing called hubris, which got so many protagonists into hot water in the old Greek mythology. Hubris in English is usually taken to mean prideful arrogance; in ancient Greek the word meant simple insolence. The Apollo enthusiast rejects the concept of hubris; he says we go to the moon not because we are arrogant, but because we are driven, and thereby implicitly rejects the concept of free will and substitutes sappiness for sassiness. The majority asks, ‘But if we didn’t go, what?’ and the minority responds, ‘If we didn’t go, so what?’” (W Star, 7/20/69, G2) Humorist Art Buchwald in Washington Post: “Sometimes one gets the feeling that the right hand germs in the Government don’t know what the left hand germs are doing. This was brought home to me . . . when I read about the millions of dollars that were being spent to see that the astronauts did not bring back a single germ from the moon. Unfortunately, across the page from that story was another that the Army was going ahead with open air testing of nerve gases and germ warfare.” (W Post, 7/20/69, B6) Los Angeles Herald-Examiner: “America’s moon program has benefited all mankind. It has brought better color television, water purification at less cost, new paints and plastics, improved weather forecasting, medicine, respirators, walkers for the handicapped, laser surgery, world-wide communications, new transportation systems, earthquake prediction system and solar power. . . . The Mars goal should bring benefits to all mankind even greater than the tremendous contributions of the moon program.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/20/69) Baltimore Sun: “. . . it is still almost incredible that in the afternoon of a Sunday on earth two humans found themselves within a vehicle resting on the surface of the moon. Nothing could quite prepare one’s mind for that, or for the subsequent moment of climax, the actual setting of a human foot on the substance of our barren satellite. One of the mysteries that had engaged the infinitely inquisitive mind of man is now made tangible. Others remain beyond our planet and upon it.” (B Sun, 7/21/69, A16) Chicago Daily News: “These have been moments to savor—moments in which uncounted millions have shared the immediacy of a turning point in history. This time there was no lapse of weeks or months, waiting for the event to be confirmed. We were all there, bound together by the miracle of communication that intertwined all the other miracles of technology that marked man’s first step on a celestial body.” (C Daily News, 7/21/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Superlatives pale before the magnificence of the achievement. . . . but how many years before the astounding performance of Armstrong and Aldrin will seem as primitive as the pioneering work of the Wright brothers?” (MJ, 7/21/69, 14) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Man’s store of scientific knowledge will be vastly enriched by the landing on the moon. In no other single event in history has there been greater opportunity to unlock the mysteries of the universe.” (Plain Dealer, 7/21/69) London Daily Sketch: “America’s moon triumph offers this old world’s bickering and jealous people a parable of hope.” (B Sun, 7/22/69, Al) Montreal Star: “The deepest hope for a world starved for some form of symbolism, of an attempt at harmony in place of selfishness and narrow nationalism, came from the astronauts,” CFOX Radio, Montreal, broadcast. “Eliminate war? Yes! Eliminate poverty? Yes! But the exploration of space will help us, not impede us, in reaching these goals.” (Am Consul, Montreal) Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden (principal organ of Social Democratic Party): “No Soviet politician has ever before used such conciliatory tones toward the U.S.A. as did Foreign Minister Gromyko recently in his speech before the Supreme Soviet. . . . This Russian position seems generally to be based on fears of a confrontation with China. . . . One of the side effects can be increased Russian interest in broader scientific cooperation in space research. Nothing else could be better designed for global cooperation, since nothing else gives us clearer testimony that we live in one world.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Apollo 11 was producing noticeable effect on business and consumer products, Washington Post said. Snoopy the Astronaut dolls were selling out; sales of color TV sets had risen in some stores; and sales of “moon maps and globes, as well as toy rocket ships and lunar exploration vehicles had also lifted skyward.” Two Washington, D.C., department stores were offering Japanese telescopes ranging from $19.99 to $1,000.00. One toy store manager said sales of space-related toys had jumped 70% or 80% in two months. Rockets propelled by solid-fuel inserts sold for $1.50 to $5.00 complete with recovery parachute. One Washington store had sold out supply of $10 spacesuits. Demand for rental of color TV sets in Washington area had been “terrific,” according to area dealer. (Cushing, W Post, 7/16/69, Dll)
Apollo 12 congratulatory telegrams at msc suggested “crew members of Apollo 12 will not be lacking their own fan club,” Washington Post article said. Meanwhile, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Apollo 8 crew continued to receive fan mail. Biggest fans of space program appeared to be “little children and supporters of prayers in outer space.” (Lardner, W Post, 11/22/69, A6)
The Biomedical Foundations of Manned Space Flight: A Report of the Space Science and Technology Panel of the President’s Science Advisory Committee was submitted to President’s Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge: “In order to define an appropriate mix of manned and unmanned operations, NASA will need to ‘qualify man for space flight’ in the broadest sense. That is, NASA should pursue a biomedical program which explores the optimization of man’s role in space, the limitations on his effectiveness and means to circumvent those limitations ... a program to determine the best use of man as a space subsystem in interaction with automated subsystems. An effective program directed to this objective exceeds the present capabilities of NASA and involves resources not yet developed in the biomedical community.” Report criticized NASA for not implementing previous recommendations toward strong biomedical research capability. “Pressures for early and reasonably certain success led to placing primary emphasis initially on validation of the capability to construct, orbit, and recover manned spacecraft, with long-range, scientific goals in the biomedical field set aside as potentially interfering with flight objectives. Scientific requirements were thus deemphasized at the very time when development of basic scientific knowledge and a cadre of scientific talent should have been begun.” NASA was now faced “with the question of qualifying man for more complex tasks in space, for longer duration flights, and of evaluating man as an integral part of the spacecraft man-machine system, without sound biomedical foundation.” In particular, “decisions concerning development directions for the next generation of manned spacecraft systems for use in earth orbit must be made without an adequate basis of understanding.” NASA should plan overall biomedical program using resources, personnel, and experience of other Government areas, especially dod, and support multidisciplinary environmental medical laboratories within universities. Report favored international cooperation in space exploration for peaceful purposes, close communications with biomedical community, and broadened participation of biomedical scientists in space flight programs. NASA should affiliate biologically and medically trained astronauts with research components of NASA or qualified institutions. They should be assigned to msc flight-crew organization only when participating in specific missions. Report recommended that NASA consider separating space biomedical research from organization conducting space missions and from flight medical services. (Text)
Apollo 12 astronauts and wives attended Sunday services at White House and later were guests at informal dinner given by President and Mrs. Nixon. They stayed overnight at White House. {PD, 12/22/69, 1763; AP, B Sun, 12/22/69, A3)
At Leningrad news conference during U.S.S.R. tour, Astronaut Frank Borman said he hoped U.S. and Soviet spacemen would fly together in joint mission by mid-1970s. (Reuters, W Post, 7/4/69, A3)
Astronaut promotion policy seemed “certain to discomfit someone after the end of Apollo 12 no matter whether it’s followed or ignored,” Washington Post said. President Johnson had decreed in 1965 that each military astronaut would get one spot promotion after his first space flight. Apollo 12 commander Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., and cm pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr., had both received promotions to commander, usn. Apollo 12 LM Pilot Alan L. Bean, also commander, USN, now rated promotion to captain, but was junior crewman in age, service in grade, and space experience. Bean promotion might “irritate” others but would be fair to Bean. Promotion for all three astronauts would be “unfair to other astronauts who have flown twice or three times and only promoted once.” President Nixon might have to make “sticky” decision. (W Post, 11/21/69, A17)
U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov would arrive in New York Oct. 20 to begin two-week visit to U.S. as guests of astronauts, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman announced. He had extended invitation during his July tour of U.S.S.R. Beregovoy had flown Soyuz 111 mission, Oct. 26—30, 1968; Feoktistov was scientist aboard Oct. 12, 1964, Voskhod I flight. Itinerary was expected to include msc, Grand Canyon, California, Detroit, and Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 69-141; AP, W Star, 10/21/69)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial on Apollo 9 mission: “In the first Apollo launchings, it was the taming of sheer, brute power that awed the on-looker. “At the moment of ignition, it was not what lay beyond the astronauts that gripped the millions watching TV. It was the question whether the huge Saturn V booster would respond to command, whether it would hurl the astronauts into orbit or collapse, toppling slowly into a furnace of its own making. “But with yesterday’s flawless Apollo 9 launch, the Saturn V booster seemed to emerge as a proven piece of space hardware. The preoccupation now is with the complexity, sophistication, the intricate workings of the most complicated of the several machines the United States has put together for the conquest of the moon. ... In its sophistication and vulnerability, [the LM] is ... an extension of man himself.” (P Bull, 3/4/69)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and 20 otjier persons quarantined in Lunar Receiving Laboratory were released shortly after 9:00 pm cdt—four hours earlier than planned. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, Msc, said astronauts, who had been confined since July 24, showed no signs of any possible infection from exposure to moon. He cautioned that astronauts might become ill after release— not from lunar contamination, but from earth organisms to which they were highly susceptible after long period of isolation. Report on health of persons under quarantine would be presented by NASA Aug. 11 to Interagency Committee on Back Contamination, which had approved early release. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/11/69, Al; AP, W Post, 8/10/69, A7) _
Baltimore Sun noted Apollo 10’s first day in space enabled men to be “as near as they will ever come to being in two places simultaneously— there in their own living rooms with their television sets before them and, at the same moment more than 22,000 miles away, observing the planet on which they live. “What we saw with such marvelous cold clarity was, of course, a round and mottled swirl of blue, brown and white, a small fragment of the cosmos which until less than a decade ago had fixed absolute limits upon all of mankind’s history. Now suddenly we saw it as a unity, a whole, as the habitation common to all of us, just as it would be seen by a non-human visitor approaching it as the astronauts are approaching the moon, silent, mysterious and seemingly lifeless and motionless. The observer had to remind himself that this was indeed the earth he knew. .. .” (B Sun, 5/20/69)
National and international press commented on successful completion of Apollo 11 mission: Washington Post: “It has been eight days of triumph for America, eight days of triumph for mankind. Much more will undoubtedly follow as the secrets of space bow to the advances of science. But it is enough now—more than enough for an entire lifetime when you think about it—to have seen the first men walk on the moon and then, less than four days later, to welcome them back home safely.” (W Post, 7/25/69) New York Times: “For the first time in history, men have gone from this earth to another celestial body, landed there and returned'home, . even bringing back with them extraterrestrial matter. Not since the human race evolved has there been a comparable event, nor one so capable of lifting all mankind’s horizons, dreams and aspirations. What was fantasy to preceding generations is now accomplished fact. The achievement will be remembered so long as civilization survives.” Of President Nixon’s round the world tour, Times said: “The spectacular success of Apollo 11 has vastly increased good feeling toward the United States throughout the world. The President obviously wants to capitalize on it both for foreign and domestic political purposes.” {NYT, 7/25/69, 46) Cleveland, Ohio, Plain Dealer: Apollo 11 mission “closes out one aspect of the exploration program but opens wide the door of what can be an almost endless journey. . . . Although the Apollo program is not complete, the lure of Mars, 5 million miles away, grows in bold anticipation of the future. ... the race has only just begun.” (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 7/25/69) Newport News, Va., Times Herald: “All of the money poured into the space program would appear justified if one of the side products was the kind of cooperation [with the U.S.S.R.] now possible.” (Newport News Times Herald, 7/25/69) El Rai El Amm, Khartoum, Sudan: “America achieved a victory for the human mind by sending the first man from the earth to the moon. . . . But America, the great power that achieved this astonishing big success, must stop doing things that are far below these standards.” (Am Embassy, Khartoum) Somali News, Mogadiscio, Somali: “It is true that the responsibility for the Apollo-Eleven is entirely American, but the message left behind on the moon for posterity by the astronauts . . . acknowledges the universal aspect of such a feat. We think ... of those courageous astronauts not... as Americans but as worthy representatives of the human race on whose total achievement they relied in carrying out their mighty and splendid mission.” (Am Embassy, Mogadiscio)
Project Tektite civilian aquanauts Richard A. Waller, Conrad V. M. Mahnken, John G. Van Derwalker, and Dr. H. Edward Clifton set 32-day record for remaining under water in “habitat” off St. John Island in Caribbean. Previous record was held by former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, who had remained submerged 30 days in 1965. In Project Tektite* aquanauts were trying for 60-day submersion. (dod Release 204-69; upi, W Post, 3/20/69, A2)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family flew from New York for nine-day tour of U.S.S.R. Institute for Soviet-American Relations in Moscow had extended invitation through Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. Itinerary included Moscow, Leningrad, Novosibirsk, and Crimea. {W Post, 7/1/69, A15; AP, W Star, 7/1/69, A4)
Washington Post Apollo 12 editorial: “Although it will be weeks or months before we know what the harvest of knowledge from this trip has been, the first impression is that the harvest has been a rich one. The astronauts accomplished everything they had been asked to do and more. The pinpoint landing indicates that the navigational problems are not nearly as great as once thought, clearing the way for future astronauts to go precisely where the scientists want them to. The ease with which Mr. Conrad and Mr. Bean functioned on the moon’s surface indicates that their successors will be able to range farther afield and undertake more complicated assignments. Even the accidental fall of Pete Conrad is a plus. It cuts down the fear that a fall would be extremely serious and points out . . . that man may be more adaptable to alien conditions than he dreams.” (W Post, 11/25/69, A20)
Apollo passive seismic experiment, part of extravehicular activity to be performed by Apollo 11 astronauts on moon, was described in Science as “the most exciting experiment in seismology.” Dr. G. Latham and Dr. M. Ewing of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, Dr. F. Press of mit, and Dr. G. Sutton of Univ. of Hawaii explained objective was to detect naturally occurring seismic events on lunar surface through early Apollo scientific experiment package (easep) planted on moon. Package weighed 105 lbs and would transmit data to earth one year (or maximum two years), during lunar days because its solar cell panels required illumination to provide power. Complete Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep), containing at least three additional experiments for measurements of solar wind and magnetic field, would be included on Apollo 12 for day and night operation. In Apollo 11 experiment astronaut would remove instrument from lm to smoothest area within 6.6—9.8 ft (20—30 m) of lm, unfold solar panels, adjust package level to within 5°, orient it with azimuth for maximum illumination of solar panels, and aim antenna toward earth. MSC would issue commands to uncage and level seismometers and select proper gain. Expected sources of lunar seismic activity included several hundred monthly moonquakes, thermal stresses produced by rapid temperature variations at surface; tidal stresses exerted by earth and sun; and meteoroid impacts. By end of Apollo program, scientists hoped to have achieved crude curves of travel time for body and surface waves and beginning of seismicity map of moon. During post-Apollo period, seismologists wanted to achieve wider distribution of detectors to map seismically active belts in greater detail; study mechanisms of energy release; lower minimum detectable ground motion of individual seismometer; and improve performance of long-period seismometer systems at ultralong-period end of spectrum for recording surface waves from moonquakes, free oscillations of moon, and lunar tides. (Science, 7/18/69, 241—50)
Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Apollo 12 Mission Director, described Apollo 12 plans to press at NASA Hq. [see Oct. 2]. Mission would be launched toward moon at 11:22 am est Nov. 14, carrying Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Alan L. Bean (lm pilot), and Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (cm pilot). Primary objectives would be to perform selenological inspection, survey and sample mare area, deploy Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), develop techniques for point landing capability, and photograph candidate landing sites. Basic flight plan would be similar to one for Apollo 11 (July 16—24) with modifications to improve landing accuracy and increase data return. Launch azimuth had been narrowed from 72°—108° for Apollo 11 to 72°—96° for Apollo 12 and trajectory had been changed from free-return to hybrid. Lunar orbit stay time for Apollo 12 would be increased from 59.6 hrs for Apollo 11 to 89 hrs; lunar surface stay time, from 21.6 hrs to 31.5 hrs; EVA from one 2-hr 32-min period to two 3-hr 30-min periods; and total mission time, from 195.3 hrs to 244.7 hrs. LM sleeping arrangements would be improved with hammocks, color TV if repaired by launch date would be used on surface, and LM ascent stage would be crashed onto lunar surface near seismometer after ascent from moon and redocking. To increase navigational accuracy crew would avoid waste and water dumps 10 hrs before landing to prevent thrust that might carry them off course, would approach moon upside-down so landing radar would be operational during entire landing phase, and would speed up descent to conserve fuel at landing. (Transcript)
U.S. Geological Survey Director William T. Pecora said in Washington, D.C., that rocks brought back by Apollo 11 were geologic “hors d’oeuvre” but Apollo 12 rocks “will be a veritable feast.” Geologists were delighted “by the onsite descriptions provided by astronauts Conrad and Bean” who were “eager rock hounds.” (upi, NYT, 11/25/69, 32)
Astronaut Anthony W. England suffered symptoms of bends while testing moon-walking equipment in vacuum chamber at MSC. NASA spokesman said cause of symptoms, which disappeared as soon as chamber was returned to full atmospheric pressure, was not known. England was placed under 24-hr observation, (upi, W Post, 10/9/69, A28)
MSC announced revised quarantine procedures for Apollo 11 after landing. To prevent back contamination from moon, astronauts would dispose on moon under containment conditions equipment exposed there; brush, vacuum-clean, and bag other equipment and clothing for return; prevent dust from being transferred from LM to CM; and continuously filter CM atmosphere during return trip to remove dust particles. Under original plans Apollo 11 crew would have remained in cm after splashdown while it was hoisted onto recovery ship. After reviewing loads to be lifted in transferring CM to deck, reliability of shipboard cranes, and capacity of available load-limiting elastic tackle, NASA decided to retain helicopter lift used on previous Apollo missions. Crew would emerge from cm to raft, where they would put on biological isolation garments that would cover them completely and provide high-efficiency air outlet filter. Interagency Committee on Back Contamination—NASA, Dept, of Agriculture, hew, Dept, of Interior, and NAS—had agreed that helicopter lift, combined with other prelanding procedures, would provide maximum achievable precautions against back contamination, (msc Release 69—47)
North American Rockwell Corp. announced plans to develop for NASA flying lunar excursion experimental platform (fleep)—one-man, jet-propelled craft with adjustable hand controls—to transport astronauts across lunar surface. (AP, NYT, 11/22/69, 38)
President Nixon addressed Air Force Academy commencement in Colorado Springs, Colo.: “A nation needs many qualities, but it needs faith and confidence above all. Skeptics do not build societies; the idealists are the builders. Only societies that believe in themselves can rise to their challenges. Let us not, then, pose a false choice between meeting our responsibilities abroad and meeting the needs of our people at home. We shall meet both or we shall meet neither. “This is why my disagreement with the skeptics and the isolationists is fundamental. They have lost the vision indispensable to great leadership. They observe the problems that confront us; they measure our resources and then they despair. When the first vessels set out from Europe for the New World these men would have weighed the risks and they would have stayed behind. . . . “Our current exploration of space makes the point vividly, here is testimony to man’s vision and man’s courage. The journey of the astronauts is more than a technical achievement: it is a reaching-out of the human spirit. It lifts our sights; it demonstrates that magnificent conceptions can be real. “They inspire us and at the same time they teach us true humility. What could bring home to us more the limitation of the human scale than the hauntingly beautiful picture of our earth seen from the moon? “When the first man stands on the moon next month every American will stand taller because of what he has done, and we should be proud of this magnificent achievement. “We will know then that every man achieves his own greatness by reaching out beyond himself, and so it is with nations. When a nation believes in itself—as Athenians did in their Golden Age, as Italians did in the Renaissance—that nation can perform miracles. Only when a nation means something to itself can it mean something to others. “That is why I believe a resurgence of American idealism can bring about a modern miracle—and that modern miracle is a world order of peace and justice.” (PD, 6/9/69, 797—802)
Apollo 11 astronauts, welcomed by crowds in Amsterdam during world tour, presented Queen Juliana with plaque similar to one they left on lunar surface. In Brussels later in day they were decorated by King Baudouin with insignia of the Order of Leopold, nation’s highest honor. (AP, Huntsville Times, 10/9/69; upi, W Star, 10/10/69, A9)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean held press conference at msc. Code names for Apollo 12 LM and cm had been selected, they said, from entries submitted by North American Rockwell Corp. and Grumman Aerospace Corp. employees. CM would be called “Yankee Clipper” and lm, “Intrepid.” Major differences from Apollo 11 mission would be increase in geology and photography. Detailed documented sample collection would be team effort. Description would tell geologist about rock’s location, including how it was related to other rocks, whether it was partially covered, and why it attracted attention. Astronauts would carry bags and tongs at all times during eva to collect rocks when sighted instead of being limited to collecting during specific period of EVA. Photographic activities, described by Conrad as “the world’s greatest zero-G juggling act,” would include multispectral photography of lunar surface, using four Hasselblad cameras in hatch window. Three cameras would have black-and-white film with filters; fourth would have infrared film. Purpose of camera setup, Gordon explained, was to “photograph the illuminated side of the moon from one minute after sunrise to one minute prior to sunset in a stiff manner.” Every 20 secs “cameras would be activated, to give complete strip photography across the surface of the moon. . . . The big step photography I think is probably one of the most important things we’re doing on this flight. . . .” (Transcript; msc Release 69—68)
Apollo 11 astronauts arrived at Belgrade from Rome during world tour. They were cheered by crowd estimated at 400,000 to 500,000 persons between airport and tomb of Yugoslavia’s Unknown Soldier, where they placed wreath. Later, at luncheon in their honor, President Tito said, “I do not like invaders on earth, but I hold in high esteem the conquering of celestial bodies, and I express my wishes for biggest success.” (NYT, 10/19/69, L69; upi, W Star, 10/19/69, A4)
New York Times commented on Soviet decision to participate in February intelsat conference [see Jan. 22] and on Soviet coverage of Apollo 8 which was “treated more generously in the Soviet press than any earlier American space accomplishment.” Editorial said: “These indications of a positive shift in Kremlin thinking seem to enhance hopes that President Nixon will have an opportunity for creative diplomacy and action of the kind he envisaged in his Inaugural Address. Thought might be given, for example, to inviting Moscow to designate a Soviet astronaut to participate in an Apollo flight late this year or early next year. Or Washington might suggest that the United States and the Soviet Union coordinate their programs of planetary exploration with one nation, say, having primary responsibility for studying Venus and the other Mars. With the landing of men on the moon now probably only months away it is certainly not too early for the two nations that have pioneered most actively in space to discuss concrete means for involving the United Nations directly in the future exploration and exploitation of the moon, as well as of the planets when men reach them.” (NYT, 1/24/69, 46)
In Kinshasa, Republic of Congo, Apollo 11 astronauts were awarded National Order of the Leopard, Congo’s highest decoration, by President Joseph D. Mobutu for “setting an example to all mankind.” (C Trib, 10/24/69)
Galabert International Astronautics Prize for 1969 was awarded in Paris to Apollo 11 astronauts. Award of .$4,000 was presented annually for notable contributions “to human progress for the advancement of all sciences and techniques associated with astronautics.” (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69, A8)
Author Norman Mailer’s total publishing rights on book on lunar landing would exceed $1 million when book was published by Little, Brown & Co. in January or February 1970, according to his agent, Scott Meredith. If film rights were sold, total could approach the $1.5 million paid for Lyndon B. Johnson memoirs. Mailer planned to visit KSC during Apollo 11 launch to interview astronauts and describe space center operations. He also planned chapter On philosophical and technological implications of lunar landing. Meredith said he was surprised at “phenomenal competition among foreign publishers for book and magazine rights.” (Raymont, NYT, 5/13/69, 44)
U.K.’s Royal Geographical Society awarded special gold medal—its first for space exploration-—to Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong for leading Apollo 11 mission. Other gold medalists included Capt. Roald Amundsen, first to reach South Pole; Adm. Robert E. Peary, first to reach North Pole; Sir Edmund Hillary, conqueror of Mt. Everest; and Sir John Hunt, leader of Everest expedition. (AP, W Star, 7/28/69, A5)
Apollo 11 astronauts attended celebrations in their hometowns. In Wapakoneta, Ohio, Neil A. Armstrong was cheered by crowd estimated at 10 times normal 7,000 population, addressed teen-age rally, and led parade including Gov. James A. Rhodes, Dr. Albert D. Sabin (developer of oral polio vaccine), and comedian Bob Hope—all Ohioans. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., on second visit to hometown as astronaut, presented Montclair, N.J., Library with autographed photo of plaque left on moon; Library named its science collection in his honor. Astronaut Michael Collins, who was born in Rome, Italy, visited New Orleans, La., as his adopted hometown. He attended luncheon in his honor and visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility. (W Post, 9/7/69, A3)
U.S.S.R. had ordered 100 space pens developed for U.S. astronauts and 1,000 special pressurized ink cartridges which enabled pen to write in weightlessness according to pen’s inventor, Paul C. Fisher. When he presented models of pen to Soviet Cosmonaut Alexey Leonov at German trade fair in 1968, Leonov said Soviet cosmonauts were writing with grease pencils during space flights and incurring difficulty with their flaking, (upi, W Post, 2/13/69, D24)
Lunar Science Institute and Msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory were preparing for “lunar knowledge explosion” expected to follow first manned lunar landing, Washington Evening Star reported. Laboratory would quarantine astronauts and lunar samples brought back from landing, storing samples for study and distribution to scientists. Institute, funded by NASA and administered through nas by Rice Univ., would facilitate lunar research by nonspace scientific community, Administrator Robert C. Wimberley said in interview. Directed by William C. Rubey, Institute was soon to be turned over to consortium of universities. U.S. Public Health Service, nas, Dept, of Interior, Dept, of Agriculture, and NASA had planned 30-day quarantine and study of moon material and 21-day quarantine of astronauts. Samples would be sealed on lunar surface and would be flown from recovery carrier to Laboratory after spacecraft return. Astronauts were to be transferred from spacecraft into sealed van through plastic tunnel aboard carrier [see May 16]. Van would be delivered to nearest port and then flown to Houston to sealed-off laboratory. Objective was to prevent importing viruses, some of which had been known to survive thousands of years under unlikely conditions. During three-week debriefing, crew would live in glassed-in quarters including medical area. Samples would be maintained under vacuum seals until opened in high-vacuum chambers containing remotely controlled equipment. Once photographed, catalogued, and processed, content and structure would be studied to determine composition and origins. (W Star, 3/12/69, A13)
At first day ceremonies for commemorative moon landing stamp in Washington, D.C., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount presented Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, with albums containing 32 stamps each. He said: “In the largest sense we pay tribute today to the spirit of man. We cannot separate the accomplishments of Apollo 11 from those of Yostok 1; we cannot separate the contributions of Michael Collins, or Edwin Aldrin or Neil Armstrong from those of Goddard and Einstein, Kepler and Newton, Copernicus and Galileo. We know this. And in the knowing again we find hope. For if men of all nations, together, can achieve dominion over the heavens, men of all nations, together, can achieve peace on earth for men for all time.” Armstrong said astronauts had deferred cancellation of stamps until they were reunited in cm, July 22. They had then grasped canceler simultaneously and pressed it upon die-proof version of commemorative stamp affixed to unaddressed envelope. Cancellation date remained July 20, day of lunar landing. (PO Dept Release 135; Shandler, W Star, 9/10/69, A3)
President Nixon telephoned congratulations to Apollo 10 crew following successful splashdown after lunar mission for its “magnificent achievement” and invited astronauts and their wives to dinner at White House. “This is a proud moment for the country,” President said. (NYT, 5/27/69, 29; PD, 6/2/69, 775)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong arrived in Bangkok, Thailand, to meet with Peace Corps officials on Presidential mission. (AP, W Post, 12/21/69, A17; W Star, 12/21/69, D7)
Apollo 11 recovery physician, Dr. William R. Carpentier, reported from inside Mobile Quarantine Facility onboard U.S.S. Hornet that astronauts had completed preliminary medical examination and were “fine.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s slight ear infection had disappeared and all three astronauts were in excellent condition. (Wooten, NYT, 7/26/69, 1)
Visiting Soviet Cosmonauts Konstantin P. Feoktistov and Georgy T. Beregovoy left New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport for Moscow after two-week U.S. visit. During airport interview Feoktistov said he liked U.S. astronauts’ “sincerity and hopeful approach to life.” Beregovoy said, “Friendship is a force which will help the world to conquer space.” Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was at airport to see them off. (NYT, 11/5/69, 52)
President Nixon and Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan issued joint statement following White House discussions on international situation. On space, statement said: “The Prime Minister congratulated the President on the successful moon landing of Apollo XII, and expressed the hope for a safe journey back to earth for the astronauts. The President and the Prime Minister agreed that the exploration of space offers great opportunities for expanding cooperation in peaceful scientific projects among all nations. In this connection, the Prime Minister noted with pleasure that the United States and Japan last summer had concluded an agreement on space cooperation. The President and the Prime Minister agreed that the implementation of this unique program is of importance to both countries.” {PD, 11/24/69, 1633—7)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President, Prof. Mstislav V. Keldysh, said in Stockholm, “We no longer have any time plan for manned moon trips. Right now we are concentrating on constructing big satellite space stations.” He predicted expanded scientific cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R. with possibility of cosmonauts and astronauts aboard same spacecraft in future. In Sweden for Swedish Academy of Engineering’s 50th anniversary, Prof. Keldysh implied U.S.S.R. planned to assemble spacecraft in orbiting stations and launch them from there. He indicated existence of conflicting views in U.S.S.R. as to space research funding. “My personal view is that, when man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (upi, W Post, 10/25/69, A3)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins held first postflight press conference at MSC, narrating 45-min film of mission and answering questions. On meaning of lunar landing, Collins said it was “technical triumph for this country to have said what it was going to do a number of years ago, and then by golly do it. Just like we said we were going to do. Not just . . . purely technical, but also a triumph of the nation’s overall determination, will, economy, attention to detail, and a thousand and one other factors that went into it.” To Aldrin mission meant “that many other problems perhaps can be solved in the same way by taking a commitment to solve them in long time fashion. I think that we were timely in accepting this mission of going to the moon. It might be timely at this point to think in many other areas of other missions that could be accomplished.” Armstrong said moon landing heralded “beginning of a new age.” He said moon was “stark and strangely different place, but it looked friendly . . . and proved to be friendly.” Astronauts had much less trouble than expected on lunar surface. Primary difficulty was that “there was just far too little time to do the variety of things that we would have liked to have done. . . . We had the problem of the 5 year old boy in a candy store. There are just too many interesting things to do.” Armstrong said that during landing they “were concerned about running low on fuel on range extension we did to avoid the boulder field and craters. We used a significant percentage of our fuel margins and we were quite close to our legal limit.” On possibility of abort during period they were receiving alarm signals, Aldrin said procedure in preparation simulations had been always to “keep going as long as we could. . . . The computer was continuing to issue guidance . . . and it was continuing to fly the vehicle down in the same way that it was programmed to do. The only thing that was missing ... is that we did not have some of the displays . . . and we had to make several entries ... to clear up that area.” Armstrong added, “We would have continued the landing so long as the trajectory seemed safe. And landing is possible under these conditions, although with considerably less confidence than you have when you have the information from the ground and the computer in its normal manner available to you.” (Transcript)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale posthumously awarded its highest honor—Gold Medal—to nasa test pilot Joseph A. Walker for “his many enduring contributions to the advancement of aviation made during a 21-year flight research career marked by extraordinary perfection and valor.” . Award was received by his widow at Edwards afb ceremony. As FRC chief research pilot, Walker had flown X—15 to its highest altitude, 354,200 ft (67 mi); was first man to fly llrv astronaut training craft; was author of 20 technical papers and articles; and had taught Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong at frc. (frc Release 17—69)
msfc issued rfps for design, development, test, and delivery of four flight models of manned lunar roving vehicle. Four-wheeled, 400-lb vehicle would be carried to moon on board LM in 1971, to transport astronauts, tools, lunar samples, and other equipment and experiments. (nasa Special Release)
NASA announced availability of 16-in-dia globe of moon prepared by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center from NASA photos made by Lunar Orbiter series. Lovell Observatory, Ariz., prepared art work with exaggerated color tones showing lunar landscape bathed in morning sunlight and large Ring Plains, or explosive craters, on far side. One globe had been presented to President Nixon by Apollo 10 astronauts. (NASA Release 69—83G)
U.S. delegate to U.N. William B. Buffum, responding to Soviet tribute to Apollo 11 astronauts by U.S.S.R. delegate Aleksey V. Zakharov, said before Security Council he hoped “fraternal spirit” demonstrated by astronauts and cosmonauts would lead to greater cooperation on earth also. {NYT, 7/25/69, 31)
At Apollo 11 splashdown party at Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D.C. —attended by Apollo 11 astronauts and wives—NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced new Apollo Achievement Award of lapel button and certificate. He presented awards to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller; former Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) ; and former Deputy Director of Apollo Program George H. Hage. (Beale, W Star, 9/10/69, FI)
NASA had assured Post Office Dept, that master die for 10-cent moon landing commemorative stamp [see July 9] had gone all the way to lunar surface as planned. It had returned to earth in cm and been rushed to Washington, D.C., July 31 after decontamination at msc. However, moon letter envelope with die proof of moon landing stamp had not been postmarked on lunar surface. Because of tight schedule for lunar eva, letter had heen left with Astronaut Michael Collins in cm Columbia while Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Al-drin, Jr., worked on moon. “Moon Landing” postmark had been applied during return voyage. Letter had been decontaminated at msc and returned to Postmaster General Winton M. Blount Aug. 5. (Fairies, W Star, 8/10/69, Hll)
Time named Apollo 8 astronauts its Men of the Year for 1968. “For all its upheavals and frustrations, the year would be remembered to the end of time for the dazzling skills and Promethean daring that sent mortals around the moon. It would be celebrated as the year in which men saw at first hand their little earth entire, a remote, blue-brown sphere hovering like a migrant bird in the hostile night of space.” {Time, 1/3/69, 9)
Time magazine said Astronaut Frank Borman had amused audiences during February 1969 European tour by claiming Apollo 8 astronauts deserved overtime pay because they had aged about 300 microseconds more than people on earth during moon mission. At NASA’s request, Univ. of Maryland physicist Carroll Alley had calculated effects on astronauts of phenomena described in Einstein’s relativity equations— time ran slower for object as its speed increased, and time accelerated for object as it moved away from body exerting gravitational force. Alley found Apollo 8 spacecraft speed was predominant factor when it was within 4,000 mi of earth; time slowed and astronauts actually aged more slowly. Beyond 4,000 mi, effects of earth’s gravity lessened as Apollo’s time passed 300 microseconds faster than earth’s. Despite Alley’s calculations, said Time, Borman’s claim was valid only for Astronaut William A. Anders, who made his first space flight on Apollo 8. Astronauts Borman and James A. Lovell had been crew-mates on Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini VII, when time dilation effect was dominant for entire two weeks. They had aged less than those on earth by 400 microseconds. Lovell’s time also had been slowed during four-day Gemini XII mission Nov. 11—15, 1966, by about 100 microseconds. “Thus,” said Time, “during all their missions in space, Lovell and Borman respectively spent 200 and 100 microseconds less time than was recorded on earth—which means they were paid for more time than they actually worked.” [Time, 3/7/69, 42)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Michael Collins, their families, and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, flew in presidential jet from Houston to New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles during day of cross-country celebrations. Three-hour New York visit included greeting at City Hall by Mayor John V. Lindsay, motorcade to U.N. for greeting by TJ.N. Secretary General U Thant, and ticker-tape procession to John F. Kennedy International Airport for departure to Chicago. New York Public Events Commissioner John S. Palmer estimated crowds at 4 million; other observers said there were fewer and blamed ahead-of-schedule appearance and TV coverage. In Chicago, welcoming crowd was estimated at 3.5 million. Mayor Richard J. Daley greeted party at Civic Center and presented medals symbolic of honorary citizenship to astronauts and Dr. Paine. Illinois Gov. Richard B. Ogilvie said, “To these first citizens of the new epoch, the people of Chicago and Illinois offer their profound admiration and respect.” Astronauts spoke to 15,000 young people in Grant Park before returning by helicopter to O’Hare International Airport for flight to Los Angeles. Mayor Samuel W. Yorty met party at Los Angeles International Airport. After brief ceremony, party sped to Century Plaza Hotel for reception preceding state dinner. (Lelyveld, NYT, 8/14/69, 1; Ober-dorfer, W Post, 8/14/69, Al; NASA pao)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial on Apollo 10 color TV pictures: “Of all the visions man sees from his new and precarious vantages in space, the most compelling is still the planet from which he comes. In the eye of Apollo 10’s color TV camera, Earth is indeed the fairest object, the ‘oasis’ the Apollo 8 astronauts saw last Christmas on Earth’s first manned mission to the moon. “For a stranger entering the solar system from the outer reaches of the Universe, surely Earth’s mist-shrouded blues, browns and reds would be a goal to satisfy the utmost yearning. Set against the cold blackness of space, it would be a prize to draw bold and venturesome inhabitants of other planets across incredible distances. It would be a goal courageous strangers would endure incredible hardships to win. . . . “The awe expressed by the intrepid Apollo 10 astronauts ... is further reminder that the greatest space prize presently within man’s comprehension is already in his keeping. And it is one to leave man wondering whether beings on other planets strive and dream as he does. For the moment certainly, it would not seem so. For what people on another planet could resist the vision in the eye of Apollo 10’s TV camera?” (P Bull, 5/20/69)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family returned from European goodwill tour made on behalf of President Nixon. At Andrews afb, Md., Borman told press on arrival that Europeans found, it hard to believe U.S. “could spend all that money on its space program and still make public everything we learned.” He said reception had been uniformly friendly, “but they would hesitate to ask us questions, because they assumed . . . information about the Apollo 8 flight must be classified.” Borman and family reported at Capitol to Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of nasc. Borman told press conference he had found “extreme identification of people in all walks of life in Europe with our flight. They were very well informed about it and looked on us as representatives of Earth. I hope that feeling of comradeship can continue.” (AP, W Post, 2/22/69, A2)
House passed by vote of 328 to 52 H.R. 11271, FY 1970 nasa authorization of $3,966 billion, allocating $3.26 billion for R&D, $58.2 million for construction of facilities, and $643.8 million for research and program management. House had adopted amendment canceling $327 million authorized for FYs 1967, 1968, and 1969 for which appropriations had not been made. It also adopted amendment requiring emplacement of U.S. flag, exclusively, on moon or any other planet by U.S. astronauts during visits financed entirely by Government funds. Act would be symbolic gesture of national pride in achievement, not declaration of national appropriation by claim of sovereignty. (Text; CR, 6/10/69, H4615-56)
At Cape Kennedy press conference, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman termed “totally ridiculous” cancellation of President Nixon’s dinner with Apollo 11 crew on eve of launch to avoid contaminating crew with presidential germs. He had delivered invitation to dinner to White House and President Nixon had accepted when msc Medical Director, Dr. Charles A. Berry, criticized dinner [see July 7]. Borman said his talks with U.S.S.R. officials during recent tour had left him convinced they planned lunar landing soon but, “from the people on the subways to their president, all I heard was that they are wishing success for Apollo 11.” (Greider, W Post, 7/13/69, A4)
Austin, Tex., District Judge Jack Roberts dismissed suit by atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair and Society of Separationists, Inc., to stop astronauts from saying prayers in space [see Nov. 25]. He ruled prayers were not NASA policy but individual decision by astronauts. If nasa had forbidden astronauts to pray in space it would have been unconstitutional abridgment of their rights. Mrs. O’Hair planned to appeal decision. (NYT, 12/3/69, 44)
In nationwide reaction to safe return of Apollo 11 astronauts, New York Stock Exchange went wild though stocks continued to fall. Numbers on annunciator boards flapped in unison as message “New York Stock Exchange shares the world’s joy at the safe return of Apollo from the moon—Astronauts Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins—So proudly we hail you” appeared on tape and illuminated on screen. Along Fifth Avenue church bells rang. Hayden Planetarium suspended usual program to throw “splashdown party” with champagne and live color telecast of Apollo 11 recovery operations flashed on blackened dome. San Franciscans exploded firecrackers and threw ticker tape from windows, and 10-story-high figure “11” was fashioned in lighted windows at mit in Boston. Des Moines, Iowa, rang Liberty Bell reproduction for first time since its 1950 installation on State House grounds. In Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s home town, Wapakoneta, Ohio, high school band marched playing moon songs. Montclair, N.J., theater marquee read, “Congratulations Buzz Aldrin—Mqntclair’s Man on the Moon.” In Huntsville, Ala., Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was hoisted on shoulders of four local councilmen while thousands at msfc site cheered and waved banners saying “Huntsville is Rocket City.” City of Houston planned “Texas size” celebration for Apollo 11 astronauts Aug. 16, including ticker-tape parade and huge program in city’s Astrodome coliseum. (Sloan, Weinraub, Hicks, Borders, upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 67, 29, 69, 31, 30; B Sun, 7/25/69, 45)
In letter to Astronaut Frank Borman, Board of Education of Glendale Union High School District No. 205, Glendale, Ariz., said it had named planned high school “Apollo” in “honor and appreciation of the accomplishments of the participating astronauts.” It invited Apollo 8 crew to participate in 1970 dedication ceremony. (CR, 2/21/69, E1216)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean underwent last major preflight medical examination at KSC and were cleared for Nov. 14 launch. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, said astronauts were rested and in good spirits and showed no evidence of any infectious disease that might interfere with launch, (upi, NYT, 11/10/69, 10)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong joined comedian Bob Hope in entertaining 15,000 U.S. troops at field headquarters of 25th Infantry Div. near Saigon, South Vietnam, (upi, W Star, 12/24/69, A5)
U.S. newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 12 landing on moon: Washington Post: “The sheer joy of these two astronauts . . . shines out over everything else. They are obviously moon-struck. Conrad sounded like the most eager and happiest young geology student in the universe as he hummed and laughed his way from rock to rock, grabbing one after the other and complaining that he couldn’t get enough. And who would have thought that one of these highly skilled men would resort, as Bean did, to bonking the television camera with a hammer in an effort to make it work? Unfortunately, the failure of the camera did deprive us of seeing this frolic. . . . There was much to be learned from it about the moon and about the men who combine such cool technical competence with such zest for a serious and dangerous job.” (W Post, 11/20/69) Detroit News: “To travel 230,000 miles and hit the target on the button is almost unbelievable except that NASA, its crews and its machines are making believers of us all. But there’s a lesson to be taken to heart in the camera’s freak failure. Conrad and Bean tried to remedy the defect. . . . But they had to drop that to get on with more essential scientific exploratory experiments. Conrad’s oxygen limit was four hours. He hadn’t time to spare. . . . that should be warning to those euphoric advocates of setting a target date for a trip to Mars. An astronaut limited to four hours work on the moon is a reminder of the vast project ahead in confounding the elements in this untapped lunar mystery. Prophecies of colonizing the moon should be set against that four-hour limit, even though we no doubt will improve on it.” (D News, 11/20/69) Atlanta Constitution: “This second landing, more than 900 miles from where the pioneers of Apollo 11 put down last July, notably extends our knowledge. New landing techniques, a longer lunar stay, nuclear-powered experiments—they all serve to push back a fantastic frontier which only a few short years ago was regarded as a most implausible province of man.” (Atlanta Constitution, 11/20/69) Houstin Chronicle: “Our admiration for the coolness and the skill of astronauts Conrad, Bean and Richard F. Gordon, Jr.—the latter still in lonely orbit around the Moon—is boundless. The astronauts continue to perform, one mission after the other, in story-book perfection. We marvel, too, at the ability of the technicians on the ground to quickly respond to unexpected eventualities, like the electrical difficulty just after the launch, and to enable the mission to proceed unimpaired. These achievements inspire all men. They lift our sights for the future.” (.H Chron, 11/20/69, 2 Sec, 5) Birmingham, News: “The flight has been so predictably on schedule that its very success is certain to help push moon travel back into the ho-hum recesses of blase mankind’s mind, as each success in the Mercury and Gemini and early Apollo series made earth orbital spaceflight seem routine.” (B News, 11/20/69)
msfc announced that it had issued $10,751,000 contract to General Electric Co.’s Apollo Systems Div. for electrical support equipment for Apollo Telescope Mount and launch systems for Saturn V Workshop multiple docking adapter and airlock. Work was to be completed June 30, 1975. msfc had also issued six-month $56,727 contract to Bionic Instruments, Inc., to develop lunar roving vehicle hazard locator. Locator, which would be installed on lunar rover or dual-model vehicle, would use laser beam to spot rocks, holes, and other, obstacles on lunar surface and display on screen warning of obstacles hidden from astronauts’ view, (msfc Releases 69—223, 69—224)
nasa was using July 26 edict against unauthorized use of Apollo flight insignia to make “unauthorized” possession of souvenir Apollo flight patches Federal offense, 'Washington Post said. While astronauts felt they should be only ones entitled to distribute patches, businessmen contended they ought to be in public domain. NASA contractors like Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. had been granted exceptions to blanket rule. (Lardner, W Post, 11/25/69, A8)
Associated Press quoted Col. Edwin E. Aldrin (usaf, Ret.) as saying nasa had rejected his proposal to postpone Apollo 12 and run it in tandem with Apollo 13 so crews could protect or rescue each other in emergency. Aldrin was father of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and a NASA safety consultant. NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Director Jerome F. Lederer had called proposal impractical, “tremendously expensive, and I don’t know if it could be done.” Lederer had said there was no question that astronaut rescue capability from lunar surface or orbital emergency must be provided, but it was “out of the picture for Apollo.” (Haughland, AP, W Star, 9/22/69, A4)
President Nixon and his daughter Tricia {foreground) watched preparations jor the launch of Apollo 12 from ksc, while Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA A rimin' istrator, shielded Mrs. Nixon from rain. Seconds into flight an electrical discharge shut down the spacecraft fuel cells, but the astronauts corrected the condition. 10,000	ft with tops at 21,000 ft. During ascent observers on ground saw two parallel streaks of lightning flash between clouds and launch pad. NASA reported electrical transients, later attributed to electrical potential discharges from clouds through spacecraft to ground, had suddenly shut off spacecraft’s electrical power at 00:36 get and turned on numerous alarms in cm. Spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while crew restored primary power system. Commander Conrad radioed, “We had everything in the world drop out.” Control Center commented, “We’ve had a couple of cardiac arrests down here, too.” “There wasn’t time up here,” Conrad answered. Power system remained normal throughout rest of mission. Spacecraft entered planned parking orbit with 118-mi (189.9-kra) apogee and 115.0-mi (185.0-km) perigee. After postlaunch checkout CSM. separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and LM, code-named Intrepid, Onboard TV initiated after separation clearly showed csm transposing and docking with lm at 3:27 GET and ice on windows from rain frozen during liftoff. Crew ejected CSm/lm from S—IYB and conducted first SPS burn for translunar insertion. Slingshot maneuver placed S—IVB into earth orbit with 515,549.4-	to 560,429.9-mi {829,519.0- to 901,731.7-km) apogee and 93,213.2-	to 109,324.1-mi (149,980.0- to 175,902.5-km) perigee and period of 39 to 45 days, instead of heliocentric orbit planned, because of error in instrument unit. To ensure that electrical transients during launch had not affected lm systems, Conrad and Bean entered LM at 7:20 GET for housekeeping and systems checks. All checks indicated systems were satisfactory, Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse maneuver No. 1 was not necessary. Midcourse correction No. 2, at 30:53 GET, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 69.1 mi; third and fourth maneuvers were not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 47 min. Conrad and Bean began transfer to LM during translunar coast Y2 hr earlier than planned to obtain full TV coverage through Goldstone tracking station. The 56-min transmission, beginning at 62:52 get, showed excellent color pictures of GSM, intravehicular transfer, LM interior, earth, and moon. Gordon reported crew was in good condition. TV broadcast scheduled for 81:30 GET before lunar orbit insertion was canceled because of sun angle and glare on spacecraft windows. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 72.0-mi (115.9-km) perilune at 83:25 GET (10:47 pm est Nov. 17) after first sps burn. During first lunar orbit good quality TV coverage of lunar surface was transmitted for 33 min. Crew provided excellent descriptions of lunar features. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 76.1-mi (122.5-km) apolune and 62.5-mi (100.6-km) perilune at 87:47 get. Conrad and Bean transferred to lm for l^g-hr housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check and then returned to CM. CM Yankee Clipper, reported sighting Surveyor III and Intrepid on moon. Conrad opened lm hatch at 115:11 GET, descended LM ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Conrad reported seeing Surveyor HI spacecraft and said lm had landed 25 ft down-range from lip of crater. Conrad, inches shorter than Neil A. Armstrong, who had stepped onto moon July 21, had difficulty taking last step from ladder. When he touched lunar surface at 115.22 get (6:44 am est Nov. 19) Conrad said, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small step for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” He said lunar surface was soft and loosely packed, causing his boots to dig in as he walked, and sun was bright like a spotlight, lm had landed so gently its shock-absorbing legs were barely telescoped by gentle impact. Conrad recorded Bean’s descent to lunar surface at 115:52 get (7:14 am EST Nov. 19). Shortly after color TV camera was removed from mesa bracket, transmission was lost and was not regained for remainder of eva. Crew collected 40- to 50-lb contingency sample and reported mounds resembling volcanoes. Mounds were 4 ft high with flattened tops 5 ft wide and sides sloping out to 15- to 20-ft dia. Conrad said he saw neither breccia nor vesicular rocks, only basalts. Lithium hydroxide canisters and contingency sample were transferred to lm ; S-band antenna, solar wind composition experiment, and American flag were deployed as planned, alsep with SNAP—27 atomic generator was deployed 600—700 ft from lm. Shortly after deployment passive seismometer transmitted to earth signals from astronauts’ footsteps as they returned to lm. During deployment astronauts kicked up dust and some adhered to instruments. Overall effect would be determined through long-term measurements of system’s engineering parameters. Conrad and Bean dusted each other off and entered Intrepid after 3 hrs 56 min walking on lunar surface. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:33 get (10:55 pm est Nov. 19), 1 hr 40 min ahead of schedule. Astronauts stored lm TV camera in equipment transfer bag for return to earth for failure analysis. Conrad walked to alsep site to check leveling of lunar atmosphere detector. Astronaut movement on surface was recorded on passive seismometer and lunar surface magnetometer, eva traverse took crew to alsep deployment site, Head Crater, Bench Crater, Sharp Crater, Halo Crater, Surveyor III site, Block Crater, and back to lm. Astronauts walked 1,500—2,000 ft from lm, covering about 6,000-ft distance, their confidence and speed increasing with experience. After walk Conrad reported he had fallen once but Bean had picked him up without difficulty. Conrad rolled grapefruit-sized rock down wall of Head Crater about 300—400 ft from passive seismometer, but no significant response was detected. Crew obtained desired photographic panoramas, core samples, trench sample, lunar environment sample, and assorted rock, dirt, bedrock, and molten samples. They reported fine dust buildup on all sides of larger rocks and said soil color lightened as depth increased. Crew reported Surveyor footpad marks were still visible and entire spacecraft looked brown, as if something had rained on it. Glass parts were not broken. Crew retrieved parts of Surveyor III, including TV camera and soil scoop. They then retrieved solar wind composition experiment and stowed it in equipment bag, took stereo pictures near lm, and transferred all collected samples, parts, and equipment to lm. They dusted off, reentered LM, and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by 134:82,get (2:44 am EST Nov. 20), after 3 hrs 49 min walking on lunar surface in second eva period. While lm was on moon Gordon, orbiting moon in csm, completed lunar multispectral photography experiment and photographed Wall of Theophilus and future landing sites, Fra Mauro and Descartes. Film would be analyzed to aid scientists in planning for future sample collection and in extrapolating known compositions from returned samples to parts of moon that would not be visited. At 142:04 get (9:26 am est Nov. 20) lm successfully lifted off moon after 31 hrs 31 min on lunar surface, leaving lm descent stage. Astronauts brought back 95 lbs of lunar surface samples, parts of Surveyor III, films, and miniature flags of 136 nations, 50 U.S. states, and 4 U.S. possessions. A 1.2-sec overburn of lm ascent propulsion system caused by incorrect manual switching sequence prevented automatic shutdown of engine and resulted in insertion velocity 32 fps greater than planned, placing lm in orbit with 71.4-mi (114.9-km) apolune and 10.6-mi (17.1-km) perilune. Crew quickly recognized discrepancy, manually shut down engine, and used RSC trim maneuver to enter planned orbit with 53.3-mi (85.8-km) apolune and 10.1-mi (16.3-km) perilune. Rendezvous maneuvers occurred as planned and lm docked with csm at 145:36 get (12:58 pm est Nov. 20). TV was transmitted from csm for last 24 min of rendezvous sequence. Crew transferred with samples, equipment, and film to CSM; lm ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 5:17 pm est Nov. 20 about 44.9 mi (72.2 km) southeast of Surveyor III. Crash was detected by seismometer left on moon and produced reverberations lasting for more than 30 min. Crew made csm plane-change maneuver at 159:05 GET and took high-resolution and stereo-strip photos and tracked landmarks, to conclude planned photography of Fra Mauro, Descartes, and Lalande. antine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. cm was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and cm was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Pago Pago and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 12 mission objectives—to perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of mare area, deploy and activate ALSEP, develop techniques for point landing capability, develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment, and obtain photos of candidate exploration sites—were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor and corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding. All three crew members remained in excellent health and good spirits. Accomplishments included first use of hybrid trajectory, largest U.S. payload placed into lunar orbit (72,335 ibs after lunar orbit insertion), first demonstration of point landing capability, first use of two EVA periods, first recharge of portable life-support system, first double-core-tube sample, first return of samples from vehicle previously landed on moon, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, first multispectral photography from lunar orbit, and longest lunar mission to date. Apollo 12 was ninth Apollo mission to date, sixth manned Apollo mission, and second manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16—24, 1969) had proved capability to perform manned landing on moon and return and to retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; Mission Commentary; NASA Release 69—148; FonF; NYT, 11/15—26/69; W Post, 11/15-26/69; W Star, 11/15-26/69; B Sun, 11/15-26/69) November 14: President Nixon became first President to witness space launch while in office when he, Mrs. Nixon, and daughter Tricia viewed Apollo 12 launch at ksc. President called liftoff “spectacular.” Later he addressed NASA personnel in Launch Control: “. . . I know there has been a lot of discussion as to what the future of the space program is. ... I do think you can be assured that in Dr. Paine and his colleagues you have men who are dedicated to this program, who are making the case for it ... as against other national priorities and making it very effectively. I leaned in the direction of the program before. After hearing what they have had to say with re'gard to our future plans, I must say that I lean even more in that direction. ... I realize that in those within the program . . . there are different attitudes as to what the emphasis should be, whether we should emphasize more exploration or more in taking the knowledge we have already acquired and making practical applications of it. . . . We want to have a balanced program, but most important, we are going forward. America ... is first in space.” (Carroll, B Sun, 11/15/69, Al; PD, 11/17/69, 1601-2)
Soviet Embassy praised Apollo 10 mission as event that “inspires into us pride for man.” Message, written by academician Boniface Kedrov, called astronauts “20th Century Columbuses” and said mission was an “immeasurably more complex, dangerous and almost unrealizable aim compared with that Columbus set before himself at the dawn of the new era.” Moscow TV showed splashdown. (W Post, 5/27/69, A9)
American Academy of Achievement presented 1969 Gold Plate “Man of Achievement” Awards to Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and to Apollo 8 Astronauts William A. Anders and Frank Borman. (LA Her-Exam, 6/19/69; AFJ, 6/21/69, 30)
In message transmitting to Congress nasa’s Twentieth Semiannual Report, President Nixon said: “During this decade, we have successfully met many challenges and have achieved significant progress in our ability to utilize space for practical applications, scientific exploration, and expansion of man’s frontiers. We have subsequently landed astronauts upon the Moon, explored its surface, and returned these men to Earth. This historic event was made possible because of the solid foundation of a broad range of earlier activities, and through the skill and dedication of the many contributors to our space program.” (PD, 11/17/69, 1603; CR, 11/13/69, S14274)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman ended four-day visit to Czechoslovakia —first visit by U.S. astronaut to any Communist country, (upi, W Post, 5/24/69, A3)
In interview published by This Week, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman said many things could be learned from moon: “One ... I hope will be international cooperation, such as now exists in Antarctica. Even though the moon struck me as a very desolate, forbidding expanse, it will be very beneficial for men to work together to unlock its many mysteries and secrets. I hope that both the moon and the large permanent space stations from earth will be citadels for international cooperation and that the people who visit them will really be internationalists in the truest sense.” (This Week, 4/6/69)
During visit to West Berlin, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman drove past U.S.S.R.’s war memorial near Berlin wall and looked across wall into East Berlin. At Tempelhof airport Borman told press, “I was here before [during 1949 Berlin airlift] amid many bags of coal. There have been many space advances in the last two decades, yet we have so many troubles here on earth.” (C Trib, 2/13/69)
NASA’s Apollo 10 lunar orbital mission was proceeding well toward launch readiness for 11:49 am EST May 18, Deputy Apollo Program Director George H. Hage told NASA Hq. briefing. Flight readiness test had been successfully completed April 9. Countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin April 27, completing cryogenic propellant flow May 2; crew participation in cddt would begin May 3. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot) would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad B—being used for first time—on eight-day mission in which crew would enter lunar orbit, separate lm from CSM, and pilot lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface. Mission would include 11 different crew operations on TV and Westinghouse Electric Corp.-developed “experiment involving color TV if we can develop it and get it prepared to fly in time to support this mission. If we are able to ... we would do most of the pictures with color TV rather than black and white. . . .” (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins visited Canadian Parliament in Ottawa. Canadian Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau said astronauts’ contributions to science and humanity “will live as long as mankind lives.” Astronauts would conclude two-day Canadian visit with Dec. 2 visit to Montreal and tour of nearby factory where lm landing pads were made, (upi, W Post, 12/4/69, B3)
NASA announced appointment of Astronaut James A. McDivitt as Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. McDivitt, who would remain in USAF, would be responsible for planning lunar landing missions subsequent to first landing and would no longer be candidate for space flight crew assignments, (nasa Release 69—96)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family departed on usaf jet for 18-day Presidential goodwill mission to Europe. Itinerary: London, Feb. 2—5; Paris, Feb. 5—7; Brussels, Feb. 7—10; The Hague, Feb. 10—11; Bonn, Feb. 11—12; West Berlin, Feb. 12—13; Rome, Feb. 13—17; Madrid, Feb. 17—19; and Lisbon, Feb. 19—21. (nasa Int Aff; W Star, 2/2/69, A3)
During telephone call from White House to U.S.S. Hornet, shortly after Apollo 12 splashdown and recovery, President Nixon told Apollo 12 astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan F. Bean of their promotions to captain, usn. (PD, 12/1/69, 1659)
Inaugural parade following President Nixon’s address included NASA float carrying mockup of lunar module to be used for moon landing and Apollo 7 capsule. Apollo 7 Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham rode in convertible automobile in front of NASA float. (NASA Pio)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, with wives, were welcomed by President Nixon at White House ceremony on their return from 44,650-mi around-the-world goodwill journey. President called 38-day, 29-stop tour of 22 countries “most successful goodwill trip in the history of the United States.” First men on the moon had demonstrated they were “the best possible ambassadors America could have on this earth.” Armstrong said astronauts had been receive'd everywhere, “not just as individuals, but as representatives of the United States” and of “scientific and technological accomplishment . . . that serves as a symbol ... of a willing and talented nation assembling its resources and firm in its will ... to share for the benefits of all mankind.” During journey, astronauts had given 22 news conferences, been received by 20 heads of state, and received decorations on nine occasions. (PD, 11/10/69, 1563; Robertson, NYT, 11/6/69, 22)
Commemorative stamp to be issued May 5 in honor of Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission would include phrase “In the beginning God . . .” on photo of earth as seen from moon, taken by Apollo 8 crew. Postmaster General Winton M. Blount said phrase, read from Genesis by Astronaut William A. Anders during lunar orbit Christmas Eve 1968, would be included in response to many requests. Stamp would be first U.S. stamp with religious wording since 1961. (upi, W Post, 2/28/69)
Cancellation of mol program had left usaf with $1 billion in space hardware and 14 highly trained astronauts, Ralph Dighton of Associated Press wrote. Most of $1 billion already spent on program had been for undisclosed number of Titan HIM boosters and satellites built or on order, usaf had said launch facilities would be finished on schedule in September because they would have to be paid for anyway. They could be used for unmanned spacecraft. The $1.3-million mol administration building at Vandenberg afb, Calif., and $1.6-million medical and training structure could be adapted for office space, mol astronauts had been offered to NASA but no decision had yet been reached. Aerospace workers in seven firms had been hit by mol cancellation, with McDonnell Douglas Corp. most affected. It had 7,200 employees on project. (AP, W Star, 6/21/69, A5)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director of Flight Operations, told press at msc he wanted full report on piloting difficulties in landing on moon before committing Apollo 13 to landing attempt on moon’s rugged central highlands. Full discussion of lunar landing—described by Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., as “no easy task”—was important aspect of what must be learned during crew debriefing, Kraft said. (Wilford, NYT, 11/25/69, 33)
Estimated 250,000 persons watched Apollo 11 astronauts parade in Houston, Tex. Crowd threw confetti, ticker tape, and “moon certificates”— fake $100 and $1,000 paper money—until streets were two to three feet deep in litter. Later, 55,000 persons attended gala in Houston’s Astrodome coliseum, which was filled to capacity. Total of 31 astronauts and families rode through cheering throngs, (upi, W Post, 8/17/69, A12)
President Nixon arrived at Lahore, Pakistan, during round-the-world journey. Pakistan President Yahya Khan said at airport, “The City of Lahore is happy to receive you on its historic soil and to share your joy at the most recent and the most memorable triumph of human courage, determination, and scientific skill which was achieved by your astronauts when they were first to land on the moon.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1060)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, told preflight press conference Apollo 9 astronauts were “in a real fine state of health” for March 3 launch. Although two astronauts still had some minor throat infection, it would not interfere with planned launch time. Three-day postponement of launch from original Feb. 28 date had made possibility of inflight illness “exceedingly slim.” Only addition to spacecraft’s standard medical kit—which already included nasal emolient—might be throat lozenges. (Transcript)
Press commented on personal qualities of Apollo 10 astronauts during crises and technological marvels. New York Times: “Their courage and high technical skill were evident. There was total absence of posturing or pomposity. Notable, too, was the absence of false patriotism or of any attempt to use the space feat as the basis for claims of national or ideological superiority. The astronauts’ personal behavior added a warm human luster to the superb scientific and technological feats they were and are performing.” (NYT, 5/23/69) Washington Evening Star:	. . the flight of Apollo 10 has shown something . . . about the durability of human nature. . . . However rigorous the training, however unworldly and unreal the surroundings, man is still capable of awe, error, fright, outrage and—when the occasion calls for it—profanity. It’s good to know.” (W Star, 5/23/69, A16)
Tass announced that Luna XV was still functioning normally in lunar orbit with 109.4-km (68-mi) apolune, 16.1-km (10-mi) perilune, 1-hr 54-min period, and 127° inclination. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Luna XV had conducted two midcourse corrections and speculated that spacecraft was preparing either to land or to observe Apollo 11 landing. (AP, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al) Harlem, many of 50,000 attending soul music festival booed lunar landing announcement. At massive “Moon In” at Central Park, enthusiastic crowd of young people watched landing on huge outdoor TV screen in steady downpour and bought “lunar dogs,” “Apollo rock candy,” and “moon picnic” boxes. Composer and band leader Duke Ellington made singing debut with “Moon Maiden,” song he wrote to celebrate Apollo 11 success, taped for ABC. New York Times sold out 950,000 copies of July 21 issue announcing lunar landing and announced it would reprint entire edition July 24 as souvenir. Special Florida Times-Union edition datelined “Moonday, July 21” sold out in Jacksonville within two hours. Estimated 8,000 Western Electric Co. employees left work or failed to show up in protest against being denied access to TV or radios on job during lunar landing. Des Moines, Iowa, TV stations received some complaints from viewers over absence of regular programs.	, Crime rate fell in Los Angeles, while in Savannah, Ga., 17 prisoners sawed their way out of Chatham County prison branch while guards watched Apollo 11 on TV. At msc, Houston Welfare Rights Organization members demonstrated around display of lm, calling on U.S. to set new goal—elimination of poverty. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21/69; 7/22/69; Apollo 11 Mission Commentary, 7/21/69; NYT, 7/17/69, 7/27/69) • Millions around world hailed Apollo 11 landing: Soviet Premier Alexsey Kosygin complimented U.S. on lunar landing and expressed interest in widening U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation during July 21 Moscow discussion with former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, who was ending Soviet visit. Soviet TV did not carry live coverage of Apollo 11 lunar landing July 20; Tass announcement was read by newscaster and carried in two-paragraph item on Pravdals front page. Evening paper, Izvestia, accorded story more space and featured photo of astronauts on moon. On TV, Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov described landing as “major landmark” and said crew had coped “brilliantly” with mission. Georgy Petrov, Director of Soviet Institute for Cosmic Research, called Apollo 11 “outstanding achievement” but said more data per ruble could have been gathered by unmanned probes. Statue dedicated to Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled July 21 in sports stadium at Cracow, Poland. In U.K., Queen Elizabeth watched lunar landing on TV, then cabled President Nixon “warmest congratulations.” Prime Minister Harold Wilson expressed “heartfelt relief.” At Jodrell Bank Experimental Station astronomers applauded and director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said that “the future has been revolutionized.” David Threlfall collected $24,000 on five-year-old bet that man would land on celestial body before 1971. Betting shop had given him thousand-to-one odds [see May 29]. In Wollongong, Australia, local judge heard cases while watching Apollo 11 lunar landing on portable TV set. Czechoslovakia issued two postage stamps July 21 commemorating lunar landing, while record crowds at U.S. Embassy exhibition tapered off after exhausting supply of Apollo giveaway materials. Five thousand Hungarians walked through American Embassy in Budapest July 21, picking up USIA pamphlet Man on the Moon. In Romania, bouquets were tossed through U.S. Embassy fence to foot of flagpole and several Romanians reported large numbers of Bulgarians were crossing border to watch live TV coverage of Apollo 11. Cuban government decided not to jam Voice of America broadcast of Apollo 11 lunar landing. In Algiers news was ignored except for announcement in government-controlled newspaper that “the man is on the moon.” In Ghana, village chief listening to voa broadcast feared astronauts might fall off moon if not careful. In Bangkok, freedom for 622 pardoned prisoners was delayed because guards refused to leave TV sets showing Apollo 11. Lunar landing stole top play in Israel and Egypt, from accounts of their fierce fighting at Suez Canal. In Singapore, girl born half hour after lunar landing was named Luna. In Pakistan, boy baby was named Apollo. Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, and Indian Parliament gave standing ovation to Apollo 11 astronauts at opening of day’s business in New Delhi July 21. In Japan, Emperor Hirohito called off customary daily stroll and interrupted lunch to watch Apollo 11 on TV. Iroquois Indians in Brantford, Ontario, Canada, feared lunar landing might plunge earth into darkness and release monsters from earth’s core. Their medicine man and chief, Joseph Logan, Jr., had said moon was sacred to his people and “we are not supposed to disturb her.” In Taipei, Formosa, Nationalist China Parliament member Hsieh Jen-chao invited Apollo 11 astronauts to attend Moon Festival honoring rabbit which Chinese legend said lived on moon and could provide eternal life. Some devout Moslems in Somalia refused to believe Apollo 11 lunar landing was reality. Following radio, press, and word-of-mouth announcement, fist fights broke out July 21 in Mogadiscio streets between believers and disbelievers. Parents of baby boy born on lunar landing day broke with Muslim tradition and named child Armstrong Abdurahman Osman. In Brussels workers in radio and TV studios suspended strike during transmission of Apollo 11 mission film. In Brazil several thousand persons cheered as they witnessed televised lunar landing at Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro while church bells rang outside. In Santiago de Chile people rushed out of restaurants to look at moon, forgetting it was midafternoon when they learned of lunar landing. While rest of world focused on lunar landing, one quarter of world’s population labored through sixth moon of Chinese lunar year unaware of event. Approximately 800 million people in Communist China had heard no news of lunar landing. Only deviation from “total blackout on space exploration” was July 17 story of Astronaut Frank Borman’s visit to Moscow, reported by New China News Agency. (C Trib, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21-22/69; W Star, 7/22/69; NYT, 7/22/69; B Sun, 7/21—22/69; Am Embassy, Prague, Bucharest, Brussels, Budapest, Mogadiscio)
House passed H.J.R. 775, to authorize President “to award appropriate medals honoring those astronauts whose particular efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind have been exceptionally meritorious.” (CR, 9/15/69, H7870—2)
Look published interview in which former astronaut M. Scott Carpenter announced that infarcts in lower thigh bones, indicating calcification, would terminate his career as active deep-sea diver. He would remain senior aquanaut on Sealab III project as deputy on-scene commander of Sealab III command ship Elk River. (Look, 1/21/69, 68-74)
Apollo 11 astronauts would leave three items on lunar surface to commemorate landing, NASA announced. Silicon disc, 1%-in-dia, would carry statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon; messages of goodwill from leaders of 73 countries; list of leaders of Congress and members of four congressional committees responsible for NASA legislation; and names of NASA’s top management, past and present. Statements, messages, and names had been etched on disc by process used to make microminiature electronic circuits. Each message had been reduced 200 times, to barely visible dot. Three- by five-foot nylon American flag with tubing along top edge would be erected on eight-foot aluminum staff on airless moon. Two other U.S. flags and flags from 136 nations and 50 U.S. states would be carried to moon and returned to earth. Plaque left on lm descent stage would bear images of two hemispheres of earth and inscription “Here men from the planet earth first set foot upon the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.” It would bear names of Apollo 11 crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins—and President Nixon, (nasa Releases 69—83E, 69-83F, 69-83H)
Economist commented on perils of prolonged space voyages: “When astronauts begin to do tours of duty that could run from three months to a year at a time on the moon, or on orbiting earth platforms— still more when they embark on 2% year trips to Mars—the problems will be much greater. Their bodies may adapt themselves to conditions of weightlessness or low gravity, and to living in atmospheres of rather less density than on earth, and then find it hard to re-adapt back to earth conditions again. If, over time, the changes become irreversible, we could witness the evolution of a new race of space hominoids with whom we could communicate but not cohabit.” (Economist, 11/22/69)
NASA announced that 8 of 14 aerospace research pilots trained for USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program terminated June 10 would join NASA. One, l/c Albert H. Crews (usaf), would be assigned to Flight Crew Operations Directorate at MSC. Seven would be astronauts, bringing total number of active NASA astronauts to 54: Maj. Karol H. Bobko (usaf), l/cdr Robert L. Crippen (usn), Maj. Charles G. Fullerton (usaf), Maj. Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr. (usaf), Maj. Robert F. Over-myer (usmc), Maj. Donald H. Peterson (usaf), and l/cdr Richard H. Truly (usn). Effective date for new assignments had not been set. Maj. Bobko, Maj. Hartsfield, and Maj. Peterson would complete studies for graduate degrees before assuming astronaut duty, (nasa Release 69-120)
NASA had raised limit on amount of samples Apollo 11 crew could bring back from moon, Washington Post writer Thomas O’Toole reported in Los Angeles Times. Instead of 50 lbs of samples originally set as maximum, astronauts would be permitted to collect as much as they could carry—probably up to about 100 lbs. (LA Times, 6/22/69)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory scientists issued first comprehensive report on preliminary study of lunar samples collected by Apollo 11 astronauts. Experiments indicated there was no life in sample and traces of organic material reported earlier were probably from astronauts’ space-suits and containers, rubber gloves, and tools used to handle material. (Traces of hydrocarbons in two samples of lunar dust had been reported Aug. 6.) Autopsies performed on 48 mice injected with lunar dust and then killed had shown no signs of germs or illness. Detailed analyses of samples would begin in late September when material would be released from quarantine and distributed to 146 principal investigators in 9 countries. (AP, W Star, 8/8/69, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 8/7/69, 1)
Associated Press said Austin, Tex., Judge John R. Brown had granted request of atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair for three-judge Federal court to hear her suit against NASA seeking to prevent astronauts on duty from practicing religion [see Aug. 6]. (AP, W Post, 8/16/69, A3)
iaf announced official endorsement of absolute world’s records for Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission’s 10 lunar orbits: altitude, 234,672.5 mi; greatest mass lifted into earth orbit, 282,197 lbs; total time in space for an astronaut, James A. Lovell, Jr., 572 hrs 10 min 16 secs. Apollo 8 world class records: duration of lunar mission, 146 hrs 59 min 49 secs; duration in lunar orbit, 20 hrs 14 min 13.2 secs. To obtain iaf certification of Apollo 11, crew would be given torn halves of four $1 bills for comparison with other halves on return as proof same men returned as took off. naa would submit claim for absolute world record for extravehicular activity (eva) for successful Apollo 11 mission. (AP, NYT, 7/15/69, 20)
Countdown for NASA’s Apollo 10 mission, scheduled for launch May 18, began at ksc. Astronauts completed three-hour physical examinations and were reported to be in good health and good spirits. {W Post, 5/13/69, A7; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/14/69, A3)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean and 25 other persons quarantined in Lunar Receiving Laboratory were released one day ahead of schedule. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, said astronauts were in good physical condition. (B Sun, 12/11/69, Al)
Reaction to Apollo 12 lunar landing was “almost a ho-hum,” Associated Press reported. “It seemed to indicate they are now taking moon voyages for granted.” At White House, President and Mrs. Nixon arose before dawn to watch moon walk on TV. President had commented it was “first time anybody has sung from the moon,” as Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., hummed while conducting lunar tasks. In Philadelphia’s Franklin Institute, where thousands had gathered in July to watch Apollo 11 lunar landing, only 45 persons showed up to watch Apollo 12, Of 12 New Yorkers interviewed by New York Times, only Bernard Granite of the Bronx had watched lunar landing. He said, “The first one was more exciting. This one was anticlimaetic, but I still think they are justified in spending the money.” Portland, Ore., secretary Jeanne Paulson said, “I’m at the point where I think the money should go to the poverty program. There are too many starving people in the slum ghettos.” Des Moines, Iowa, secretary Eileen Brown said, “The biggest concern seemed to be that they couldn’t make the TV work rather than whether they could perform their assignments. What do we think they are up there for, anyway, to put a show on for us?” Police in Los Angeles, Calif., attributed sharp drop in reported crime to Apollo 12 moon landing and walk. In Washington, D.C., McKinley High School teacher said, “This doesn’t concern us at all. There are far more important things going on here.” Question for his pupils was “whether we will survive to the year 2000.” (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 31; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
At small White House dinner, Apollo 10 Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan presented President Nixon and Vice President Agnew with four wrinkled flags which had been carried aboard spacecraft during mission. Stafford told President, “. . . these flags have been to the moon and 31 times around it, so we thought you’d like to have them just the way we brought them back. That’s why we didn’t press out the wrinkles when we had them framed.” (Dean, W Star, 7/1/69, Dl)
In American Scholar architect R. Buckminster Fuller said: “It seems eminently clear that we not only must put our space programs on highest priority of attention and resource investment but that all humanity must be accredited and financed to enter into a new re-educational system that is geared to develop our most prominent awareness, that we indeed are in space and that all of our concern is with the fact that our space-vehicle Earth and its life-energy-giving Sun, and the tide-pumping Moon can provide ample sustenance and power for all humanity’s needs to be derived from our direct energy income without further robbing our fossil fuels energy savings account. In reality, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon are nothing else than a most fantastically well-designed and space-programmed team of vehicles. All of us are, always have been, and so long as we exist, always will be—nothing else but—astronauts. Let’s pull our heads out of the brain benumbing, mind frustrating, misinformedly conditioned reflexes. If it is going to be ‘All ashore who’s going ashore,’ once more intent to return to nonspace down here ON earth, humanity is doomed.” (American Scholar, Winter 1969-70, 27-47) During 1969: In 1969—the year man first set foot on another celestial body —U.S. orbited 54 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 70. U.S. total included 31 orbited by DOD. NASA’s 23 included 2 satellites orbited for dod as secondary payloads. Highlight of 1969 was achievement of major goal in NASA’s Apollo program—to land man on the moon and return him safely to earth. Lunar landing system completed final phases of test and demonstration when Apollo 9 demonstrated operation of LM in earth orbit and Apollo 10 demonstrated operation of complete Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit, with LM making two passes within 47,000 ft of lunar surface. Apollo program climaxed with Apollo 11, July 16—24, when LM Eagle landed on moon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. —first men on the moon—performed tasks on lunar surface, redocked with csm in lunar orbit, and returned safely to earth with lunar samples. Apollo 12 successfully accomplished second manned lunar landing with pinpoint accuracy, touching down close to Surveyor 111, which had landed on moon April 19, 1967. Crew set up first alsep on lunar surface and returned safely to earth with lunar samples and parts of Surveyor III. Unmanned Mariner VI and Mariner VII passed within 2,000 mi of Mars, transmitting more than 200 times more data about Mars than were obtained by Mariner IV in 1964. Spacecraft measured chemical composition and temperature of atmosphere and surface and took 198 high-quality pictures, providing new insight into Mars surface characteristics. Other scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso V, Oso VI, Ogo VI, and Explorer XL1. Applications satellites included Intelsat-Ill F—3, Intelsat-III F—4, and Intelsat-III F—5 for ComSat-Corp; Essa IX meteorological satellite for essa; Nimbus III; and Ats V. Biosatellite 111 provided significant biological data on instrumented monkey on board, but mission was terminated early after monkey’s physiological condition deteriorated, and monkey died shortly after recovery. Pioneer E, scheduled to enter solar orbit, and its secondary payload tetr—c were destroyed shortly after launch when Delta booster malfunctioned. Some 189 meteorological sounding rockets, 85 scientific sounding rockets, and 60 high-altitude balloons were launched. NASA—usaf XB—70 and X—15 programs were concluded and new joint program was initiated to continue aeronautical R&d, using YF—12 supersonic aircraft. First operational C—5A, military cargo transport and world’s largest aircraft, was delivered to usaf and by November seven C—5As had accumulated 1,320 hrs flying time. Aeronautical R&d continued to improve quality and quantity of options available in aircraft technology, and aircraft industry made first flights of several wide-bodied jumbo jet transports for civil use, including Boeing 747. New SST design with delta wing was approved by faa and prototype construction was recommended by President Nixon. NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 3 successful glide flights and 15 powered flights included first supersonic flight at mach 1.1 and 54,000-ft altitude, usaf’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle completed 7 flights. dod space program included orbiting of 2 Vela nuclear-detection satellites, 7 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, Tacsat I tactical comsat, Egrs XIII (Secor XIII) geodetic satellite (launched by NASA), and U.K.’s Skynet A comsat (launched by NASA). Titan HIM development was terminated and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program was canceled because of budget cutbacks. NASA and aec completed ground tests of xe experimental rocket engine with 28 successful startups and 2.8 hrs of operation, including 3.5	min at full thrust, and validated test stand No. 1 in Jackass Flats, Nev. SNAP—27 generator was used as electrical power source for Apollo 12 experiments left on moon and SNAP—19 was auxiliary power system for Nimbus III. SNAP—29 program was terminated. New liquid-propellant rocket engine was developed and new triprapellant system produced record performance for chemically powered engines. U.S.S.R.’s 70 payloads included 55 Cosmos satellites and 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 1 Luna, 1 Zond, 5 Soyuz, and 2 Venus spacecraft, and 2 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz IV docked with manned Soyuz V and two cosmonauts transferred from Soyuz V to Soyuz IV before returning to earth. Manned Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII, launched on three successive days, rendezvoused in orbit and performed experiments including photography, communications, and welding. Luna XV, apparent unmanned challenger to NASA’s Apollo 11 for first lunar landing and return, crashed onto lunar surface in July. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully reached speeds up to 900 mph and was demonstrated publicly in 90-min test flight. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; nasa Release 69—161; gsfc SSR, 12/31/69)
Izvestia gave first U.S.S.R. report of President Nixon’s July 17 announcement that medals of two dead Soviet cosmonauts would be placed on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. Factual account of mission carried no comment. {W Post, 7/19/69, A10)
Briefing on Apollo 9’s earth resources survey experiment [see March 3— 13]	was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Leonard Jaffe, Director of Space Applications Programs, stressed importance of satellite photos for earth resources program: “. . . we have taken advantage of the Apollo and Gemini, as we did with Mercury, opportunities to get pictures of the earth and its environment with cameras, largely held by hand, by the astronauts. These pictures have been a very large source of experimental data for our Earth Resources Survey Program.” Advantage of using space for earth resources survey was twofold. One was “large view that it gives you of the earth.” Second was “ability to see the same phenomenon, or the same area of the earth time and time again, to be able to arrive over this particular spot on the earth periodically and observe temporal changes.” Apollo 9 experiment had obtained some 120 or 130 useful frames of multispectral data, all of which had been distributed to principal investigators for analysis. (Transcript)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., orbiting moon in csm, set new world record for solo space flight. Gordon piloted csm alone for 37 hrs 41 min, breaking 30-hr 20-min record set by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., in Faith 7 May 15—16, 1963. (upi, W Star, 11/21/69, A7)
Senate confirmed nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders as Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council. (CR, 6/19/69, S6736)
White House announced President Nixon had canceled plans to dine with Apollo 11 astronauts July 15, eve of launch, msc Director of Research and Medical Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, had expressed concern that crew might catch earthly illness from President, which could complicate lunar landing mission. (AP, B Sun, 7/8/69)
Die proof of 1.05- by 1.80-in 10-cent airmail stamp commemorating “First Man on the Moon,” attached to envelope, would be carried by Apollo 11 and canceled on Moon by Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount announced. On return to earth, die would be used to produce commemorative stamps for August issue. Hand-canceled “Moon Letter” would undergo 21-day decontamination period at lrl and be returned to Post Office Dept, for display in Washington, D.C., and later throughout U.S. and abroad. Stamp was designed by Paul Calle, modeled by Robert J. Jones, and engraved by Edward R. Felver and Albert Saavedra. It depicted astronaut stepping from spacecraft onto lunar surface. (PO Dept Releases 107, P—37; W Post, 7/10/69, A13)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean held press conference at msc and showed movies and slides of mission. Explaining failure of color TV camera, Conrad said: “What apparently happened ... is that I took the thing off mesa and set it down. The MESA was in the sun at the time and ... I apparently either pointed it at the sun or pointed it at the mesa, which was in the sun and a pretty bright reflector . . . and just that few seconds . . . was enough to sunburn the camera. ... I didn’t realize it was as sensitive to light as it is.” Dust on surface was a major problem, Conrad said. Ground was soft and astronauts sank in significantly. It was difficult to keep experiment package clean. “It was almost impossible for us to walk around those packages without our little dust cloud and at any time the dust hit the surface of the package it stuck and the worst thing you could do was try to rub it off because you just smeared it over them even worse. . . .” To question about difficulty in landing LM on moon, Conrad replied he had misinterpreted correct gage reading and underestimated accuracy of LM’s descent. “. . . I felt that that gage was not . . . giving me the proper information. I found it quite hard to believe that I could have gotten the velocity killed quite as well as I did . . . and so I was continually going out the window to get roll information and a general idea of my lateral and horizontal velocities.” Although Conrad felt landing on moon was not “an amateur’s game,” he felt satisfactory landings under completely instrumented flight rule conditions could be made. Crew had suggested adding instrument that would provide automatic nulling of horizontal and lateral velocities but would leave pilot with rate of descent command. Conrad said he did not think dust during descent would be problem on future missions “as long as you get a look at your landing site before you get into the dust, and ascertain that it’s all right—it’s perfectly all right to go in and land, IFR. ... I don’t recommend any change from the procedures that we’re using right now.” Bean said photos of moon were realistic, but photos of earth were not. “As we view the Moon from the Earth, it’s white and flat; it’s quite pretty. When you get up at the Moon . . . it’s much the same; it’s either white or concrete colored or grey. . . . But when you look at the Earth ... it kind of sparkles, and . . . you can’t capture it on the film. It’s sort of like taking a picture of an emerald . . . and hoping to get it.” Gordon said he had mixture of emotions, “a mixture of thoughts, as to why is it all here? And . . . what the function that each person, each part, each molecule, each body performs, in the overall scheme of why is it, what is it, and from where did it come.” (Transcript)
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory’s Dr. Gary Latham said in Houston his team had detected 14 “unusual seismic events” from seismometers left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. They believed walls of lunar craters had been falling in as different parts became hotter than others during highest lunar temperatures and felt they might be observing “initial stages of the process by which fresh new craters are transformed to old.” (W Post, 7/28/69, A6)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial: “The public ceremonies honoring the astronauts underscore identity in a larger and much more responsible sense—a feeling of community, rooted in a family and expanding to embrace the nation, perhaps ultimately the world. There are other words for it—awareness of a common purpose, a sense of decency both public and private, a common standard of behavior and a common sense of service and loyalty to country. This is what made Apollo succeed, and this is what the nation is recognizing as the celebration begins today.” (P Bull, 8/12/69)
Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev told Soviet gathering in honor of four Soyuz IV and Soyuz V cosmonauts U.S.S.R. was “fully justified in saying that the successful flight . . . [see Jan. 14-18] is a great achievement of Soviet science and engineering, and a new triumph of the courage, boldness, intellect and labour of the Soviet people. The recent outstanding flight made by the American astronauts round the Moon, the confident start made by the Soviet automatic interplanetary stations ‘Venus-5’ and ‘Venus-6’ towards their distant target, and the successful flight made by the . . . [Soyuz] spaceships—all this constitutes man’s new, major steps along the road to conquering the mysterious world of outer space. . . .” (Moscow News, 2/8—15/69, Supplement, 3—5)
At U.S. Embassy Independence Day Party in Moscow Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman signed autographs with Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Georgy T. Beregovoy, and Konstantin P. Feoktistov. Among 1,000 persons attending reception given by U.S. Ambassador Jacob D. Beam were Vasily V. Kuznetsov, U.S.S.R. First Deputy Foreign Minister, and Mikhail P. Georgadze, Secretary of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. They were highest ranking Soviet officials to attend annual July 4 reception since 1964 attendance of Nikita S. Khrushchev as head of government and Communist Party. (Clarity, NYT, 7/5/69, 28; AP, B Sun, 7/5/69, A2)
Spain awarded its Grand Cross of Aeronautic Merit to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. (upi, NYT, 10/4/69, 23)
NASA announced revised plans for first orbital workshop, with 1972 launch using first two stages of Saturn V to launch workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount together. Workshop would be outfitted on ground and would arrive in 253-mi circular orbit equipped for immediate occupancy by astronauts and with atm attached. Program objectives remained same as when NASA intended to use Saturn IB 2nd stage as 1971 workshop: to provide environment in which man could live and work for extended periods in space and to study man’s physiological and psychological responses and capabilities in space, atm would permit man to operate high-resolution astronomical telescopes in space, free from earth’s atmosphere. Saturn V hardware from Apollo program was available for revised plan, (nasa Release 69—105; Simons, W Post, 7/22/69, Al)
Wendell F. Moore, assistant chief engineer at Bell Aerosystems Co. and developer of rocket belt which could lift man and carry him length of football field, died in Niagara Falls, N.Y., at age 51. He had won John Price Wetherill Medal of Franklin Institute of Philadelphia in 1964 for his invention, first flight-tested in 1961. (upi, NYT, 5/30/69) May 29—June 8: 28th Salon Internationale de l’Aeronautique et de l’Espace —Paris Air Show—featured nearly 550 exhibitors representing 14 nations. U.S., with largest pavilion, emphasized space achievements, taking “Countdown Apollo” as theme. On opening day biggest display attraction, said United Press International, was Apollo 8 spacecraft, which Apollo 9 Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart unveiled in ceremony attended by U.S. Ambassador to France, R. Sargent Shriver. U.S. exhibit also included F—1 and J—2 engines of 1st and 2nd stages of Saturn V rocket and full-scale model of Apollo 11 lm. French prototype of Concorde 001 supersonic transport was flown over Paris for first time and later took its place on apron at Le Bourget Airport among 150 aircraft, helicopters, and gliders. Opening day also marked signing of agreement for joint development of short-haul airbus by French Transport Minister Jean Chamant and West German Economics Minister Karl Schiller. Spokesman for U.K. manufacturer Hawker Siddeley said firm was still negotiating on building wings for 250-seat airbus. U.S. exhibited 490-passenger Boeing 747 but did not show Lockheed C—5A, world’s largest aircraft. U.K. exhibits at Air Show included Concorde 002, British prototype; Hawker Siddeley Harrier vtol jet fighter; and Hawker Siddeley Nimrod, maritime reconnaissance version of Comet. French exhibits included Dassault Mirage fighters and Dassault Hirondelle turboprop. U.S.S.R.’s chief entry was 500-passenger An-22 turboprop airliner. (Amer Av, 5/26/69, 33-6; upi, W Star, 5/29/69, A10; Reuters, NYT, 5/30/69, 40)
Soviet youth newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda praised NASA’s Apollo 9 mission: “A thorough check of the entire equipment necessary for a lunar landing has been attained, thanks to the courage and gallantry of the three American astronauts. At the same time the Apollo 9 flight showed that it is impossible in terrestrial conditions to envisage all difficulties astronauts are encountering in real flight.” Soviet Academician Prof. Anatoly Blagonravov complimented NASA’s planning for lunar landing: “The fact that the Americans earlier made a flight around the moon and now conducted the Apollo 9 experiment, in my opinion, is evidence of a rather complete solution of the problem of dependability,” though some risk always remained, (upi, W Star, 3/14/69, A6)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
The supersonic Soviet airliner Tu-144 following its landing at Sheremetyevo Airport, Moscow, after a public-demonstration test flight. {AP wirephoto) will be executed with the same precision that marked the early stages of this trip.” ( W Post, 5/22/69, A24) John Lannan in Washington Evening Star; “Where manned space flight once was fraught with fright and peril, it seems to have moved into an era of fun and games. . . . The astronauts have learned to fly their spacecraft, the ground crews to launch them and the Defense Department to recover them. What remains is to use this accumulated knowledge, and that’s what NASA is attempting to do.” It all pointed to fact that “space flight has come of age.” (W Star, 5/21/69, A4) Marquis Childs in Washington Post: “When the moon landing . . . is completed the cost to the government will be just under $24 billion. The achievement represents an unprecedented orchestration of the resources of science and technology. The contrast with the failures here on earth to begin to try to cure rudimentary ills could hardly at this moment of grave uncertainty be sharper.” (W Post, 5/21/69, A25) Christian Science Monitor editorial: Apollo 10 mission “has again posed the old, old question: If mankind can achieve so spectacularly in space, why cannot we improve matters faster here on earth? The answer, surely, is that it is simpler to mobilize the complex electronics and space-science gadgetry to rocket a spacecraft to the moon than it is to coordinate the manifold and conflicting human emotions, ambitions, and processes necessary for cleaning up the cities, thrusting the black revolution forward with a minimum of friction, and banishing earth’s pollutants. The earth problem is moTe complex than the moon problem. Yet success in the moon venture will offer assurance that the earth challenge can be met. “So let no one call the moon venture a waste of ambition, treasure, achievement. The whole brilliant enterprise is immensely horizon-widening, thought-expanding.” (csm, 5/21/69)
Apollo 11 astronauts were received at Buckingham Palace by Queen Elizabeth during their visit to U.K. on 22-nation tour. (Reuters, B Sun, 10/15/69)
Apollo 12 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility, arrived at Ellington afb, Tex., where they were greeted by 500 cheering persons, including their families and NASA officials, mqf was moved in motorcade to Lunar Receiving Laboratory, where astronauts would remain until Dec. 10. (DeLone, W Post, 11/30/69, A3)
Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post observed similarities among astronauts. Of 23 who already had flown in space, 21 were either only sons or eldest sons. Pattern tied in, he said, with psychologists’ beliefs that only and eldest children tended to achieve more in life because they were disciplined more and trained and treated better by parents. Astronauts also were athletic, showed academic excellence, and had intense love of flying, O’Toole said. (W Post, 3/2/69) Primary objectives were to demonstrate crew, space vehicle, and mission support facilities performance during manned Saturn V mission with CSM and LM; demonstrate LM and crew performance, demonstrate performance of nominal and selected backup lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) mission activities; and assess CSm/lm consumables. Multispectral photography experiment was carried for first time to provide photos of earth resources using several different film-filter combinations. Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft, carrying Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), entered initial orbit with 119.5-mi (192.3-km) apogee and 117.6-rai (189,3-km) perigee. After post-insertion checkout csm, code-named “Gumdrop,” separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, code-named “Spider.” Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm, and docked spacecraft was separated from 3rd stage with rcs burn. Two S—IVB burns placed stage on earth-escape trajectory. Crew conducted first docked SPS burn. On second day crew tracked landmarks, conducted pitch and yaw roll maneuvers, and increased apogee by firing sps engine three times. On third day, McDivitt and Schweickart entered lm through docking tunnel, evaluated lm systems, transmitted first telecast, and conducted first manned firing of lm descent propulsion system (dps). They then returned to csm and conducted fifth sps burn to circularize orbit. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fourth day and transmitted second telecast. Schweickart, recovered from earlier nausea, spent 37 min outside spacecraft, walking between lm and csm hatches, maneuvering on handrails, and standing in “golden slipper” foot restraints. He commented on sun’s brightness, photographed spacecraft and earth, and described rain squalls over ksc before he and McDivitt returned to csm. Scott opened cm hatch and retrieved thermal samples from csm exterior. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fifth day to perform csm—lm rendezvous. Scott separated csm from lm and fired csm reaction control system thrusters to place spacecraft about 3.4 mi (5.5 km) apart, lm dps was ignited twice to set up rendezvous, lm descent stage was jettisoned and LM ascent propulsion system (aps) was fired to set up conditions for circularization. Although problems were encountered with crewman optical alignment sight (coas) because of extremely bright reflections, radar and optical sightings backed up by earth tracking enabled spacecraft to dock successfully after being up to 114 mi (183.5 km) apart during 6%-hr separation. After McDivitt and Schweickart returned to csm, crew jettisoned lm ascent stage and maneuvered to safe distance while stage burned to propellant depletion and entered orbit with 4,309-mi (6,934.5-km) apogee and 142.2-mi (228.8-km) perigee. By end of fifth day 97% of Apollo 9 objectives had been successfully accomplished. On sixth through ninth days crew conducted sixth and seventh SPS burns to alter apogee, tracked NASA’s Pegasus III meteoroid detection satellite (launched July 30, 1965), took multispectral photos of earth, tracked landmarks, exercised spacecraft systems, and prepared for reentry. Final sps burn for deorbit on 10th day was delayed one revolution because of unfavorable weather in planned landing area, cm—sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal; spacecraft reentered during 152nd revolution and splashed down in Atlantic 180 mi east of Bahamas at 12:53 pm est March 13, 241 hrs 53 secs after launch, within sight of recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. Astronauts were welcomed by Guadalcanal crew and received congratulatory telegram message from President Nixon which said: “The epic flight of Apollo Nine will be recorded in history as ten days that thrilled the world. You have by your courage and your skill helped to shape the future of man in space. The three of you and the great team which enabled you to complete your successful mission have shown the world that the spirit of man and his technological genius are eager to begin an age of adventure, an age which will benefit all the people on this good earth.” All primary Apollo 9 objectives were achieved and anomalies were not serious enough to alter mission operations or flight plan significantly. First manned flight of lm qualified last major component for lunar landing mission. Apollo 9 was sixth Apollo mission to date and third manned Apollo mission. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4, 1968), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Second manned mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), proved capability of Apollo hardware and systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 69-29, 69-33; PD, 3/17/69, 400)
Apollo 11 had opened vast market for medals, tokens, and pins to collectors who specialized in commemorative pieces, New York Times said. Medals issued by several countries after Apollo 8 were “few compared to the meteoric shower of commemoratives for the moon landing.” Medal by Ralph J. Menconi portrayed Apollo 11 astronauts on face side; reverse showed Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., with lm on lunar surface and earth in background. Medal designed in U.K. by Paul Vincze depicted astronaut on lunar surface with names of Apollo 11 astronauts. Reverse showed figure of Hermes holding winged staff of flight and olive branch with Saturn V in background. (Haney, NYT, 8/10/69)
House adopted H.R. 765, authorizing Smithsonian Institution to display U.S. flag presented to House by Apollo 11 astronauts. (CR, 12/23/69, H13090)
Safe landing of Apollo 11 in Pacific made “splash applauded around the world,” New York Times said. In U.S.S.R. TV viewers had live coverage for first time during mission as Moscow TV station hooked into Eastern Europe’s Intervision network for live transmission of astronauts being deposited on carrier Hornet. Later, station devoted first two-thirds of final newscast to Apollo 11 and announced that Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny had sent telegram to President Nixon offering “our congratulations and best wishes to the space pilots.” Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh called voyage “a big contribution to space exploration and further progress of world science.” Cosmonauts sent message to Apollo 11 crew: “We . . . closely followed your flight. We wholeheartedly congratulate you on the completion of your wonderful journey to the moon and safe return to earth.” In London Lloyd’s of London’s Lutine Bell tolled twice for good news of splashdown of Apollo 11. Sir Bernard Lovell, Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, said, “The successful conclusion of this immense project marks the beginning of a new phase when man must concern himself with the greatest issues of peaceful coexistence in extraterrestrial space.” Thunderstorm in Paris drove many people off streets at time of splashdown. On Riviera, bells tolled for five minutes and ancient cannon boomed. Mayor Pascal Rossini of Ajaccio, Corsica, sent invitation to astronauts to visit Corsica during 1969 bicentennial of Napoleon’s birth. In Warsaw crowd of 300 Poles broke into applause at U.S. Embassy. Over Pacific on Qantas airliner flying under Apollo reentry point, crew and 80 passengers saw space capsule reenter. In Canberra Prime Minister John Gorton invited astronauts to visit Australia. Pope Paul VI sent telegram to President Nixon with prayer “that this immense achievement may foster peace and prosperity and scientific and moral progress for all mankind.” Congratulatory messages were sent by President Giuseppe Saragat of Italy, President Yahya Khan of Pakistan, Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan, President Chung Hee Park of South Korea, U.N. Secretary General U Thant, President Gustav Heinemann of West Germany, and Prime Minister John Gorton of Australia. (Collier, NYT, 7/25/69, 31; Mills, B Sun, 7/25/69, A6; AP, B Sun, 7/25/69, A6)
White House confirmed President Nixon would talk with Apollo 11 astronauts over two-way TV hookup as they first set foot on moon. Nixon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., would be visible on split screen to earth TV viewers. President could watch on White House TV, but astronauts would have no view of him. President Nixon planned to spend evening of July 20 watching Apollo 11 progress on TV with former Astronaut Frank Borman, White House liaison with NASA. (Lyons, W Post, 7/19/69, A9)
