Cancellation of 8 743 070 first day covers of moon landing postage stamp—nearly trebling previous top of three million covers canceled—was announced by Postmaster General Winton M. Blount. Requests for souvenir envelope commemorating July 20, 1969, Apollo 11 lunar landing had been received from 100 different countries and reached 60 000-80 000 daily within days after stamp was announced July 9, 1969. Stamp sales totaled 9 614 685, with value of $961 468.50. Previous record had been set in 1962 for stamp commemorating first U.S. earth-orbiting flight by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (PO Dept Philatelic Release 3)
Apollo 12 astronauts, on 40-day tour, arrived in Lima, Peru, from Caracas, Venezuela. They were greeted by about 5000 persons. (AP, WPost, 2/19/70, C7)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., received gold medal from Federation Aeronautique Internationale in New Delhi for promoting peaceful space exploration. (AP, HPost, 11/22/70)
New York Times editorial appeared before Apollo 13 splashdown: “Here on earth the drama in space has done more than shatter any complacency that may have begun to surround lunar flight. It has drawn men and nations together in common concern over astronauts who are envoys of mankind even before they are nationals of a particular state .... Lovell, Swigert and Haise have already written an epic of heroism and skill that assures them immortality in the annals of space exploration.” (NYT, 4/17/70)
Former President Lyndon B. Johnson was briefed on Apollo 12 mission by Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr.; at lbj ranch near Stonewall,Tex. (P Bull, 1/15/70)
NASA held series of three Apollo 13 post-recovery press conferences at msc hosted by NASA Administrator, manned space flight officials,' and technical specialists. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said although mission “must be recorded as a failure, there’s never been a more prideful moment in the space program.” Most impressive aspect of mission was “tremendous effectiveness in team work of our ground support operation .... From every state . . . we’ve had people. . . working to backstop the many different system decisions that had to be systematically and methodically faced up to and made. . . . The Flight Operations Directors . . . certainly demonstrated that flight controllers can operate under these very adverse conditions. They’ve been able to do things in a far shorter period of time than we’d ever thought possible be-1 fore.”	’ Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said basic procedures used for every phase of mission were predetermined. “For example, the burn made behind the moon . . . was a standard emergency burn that would be used in case the service propulsion system would not work on a normal lunar mission going into lunar orbit. Each one of these steps had been predetermined and also simulated. But putting them all together into a sequence of steps . . . and working out some of the detailed procedures on how to save power and how to save batteries; how to save water; those things were determined during the course of the flight, both by the men ... on the ground and by the astronauts.” (Transcript)
msc Roundup described Skylab food system being developed “to compensate partially for astronauts’ long absence from the usual fare of Earthlings and the warmth and delight of home-cooked meals...Skylab food system would maintain caloric level between 2000 and 2800 calories per day and provide at least minimum dietary allowances recommended by nas. Meals would be selected from a variety of foods and cooked by each crewman on special food tray. Four kinds of food would be prepared: dehydrated, including scrambled eggs, beverages, and desserts; intermediate moisture, including peanuts and coohies; wetpack, including turkey with gravy and meatballs with sauce; and frozen, including filet mignon and lobster Newburg. (msc Roundup, 11/6/70, 1)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, on goodwill trip to U.S.S.R., watched TV broadcast of Soyuz IX launch during party in his honor in Moscow and was told by Cosmonaut Georgy Beregovoy that mission was “especially in honor of your trip here.” Armstrong later presented moon fragment and small Soviet flag carried on Apollo 11 mission to Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin. Kosygin said he would “always cherish this gift as a symbol of a great achievement.” He told Armstrong, “The Soviet peoples are second to none in admiring your courage and knowledge.” (upi, W Star, 6/2/70, Al; AP WPost, 6/3/70, A19)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received award for first lunar landing at second international congress of World Wildlife Fund in London. He said earth was oasis of life that must be protected “from its own population.” Wielders of modern technology were not deliberately destructive of earthly environment, but they were as apathetic as most humans about consequences of their actions. Time had come for them to be concerned. (Lewis, NYT, 11/19/70,4)
Heart-rate tachometer invented by msfc engineers James R. Currie and Ralph R. Kissel to monitor astronauts’ heart beat in space might have medical application on earth, msfc said. Device, which could measure heart rates between 40 and 200 beats per minute and furnish almost instantaneous rate after measuring only two heart beats, might be used to monitor heart rates of cardiac patients, (msfc Release 70-226)
Importance of studying asteroids was cited in Science by Dr. Hannes O. Alfven of Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm and Univ. of California at San Diego and Dr. Gustaf O. S. Arrhenius of Scripps Institution of Oceanography: “There are now good reasons to believe that the asteroidal belt represents an intermediate stage in the formation of the planets. This links the present conditions in the asteroidal region with the epoch in which the earth and the other planets were accreting from interplanetary grains. Hence, in order to understand how the solar system originated it may be essential to explore the asteroids.” Since manned Mars landing would take place after 1980, “it is of interest to discuss whether a sample of an asteroid may be obtained in an easier way, at an earlier time, and as a technologically intermediate step.” Asteroid sample could be obtained by landing spacecraft on asteroid or by capturing small asteroid and landing it on earth’s surface or storing it in earth orbit for later investigation. (Science, 1 /9/70, 139-41) Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received honorary Doctor of Engineering degree from Purdue Univ. Later he told students and press he had no political ambitions but did not criticize astronauts who did. “After all, politics should have something more than lawyers representing the people.” (AP, W Post, 1/10/70; KC Times, 1/10/70).
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received British Interplanetary Society awards commemorating man’s first lunar landing at special meeting of Society in London. Awards were silver replica of Apollo 11LM presented to NASA and gold medals for Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (Spaceflight, 5/70, 191)
World’s first female aquanaut team received special awards from Walter J. Hickel, Secretary of the Interior, during Washington, D.C., ceremony. Later Richard H. Sprince of NASA, who was project manager for team, said test of women’s ability to function in hostile environment was one reason NASA had joined Tektite program. Asked if NASA would consider bringing women into astronaut program, Sprince said, “We’ve got to start looking in that direction.” (AP, B Sun, 7/28/70, A3)
Appointment of Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman as Senior Vice President-Operations Group was announced by Eastern Airlines Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Floyd D. Hall. (EA Release)
Apollo 12 astronauts arrived in Djakarta, Indonesia, during world tour. They were welcomed by several thousand persons. (AP, W Post, 3/19/70)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., Apollo 13 commander, received insignia of Chevalier of French Legion of Honor from French Ambassador Charles Lucet during ceremonies at French Embassy in Washington, D.C. (CR, 7/31/70, S12536-7; Dixon, W Star, 7/30/70, Cl)
Astronaut Donn F. Eisele would leave msc in mid-June to become Technical Assistant (Manned Flight) in LaRC’s Space Systems Research Div., NASA announced. Eisele had been astronaut since October 1963 and was CM pilot on Apollo 7 mission Oct. 16-22, 1968. i(NASA Release 70-81)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman would leave active duty with NASA
X-15 rocket research aircraft, holder of 7274-km per hr (4520-mph) speed record for manned aircraft, went on display at Alabama Space and Rocket Center near msfc. Once piloted by Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and one of three manufactured for NASA, the 22 700-kg (50 000-lb) $50-million X-15 was on loan from Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. Second X-15 was on display at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. Third had been destroyed in 1967 crash. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 3/28/70)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., told press at ksc that Apollo 13 mission would be his last space flight. “There are a lot of people standing in line for flights. I’ve had more than my share. So I’ll step aside after this one.” Apollo 13 would be Lovell’s fourth space flight. (AP, W Star, 2/5/70, A2)	.
Interview on Apollo 13 cuisine with msc chief of food and nutrition Dr. Malcolm Smith, Jr., was published by New York Times. Increased use of spoons, use of bowls, and facilities for spreading sandwich fillings on slices of fresh bread would provide Apollo 13 astronauts more nearly normal eating procedures than on previous missions. Freeze-dried pork and scalloped potatoes would contain chunks rather than be of baby food consistency but meal would still be lukewarm. Wider variety of fresh bread had been baked for Apollo 13 mission, in lidded pans to provide uniform crust as insurance against loose crumbs which had been problem with former freeze-dried cracker sandwiches. Loaves were passed through 1900 K (3000°F) flame to destroy all mold-producing spores. Two slices of bread made from irradiated flour would be carried to test potential alternate method of preserving food without refrigeration. Apollo 13’s food was 70% freeze-dried, mainly because of space limitation; bread was treated with nitrogen gas to retard staling. Other “firsts” in foods to be carried were pecans to stimulate astronauts’ appetites, dehydrated orange crystals modified to prevent caking, and instant rice product to be reconstituted by hot tap water. Dr. Smith was already planning for 120-day Skylab missions, when hot food would be welcomed. Major obstacle was difficulty in heating food at zero g. He hoped to place test heating device aboard Apollo 14. (Hewitt, NYT, 4/8/70, 51)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew completed 12-nation Asiatic goodwill tour which began Dec. 26, 1969. On return to Washington, D.C., he was accompanied by Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and wife, who had joined tour at Bangkok, Thailand, Jan. 3. Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan and wife had accompanied Agnew party as far as Afghanistan and had returned to U.S. Jan. 9. During tour Vice President distributed chips from Apollo 11 moon rock to government representatives and passed out foreign flags that had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (Off of VP; Naughton, NYT, 1/13/70, C3)
Walker G. Bennett, newly appointed President of Augustana Hospital in Chicago, said at Chicago dinner that he hoped to reduce patient costs by 5% to 10% by equipment and techniques for space industry. Bennett was formally introduced by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, who later said sensors developed to monitor astronauts were being used to monitor patients at Augustana and other hospitals. (C Trib, 12/6/70)
Assistant Under Secretary of State for Public Affairs and former astronaut Michael Collins addressed meeting of Foreign Service Wives Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “By the year 2000 or 2100, people will look back on the 1970s and find it incredible that cancellation of the space program was proposed______It is inevitable there will be colonization of other planets, despite the risks.” Collins told group he hadn’t been sure oi success of first manned lunar landing until he and colleagues were safely enroute home; “that was the first time I felt any certainty about it. ’ (W Star, 4/28/70, B7)
Apollo 12 astronauts arrived in Luxembourg and met with Grand Duke during 40-day, 21-nation tour. (AP, W Star, 2/25/70, A5)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman appeared as host on ABC TV program “Mission Possible—They Care for a City.” Program outlined attempts to improve environment of San Francisco. (W Star, 3/17/ 70)
Christian Science Monitor editorial on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space discussions: “While not wishing to minimize the long road which still lies ahead before America and Russia have peacefully resolved all their major disagreements, we see the new space pact as an extraordinarily heartening development. It has created a new bond, a new mutual interest, a new feeling of joint participation. It is from the multiplication of such ties that international peace and friendship grow. And from such a vision of space togetherness there can come a stronger desire for greater brotherliness on earth.’’ (CSM, 10/31/ 70) During October: Scientists at Boeing Space Center in Kent, Wash., were studying piece of Surveyor III, 5 cm (2 in) long, returned from moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, to determine why original white paint had discolored, Boeing Co. said. White paint reflected intense solar rays in space and helped prevent heat buildup inside spacecraft. Boeing researchers thought paint degraded in space because of contaminating film from rocket exhaust, constant proton bombardment, or other radiation from sun. If discoloring came from contamination, paint could be restored to whiteness through oxygen plasma process. If paint had changed through radiation damage, Boeing could replenish depleted atoms. Results of study would enable Boeing to renew reflective paint of future spacecraft which might need to function for 10 to 20 yrs. (Boeing Release S-0788)
AP quoted Soviet geophysicist Sergey Timofeyev as saying Europe had entered period of colder summers and winters because moon was closer to earth than usual. Situation created “atmosphere tide” that disturbed normal movements of warm and cool air. (NYT, 5/20/ 70) Among 32 NASA officials and scientists attending meeting were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Armstrong received tumultuous welcome from predominantly Russian audience, AP reported. During question-and-answer period before his report, Armstrong said that when he viewed earth from moon, “I thought it was impossible that a little island like that in the sky could have so many problems on it.” He had found it “more pleasant on the moon than on earth as far as gravity is concerned.” In report on experiences on moon, Armstrong said, “Since the sky is black the impression is somewhat like being on a sandy athletic field at night that is very well illuminated with flood lights.” Further improvement in mobility of pressure garments would improve ability of astronauts to carry out lunar experiments. At later session when Armstrong attended as observer, guards had difficulty restraining cheers of audience, which included 800 Soviet delegates and 420 representatives of 30 countries. AP said it was “dramatic and unusual” tribute to foreign visitors in U.S.S.R. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL scientist, reported to COSPAR meeting on study and comparison of 60 Surveyor photos taken in April 1967 and 20 Apollo 12 photos that showed moon’s extreme stillness. Photos indicated only one small pebble had moved during 31 mos at Surveyor III site. Rate of meteoroid impact or surface movement was low in area of Ocean of Storms where Apollo 12 and Surveyor III had landed. Camera and several portions of Surveyor spacecraft had coating of One dust stirred from lunar surface as Apollo 12 LM descended nearby. Only other change observed in Surveyor was that its white paint had turned to tan, “partly due to deposition of material on the spacecraft.” nas-nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1969: “Popular interest in the space program, which reached a high point with the first successful lunar landing, has diminished somewhat. Furthermore, a reassessment of national priorities has resulted in reduced financial support for space research and technology during the past year, and the support will probably be even more limited this year and next. It is our intention, despite these limitations, to try to maintain a reasonably balanced program, with continuing effort in all areas of space research in which we are currently engaged and to support mutually advantageous international cooperation in space research wherever possible.” (Text) Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov told meeting U.S.S.R. would launch two French sret earth resources satellites as part of 1966 French-Soviet agreement on scientific cooperation. French Roseau (Radio Observation par Satellite Excentrique a Automatisme Unique) program, with multisatellite payload to be launched in 1971-1972, had been postponed because of budgetary restrictions and sret (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique) had been retained. Joint French-Soviet space program also included plans for emplacement of French laser reflector on lunar surface by Soviet Luna spacecraft; stero, launching of French experiments for measurement of solar radio emission; and arcade, study of solar energy particles with French and Soviet equipment on board Soviet spacecraft. (NASA Release 70-73; upi. NYT, 5/24/70; Reuters, NY News, 5/24/70; AP, NYT, 5/26/70, 31; Reuters, B Sun, 5/26/70; AP, W Star, 5/27/70, All; SBD, 5/27/70, 125; jpl, Release 554)
Apollo 13 astronauts, on European goodwill tour, arrived in Dublin for three-day visit that would include meeting with clergyman who had held all-night vigil for them during Apollo 13 mission abort. (Reuters, NYT, 10/14/70)
NASA released two black-and-white photos taken by Apollo 13 crew, showing damage to SM from oxygen tank explosion. Former Astronaut James A. McDivitt, Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, said primary information revealed by pictures was that entire 4- by PA-m (13- by 5Vi-ft) panel held by 250 bolts had been blown off and that fuel cells above tanks had remained intact. (Auerbach, WPost, 4/20/70, A1)
Boom ‘‘was busted” at Cape Kennedy, New York Times article said. Engineers and technicians ‘‘who helped put American astronauts on the moon” had moved away by thousands, leaving “a sagging economy and perhaps the best house buys in the United States.” Employment in Cape Kennedy area had dropped from 26 000 to 18 900, and was still falling. Business in Brevard County had dropped 15%; total bank deposits were down by $1.7 million from $241 million on Dec. 31, 1968; and unemployment rate had risen to almost 4%. Motel business was off estimated $400 000 per month, with half of county’s 1500 units vacant most of time. In December 1969 county had become eligible for Federal food commodities and 1327 families had qualified. Real estate was only business booming, with local residents buying homes sold by engineers at low prices and interest rates. (Waldron, NYT, 2/8/70,80)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, spoke during 10-day “Emphasis Space” program at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. on “very basic question” of why U.S. should be spending “all of this money out in space when we have so many problems here on earth.” He said answer was “indeed that human values have the highest priority. I would submit that the American space program is indeed a program that has tremendous human values. ... we in the space agency who are effecting technical change feel that history shows that the interaction between technical change and social change is extremely close. We believe that the activities that we are carrying out will have a tremendous impact on the way our children and our children’s children will live. We are in the business of creating new wealth and new power that can be used by all men.” Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said that lunar flights were “enhancing man’s knowledge of the environment in which he lives. .. .space has proven to date that it is something that man can use that is of benefit to man. . . . The question is do you want it used.” Space program was at point “where it is up to the people to decide through the government what uses we will put space to.” (Neb Wes Univ’s New Dimensions, 9/70; AP, San Diego Union, 5/3/70)
NASA announced appointment of Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Apollo 11 commander, as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, effective July 1. He would succeed Charles W. Harper. Harper had been appointed Special Assistant to the Director for Interagency Affairs at arc, nasa announced June 25. Armstrong had served as Naval aviator 1949-1952 and after 1955 as aeronautical research pilot for NACA and NASA. Flight testing included piloting X-15 and X-brocket aircraft, F-100, F-101, F-102, F-104, F-5D, and B-47. He became NASA astronaut in 1962, was command pilot for Gemini VIII mission’s first space docking of two vehicles March 16, 1966, and was first man to step onto moon July 20, 1969. Harper had left ARC in 1964 to become NASA Director of Aeronautical Research and had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics in 1967. He had first joined arc staff in 1941. (NASAReleases 70-72,70-105)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean were presented Distinguished Service Medals by Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations, in Pentagon ceremony. Conrad also received Navy Command Insignia for his role as Apollo 12 commander. Bean, for whom Apollo 12 was first space flight, received usn astronaut wings, (dod Release 97-70)
msc announced selection of Singer-General Precision, Inc., Link Div. to receive $4-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to design, develop, install, and support Skylab simulator for astronaut and ground crew training at msc. (msc Release 70-101)
America’s “sanguine attitude about manned space flight” had been shattered by Apollo IJ’s technical problems, Howard Simons said in Washington Post. “As the first words came that the three astronauts were in peril, earthbound fears began to race along with the moonbound craft. The astronauts seemed remarkably calm, most other persons desperate.” As tension heightened, “inevitable questions began to intrude on one’s innate fears. Would they get back? Could they get back?” It seemed certain situation would revive debate over rescue capability. “Mysterious ‘bang’ in space is bound to further slow an already slowed effort to stretch man’s reach beyond his immediate horizon.” (WPost, 4/14/70, Al)
F-5D “Skylancer” aircraft used by Apollo II Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in training was being retired by FRC and eventually would be turned over by NASA to Ohio Historical Society for display in future Armstrong Museum at Wapakoneta, FRC announced. Until completion of museum in Armstrong’s hometown, aircraft, which he flew in 1960s to practice spacecraft emergency maneuvers, would be displayed at usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. (FRC Release 7/70)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell tested Apollo lm in vacuum chamber at ksc in preparation for Apollo 14 lunar landing mission. Mission was scheduled for Dec. 3 pending evaluation of Apollo 13 Review Board Report. (UPi. NYT, 6/18/70,9) June /6-J7: Final critical-design review of manned lunar roving vehicle was held at MSFC to decide on final design configuration leading to hardware manufacture and testing. First of four flight-mode] lunar rovers was scheduled to fly aboard Apollo 16 lm, set for 1971 launch, (msfc Release 70-112; MSFC PAO) June /7:U.S.S,R. launched Cosmos CCCXLI^from Plesetsk into orbit with 350-km (217.5-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 64.4° inclination. Satellite reentered June 25. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; SBD, 6/18/70,224)
Awards ceremony to observe successful completion of more than four years of Saturn V launch vehicle test firings was held at mtf. mtf employees, contractors, and groups of Government workers received special plaques and awards. Guests included local, state government, and NASA officials. Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., presented flag flown around moon on board Apollo 10 to mtf employees to express Apollo astronauts’ gratitude, as facility marked last day of space operations, (msfc Release 70-229)
President Nixon sent message to Ambassador Gerard C. Smith, chief of U.S. delegation to U.S.-U.S.S.R. strategic arms limitations talks (salt) in Vienna: “I express. . .the hope that an agreement can be reached on the limitation and eventual reduction of strategic arsenals with proper recognition of the legitimate security interests of the United States and the Soviet Union and of third countries.” (PD, 4/20/70, 531) April 17:	President Nixon issued statement following safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts: “From the beginning, man’s ventures into space have been accompanied by danger. Apollo 13 reminds us how real those dangers are. . .of the special qualities of the men who dare to brave the perils of space. It testifies, also, to the extraordinary concert of skills, in space and on the ground, that goes into a moon mission. To the astronauts, a relieved Nation says ‘Welcome home.’ To them and to those on the ground who did so magnificent a job of guiding Apollo 13 safely back from the edge of eternity, a grateful Nation says ‘Well done.’ ” In proclamation designating April 19 as national day of prayer and thanksgiving for safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts, President said: “The imperiled flight and safe return of the crew of Apollo 13 were events that humbled and inspired people all over the world. We were humbled by the knowledge that in this stage of man’s exploration of space, a safe splashdown of an imperiled mission is in its way as successful as a landing on and safe return from the Moon. We were inspired by the courage of the crew, the devotion and skill of the members of the NASA team on the ground and by the offers of assistance from nations around the world.” President spoke with Apollo 13 astronauts by telephone from White House to U.S.S. Iwo Jima in Pacific. He told them he would like to present them the Presidential Medal of Freedom in Hawaii on following day. President then announced intentions at White House press briefing. He would go “first to Houston, where we will pick up the two wives, and then go on to Hawaii. .. .what these men have done has been a great inspiration to all of us. I think also what the men on the ground have done is an inspiration to us. How men react in adversity determines their true greatness, and these men have demonstrated that the American character is sound and strong and capable of taking a very difficult situation and turning it into a very successful venture. .. in recognition, also, of the men on the ground, I am going to present the Medal of Freedom tomorrow in Houston. . . to the Apollo 13 crew on the ground who have made these very difficult decisions on the spot, decisions that had to be right.” (PD, 4/20/70, 538-40; Text)
SoyuzIXCosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov arrived in Los Angeles with Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to tour Cal Tech and visit Disneyland. They would leave for San Francisco Oct. 26, after touring arc. (LA Times, 10/25/70; ARC Astro-gram, 10/22/70,1)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said in Memphis, Tenn., that U.S. could probably explore Mars or other planets in 13 to 15 yrs but “it will be terribly expensive.” Following speech at annual Navy League convention, he told press: “I don’t believe we will ever see one nation do it. I look for a multiple-nation group..,. Some have as good or better technology and such a combination would not impose abnormal costs on any one.” (AP, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/22/70)
Edward H. White II Memorial Museum was dedicated at Hangar 9 of Brooks AFB, Tex., in honor of Astronaut White, who died in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire. Museum, near White’s home town of San Antonio, Tex., would be devoted largely to aerospace medicine. In dedication address, l/g John W. O’Neill, afsc Vice Commander, said: “Space is our new world, a final frontier. ... it is also a medium through which attack is possible, which means that we must learn everything we can about it for the defense and security of the nation.” Space science and technology had spawned “new generations of materials, systems and processes, for both military and consumer goods.” Of 12 000 new products and techniques developed during last decade, “very large percentage derives directly from space and missile development.” Most “satisfying and gratifying” space spinoffs were in health and medical field—“new type of wheel chair adapted from the moon walker. . .or chemicals used in the treatment of tuberculosis and mental illness that were originally derived from missile fuels. Or spray-on instrumentation for remotely monitoring the condition of heart patients. Or the numerous new materials and techniques being applied to. . .health care.” (Text)
Apollo //lunar landing had been voted biggest news story of 1969 in poll of Associated Press member newspapers and radio and TV stations, AP announced. Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Apollo 11 commander, had been voted top newsmaker of year. AP poll ranked Vietnam war second biggest story and “story of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy’s political fortunes” third. (Rock, AP, W Star, 1/1/70, A3)
NASA was reviewing policy of allowing astronauts to sell publications exclusive personal stories, John N. Wilford said in New York Times. Review had been initiated because current contract with Life magazine would expire July 24. Though magazine denied it had made decision to renew or to drop contract, astronauts’ attorney had said he would entertain contract discussion with other publications. NASA committee, which included three astronauts, was expected to announce policy decision within few weeks. While details of Life contract had not been made public, Wilford said it was understood magazine had paid astronauuts $200 000 a year and provided $100 000 worth of life insurance. (NYT, 3/4/70, C13)
Few people “really seem to care” that $375-million Apollo 13 mission “may never get off the ground tomorrow” because astronauts had been exposed to measles, Wall Street Journal said. Mission was inspiring “little excitement at ksc or elsewhere across the land.” Perhaps 100 000 tourists were on hand for event, “but that’s a small crowd compared with the million or so that came here for the first moon shot. . . .” There would be 700 newsmen, “far below the 2000 who covered the first shot.” (Tanner, WSJ, 4/10/70)
Many Turkish peasants were convinced that flu that had been ravaging Turkey came from germs brought to earth by Apollo astronauts, San Francisco Chronicle said. Peasants thought astronauts had been imprisoned in room for bringing microbes back from the moon and that wind had carried microbes from space capsule to Europe and Turkey. Charges were appearing in Turkish press. (Arnow, SF Chron, 1/20/70)
Max Lerner described reactions to Apollo 13 accident in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “What was I doing, glued to the TV screen like a zombie with the blood drained out me .. .? What was wrong with me—and with millions of others? ... we had all played the game of apathy up to that moment. . . confident that Apollo 13 was just one more sure-thing deployment of what man already proved he can do. The flight reports had to compete for newspaper space and, in some newspapers, were slipping into the inside pages.” After news of oxygen tank explosion “astronauts were no longer either three invincible heroes or three stooges for ‘the Establishment,’ but simply three human beings caught in space a quarter-million miles from home .... Through the plight of our proxies ... we caught a glimpse of how perilous man’s whole enterprise is, how tragic, in fact, his whole existence is in this shaky cosmos that runs by laws until you hit the unexplainable.” Apollo 13 was “a tiny, mobile version of the earth, with a power failure and the shortage of water and a danger of polluted air and the erratic fortunes of communicating and the image of three men having to read their instruments with a flashlight in the darkness of the cabin.” (P Bull, 4/20/70)
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., received award of excellence from Governor’s Committee of 100 000 Pennsylvanians at ceremonies in Pittsburgh. Conrad, cited for excellence in science and technology, was born in Philadelphia. Ceremony climaxed day during which Conrad and Apollo 12 Astronauts Alan L. Bean ana Richard F. Gordon, Jr., toured Pennsylvania. (P Bull, 1/19/70, 1/20/ 70)
Researchers at Ohio State Univ. headed by physiologist Dr. Harold S. Weiss had received grants totaling $452 975 to study artificial atmospheres inside space vehicles, upi reported. They were trying to eliminate undesirable side effects on astronauts from breathing pure oxygen. (NYT, 4/16/70, 30)
Science article commented oh suggestions of President’s Science Advisory Committee panel that NASA devote more time to biomedical research: “There appear to be practical limits other than the budgetary ones on the expansion of basic studies in the manned space program. It will be a long time before astronauts on missions operate in conditions anything like those of the laboratory.” msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, and his staff “have been responsible for establishing medical protocols for the missions, in a way that balances the need for biomedical data with operational demands and the willingness and ability of the astronauts to cooperate. Some medical procedures are tedious, unpleasant, and even humiliating, and when the work load on astronauts is heavy, data gathering has to be limited. For this reason in part, then, tension between biomedical insiders and outsiders is likely to continue. At the same time the interests of the two groups are nearer to converging than ever before.” (Walsh, Science, 3/13/70, 1469-71)
aiaa announced selection of 29 new fellows who would be honored at annual meeting in Houston Oct. 19-22. Fellows included Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, cited for Apollo 11 mission; m/g Lee V. Gos-sick, usaf Aeronautical Systems Div. Commander, for military-aeronautical leadership; and I. Irving Pinkel, LeRC, for design and implementation of aircraft safety systems, (aiaa Release)
nas released Infectious Disease in Manned Spaceflight: Probabilities and Countermeasures. Report of nas-nrc Space Science Board recommended biological precautions taken after lunar flights be taken before flights as well. Preflight quarantine period should be instituted to permit acute disease to express itself, prevent contact and infection of astronauts by general population, and permit crosscontact of flora and exchange of microorganisms among spacecraft crew. During last two weeks before launch, astronauts’ contacts should be limited to essential technical crew held under same isolation regulations.	. Report called for extensive and periodic screening of astronauts by immunological tests and “microbiological surveillance” of astronauts’ families and close associates before and after missions. Astronauts with even minor respiratory infections should be barred from mission because they might “result in greatly accelerated clinical responses under space-cabin conditions if transmitted to other astronauts.” (Text)
White House announced that President Nixon had asked Apollo 13 astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr., to visit Iceland, Switzerland, Greece, Malta, and Ireland as his personal representatives. Mission would include visit to 21st International Astronautical Congress in Constance, Germany, where astronauts would address session in October. They would be accompanied on tour by Mrs. Lovell and Mrs. Haise; Swigert was bachelor. Group would depart Oct. 1 and return Oct. 15. (PD, 9/28/ 70,1258)
Apollo 13 astronauts and families were greeted by crowd of 5000 at Ellington afb on return to Houston from Hawaii. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., said: “Jack and Fred and I are very proud and glad to be back in Texas because there were times when we weren’t sure we would make it back here. We would not have been here today if it were not for the people on the ground. The people in Mission Control guided us all the way, day and night.” (Pasadena Star-News. 4/ 20/70; Lannan, W Star, 4/20/70, Al)
Senate received President Nixon’s nomination of Col. James A. McDivitt (usaf), Apollo 9 astronaut and Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager at msc, to be brigadier general. (CR, 12/14/70, S20137)
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., on behalf of Apollo 12 crew, received special Emmy Award from National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences in New York for TV photography during Apollo 12 lunar landing. (AP, W Star, 6/8/70, B9) Reusability requirement might be most difficult of all. “One can speculate that if we can do it in aircraft engines, why not rocket engines? But we are talking about heat fluxes and turbomachinery characteristics in the shuttle engine that extend well beyond those experienced in the engines of the [Boeing] 707, 747, or even the military high performance aircraft. It is yet to be shown if we can fly 100 missions (or even 10 or 20) with this high performance engine, and achieve the confidence and maintainability which the airline operations have in hand. .. .reusability adds a new dimension to rocket engine development.” (Text) Prof. Yu. K. Khodarev, Deputy Director of Institute for Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Valery Yevdokimov, head of Academy’s data processing dept., called for studies of what U.S. and U.S.S.R. could do to establish and operate scientific base on moon. Prof. Khodarev said: “We would like to see concrete lists from American scientists of instruments that we could place on the moon for research. Then we can explore further avenues for cooperation in space. We can’t decide how to transport things there until we first decide what we want to take.” There was general acceptance of U.S.S.R. space efforts among Soviet people “but people are looking for a direct payoff—they want something for their money.” Khodarev said U.S. and U.S.S.R. could “cooperate in a Martian program as well as in intense investigations on the moon.” He suggested area for primary investigation from lunar station would have to be decided. “Do we want to look at the moon, or do we want to look into the cosmos from the surface?” During panel discussion Robert L. Lohman of NASA’s Space Station Task Force invited Prof. Khodarev to attend NASA meeting on advanced space programs at ARC later in year. Dr. Takao Ueda of Japan said Japan was working on comsats, TV satellites, and geosynchronous weather spacecraft. (AAS Paper No. 70-044; Bane, LA Her-Exam, 6/11/70; NASA Sci and Tech Info Div)
Washington Post editorial commented on launch of Project Tektite II: “As the astronauts get ready to soar to the heights, it is worth mentioning that a group of aquanauts have sunk to the bottoms—in this case, the crew of Tektite II.... The drama of undersea exploration is considerably less than probes into outer space; but, in many ways, the world on the floor of the sea is more mysterious, more demanding—and potentially richer in what it offers mankind—than anything on the craterscape of the moon.” (WPost, 4/10/70, A18) April 11-17: NASA’s Apollo 13 (AS-508)—carrying three-man crew, LM-7 Aquarius and CSM-I090dyssey—was launched on lunar landing mission, but 56 hrs into flight toward moon mission was aborted because of SM oxygen tank rupture. In most serious inflight situation experienced in manned space program, crew foljowed lm “lifeboat” emergency plan, transferring to lm and using its systems and supplies to swing around moon and back to earth on fastest feasible course. Emergency procedures were used to make electrical power, water, and oxygen last to end of journey. Crew returned to CM and jettisoned lm before reentry and splashed down safely in Pacific April 17. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 185.5-km (115.3-mi) apogee and 181.5-km (112.8-mi) perigee. During 2nd-stage boost S-II center engine cut off 132 secs early and remaining four engines burned 34 secs longer than predicted. Space vehicle velocity after boost was 68 m per sec (223 fps) lower than planned, causing S-IVB orbital insertion burn to be 9 secs longer than predicted, but sufficient propellants remained for translunar insertion. Onboard TV was initiated at 1:35 GET for 5 1/2 min. Second S-IVB burn, on schedule at 2:41 get, injected spacecraft on translunar trajectory. csm separated from S-IVB and lm Aquarius. Onboard TV initiated after separation for 72 min clearly showed csm “hard-docking” with lm, ejection of csm/lm from S-IVB/IU at 4:01 get, S-IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) evasive maneuver, and spacecraft exterior and interior. First S-IVB APS burn, lasting 217 secs beginning at 6:00 GET, aimed stage for lunar target point so accurately that second burn was not required. S-IVB/IU hit lunar surface at 77:57 GET (8:10 pm est April 14) at 259 m per sec (8465 fps) and energy equivalent to 11.5 tons of tnt at 2.4° south latitude and 27.9° west longitude— 137.1 km (85.2 mi) from Apollo 12 seismometer that detected impact. Seismic signal for S-IVB/IU was similar to signal from Apollo 12 lm Intrepid that had impacted moon Nov. 20, 1969, but was 20-30 times larger and lasted 3 hrs 20 mins—four times longer. Signal was so large that ground command had to reduce seismometer gain to keep recording on scale. Suprathermal ion detector experiment (side) deployed by Apollo 12 crew recorded jump in the number of ion counts after S-IVB/IU impact. Instrument, in lunar shadow, recorded no ions at time of impact; count increased from few ions 22 secs after impact to 250 and up to 2500 before decreasing to few ions and back to none. Scientists speculated ionization had been produced by 6300 K to 10 300 K (6000°C to 10 000°C) temperatures generated by impact or that particles that reached up to 60 km (37 mi) had been ionized by sunlight. Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse correction No. 1 (MCC-1) was not necessary. MCC-2, for 3.4 secs at 30:14 get, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 114.9 km (71.4 mi). MCC-3 was not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 49 min, beginning at 30:03 GET, including dumping waste water from spacecraft fuel cells with moon visible in background. While joking with Mission Control, Swigert suddenly remembered that he had failed to file his Federal income tax return, but was assured that he could be granted an extension. “Hey, we’ve got a problem here,” Swigert told ground controllers. “This is Houston, say again please.” “Houston, we’ve had a problem,” Lovell replied. And Haise reported “a pretty large bang associated with the caution and warning. A few minutes later crew reported spacecraft was venting something—later determined to be oxygen—out into space. Astronauts could see blizzard of particles flying out of sm, presumably from ruptured tank. Despite desperate efforts improvised on board and suggested by Mission Control, nothing seemed to halt drop in oxygen pressure. Spacecraft dipped repeatedly, apparently because of venting gas. By 57:24 get, Mission Control reported tank No. 2 pressure was “slowly going to zero and we’re starting to think about the lm lifeboat.” Swigert replied, “Yes, that’s something we’re thinking about, too. We’ve been talking it over. ...” Decision was made to abort mission. Astronauts hurriedly had to salvage enough oxygen to supply CM during reentry and keep gyros operating until lm navigation equipment could be powered up. With only minutes of power remaining, crew fed oxygen into reserve tank and hooked up emergency batteries to csm navigation gyros until lm was powered up. Crew activated lm, powered down csm, and used lm systems for power and life support. Astronauts remained calm as they wrestled with procedures to stabilize spacecraft and stretch consumables. All information on April l !-17: Officials conferred at the flight directors' consote in the MSC Mission Operations Control Room as Apollo 13 astronauts attempted to bring (heir crippled spacecraft safely back to earth. Dr. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, leans an elbow on the console at far left. Circling to the right in front of him are Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager fames A. McDivitl; Deputy Director of Flight Operations Howard W. Tindall, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director at NASA Headquarters; and Dr, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations. Apollo Mission Director Chester M, Tee stands in front of Dr. Kraft. Sealed at the console (center, left to right) are Flight Directors Gera id D. Griffin and Glynn S. Lunney. Behind the console (left to right) are Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin and Vance D. Brand. Flight Dynamics Officer Philip C. Shaffer, Retro Officer fohn S. Llewellyn, Flight Dynamics Officer Charles F. Dreferich, and Lawrence S. Can/u, guidance navigation and control engineer at MSC. mission—including details of accident and emergency procedures— were made public immediately as data were received, Public’s apparent boredom at beginning of mission was transformed into deep concern for astronauts’ safety. Messages and offers of aid were sent to U.S, from world leaders and prayers were offered by religious leaders on every continent. MCC-4 was conducted with lm’s descent propulsion system (dps) at 61:30 GET, placing Apolio 13 on free-return trajectory around moon on which CM Otfyssey would splash down in Indian Ocean at 152:00 GET. Both lm guidance systems were powered up and primary system used for 263.4-sec dps burn at 79:28 get as spacecraft swung out from behind moon, two hours after closest approach. Bum produced 262-m-per-sec (860 fps) differential velocity, shortened predicted return time to 143:53 GET, and moved predicted landing point to mid-Pacific. After maneuver, passive thermal control was established and lm was powered down to conserve consumables. “Aquarius has really been quite a winner,” Haise said to Mission Control about three hours later. “When this flight’s all over we’li really be able to figure out what a LM can do.” During remainder of transearth coast crew continued emergency procedures to deal with shortage of water to cool LM electronic systems, decreasing temperatures in both cabins, and buildup of carbon dioxide in lm. Fearing that CM instruments needed for reentry might freeze, crew kept spacecraft in passive thermal control—“barbecue mode” of rotation to let sun uniformly heat all sides, Astronauts met cooling water shortage by filling every plastic bag they could with water from CM and carrying it to lm. Shortage of air-cleaning lithium hydroxide in LM was met by rigging combination of cm and lm cartridges; following instructions worked out on ground, crew built adapter and ran lunar spacesuit air hoses from LM fans through tunnel to connect to cm air-scrubbing canisters. Transmission of health data was eliminated and communications held to minimum to conserve electricity. Crew tried to keep warm by wearing boots carried for walking on moon, sleeping in narrow tunnel between LM and CSM that seemed warmer, and wearing extra clothing. Apr// 75-/7; MCC-5 at 105:19 get, by 15-sec LM DPS burn, decreased velocity by 2.3 m per sec (7.5 fps) and raised entry-flight-path angle to -6.52°. Crew partially powered up csm to check thermal conditions. Because of unusual spacecraft configuration (with LM still attached) and LM’s inability to survive reentry heat, officials on ground developed new reentry procedures and verified them in ground-based simulations. A 30-man team at MIT’s Charles S. Draper Laboratory worked throughout night studying stressed Apollo 13 guidance system and working out new trajectories. Simulations and programming of emergency problems were conducted by NR engineers in Downey, Calif., by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., in LM at KSC, and by Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and David R. Scott at msc, so that almost every move Apollo 13 crew made had first been proved out on ground. MCC-7 was successfully accomplished at 137:40 get with 22.4-sec LM RCSburn, resulting in predicted -6.49° entry-flight-path angle. Crew viewed and photographed SM when it was jettisoned at 138:02 get, reporting that one entire panel was missing near S-band high-gain antenna and that great deal of debris was hanging out. CM was powered up and lm was jettisoned at 141:30 get. SNAP-27 nuclear generator carrying 3.9 kg (8.6 lbs) of radioactive plutonium fell from lm into Pacific northeast of New Zealand. “Farewell, Aquarius, and we thank you,” Mission Control responded to spacecraft’s report “lm jettison.” “She sure was a good ship,” Swigert added later. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Odyssey splashed down in mid-Pacific southeast of American Samoa at 142:54 get (1:07 pm est April 17), 6.4 km (4 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Iwo Jima. Astronauts—exhausted but in good health—were picked up by recovery helicopter and were safely aboard recovery ship less than one hour after splashdown. Primary Apollo 13 mission objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected Fra Mauro area; deploy and activate ALSEP; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were not achieved. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced April 17 that Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, would be established to determine cause of accident. Apollo 13 flight crew performance was outstanding throughout mission; calm, precise reaction to emergency and diligence in configuring and maintaining lm was noteworthy. Despite lack of adequate sleep and low temperature in spacecraft, neither performance nor spirits faltered. Similarly, performance of flight operations team was outstanding in planning and aiding crew to safe return. Apollo 13 was 10th Apollo mission and third manned lunar landing attempt. Accident was first inflight failure in 22 manned flights in U.S. space program. Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) and Apollo 11
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell completed testing of Apollo 14 lm in vacuum chamber at KSC, in preparation for launch to moon Jan. 31, 1971. (W Post, 9/19/70, A7; SBD, 9/21/70, 85)
msc had accepted delivery of three of eight new supersonic Northrop T-38 trainers for astronauts, purchased at $800 000 each, Washington Post reported. Two-engine aircraft would replace 10 Lockheed subsonic, single-engine T-33s in NASA service for past 10 yrs. (O’Toole, WPost, 10/29/70)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird discussed “basic asymmetry” between U.S. and U.S.S.R. efforts in nuclear weapons field at AP annual luncheon in New York: From 1965 to 1967 U.S.S.R. had more than tripled its inventory of strategic offensive nuclear weapon launchers—from 500 to 1700, including 200 heavy bombers—and quadrupled total megatonnage in its strategic offensive force. U.S. in same period had not increased established level of 1710 strategic nuclear missile launchers, had reduced heavy bomber strength of 780 by over 200, and had reduced megatonnage by more than 40%. “Except for the minimum ‘hedge’ that safeguard will provide, we have not responded to the Soviet strategic offensive buildup with new deployment programs. We did not respond in past years because the United States deliberately chose to assume that the Soviet buildup was aimed at achieving a deterrent posture comparable to that of the United States. We have not responded this year because. . .we fervently hope that salt can render such a response unnecessary.” (Text) Cal Tech physicist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg said detailed studies of Apollo 12 moon rocks had shown preliminary estimates of their age to be off by some 800 million yrs. Evidence from Apollo 11 and 12 lunar sample studies indicated moon—and possibly earth and some major planets—had at least one period of sustained turbulence, lasting about 300 million yrs and beginning some billion years after moon and rest of solar system originated. Solar system was estimated to be 4.6 billion yrs old. At news conference following meeting, Dr. Wasserburg said he uid collaborator, Cal Tech physicist Dr. D. A. Papanastassiou, had found age of lava-born Apollo 12 rocks to be 3.4billion yrs, rather than preliminary estimate of 2.6 billion yrs. Apollo 11 rocks were found to be 3.65 billion yrs old. Evidence indicated both areas of moon had been formed from same sustained process lasting some 300 million yrs. There was “widespread outpouring” of lava over sea regions of moon about 3.5 billion yrs ago. Evidence suggested Sea of Storms, where Apollo 12 rocks were found, had almost same age as Sea of Tranquility, Apollo 11 lunar site. (AP, LA Times, 4/23/70) Dr. Rhodes W. Fairbridge, Columbia Univ. geologist, reported finding territory which was earth’s south polar region in Upper Ordovician period, about 450 million yrs ago, in middle of Sahara desert. Finding supported belief that phenomenon of sliding land masses known as continental drift had occurred. (Blakeslee, NYT, 4/21/ 70, 1) At closing session scientists, with exception of ESSA’s Dr. S. Fred Singer, maintained earth and moon had simultaneous and similar origin despite differences between lunar rocks and those of earth. Dr. Singer agreed moon had most likely been captured in earth’s gravitational field “very shortly” after earth’s formation about 4.6 billion yrs. ago. Dr. John A. O’Keefe of GSFC thought earth and moon were once single planet that broke apart. Dr. A. G. W. Cameron of Yeshiva Univ. felt earth and moon had formed in same gaseous cloud, (upi, NYT, 4/27/70) April21: Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr., described their initial reaction to Apollo 13 accident to press at msc. Lovell explained: “Fred was still in the lunar module, Jack was back in the command module in the left-hand seat, and I was halfway in between the lower equipment bay.. .when all three of us heard a rather large bang, just one bang. Now, before that, Fred. . .had actuated a valve which nominally gives us the same sound. . .so when this bang came we really didn’t get concerned right away, but I looked up at Fred and Fred had that expression like it wasn’t his fault, and we suddenly realized that something else had occurred, but exactly what we didn’t know.” Swigert said he had felt vibration accompanying bang and then noticed master alarm and main bus B undervolt light. “I transmitted to Houston that we had a problem and proceeded to. . .look at the voltage. . .[which] at that time was completely normal. . ..” Swigert thought bang had occurred in LM and Haise, in lm, thought it had occurred in cm. Lovell said his first impression was “that we had had an electrical problem that caused this bang.... That quickly went away and then I looked out the window and saw this venting and my concern was increasing all the time. It went from I wonder what this is going to do to the landing to I wonder if we can get back home again. It was apparent.. .that the only way to survive the situation was to transfer to the lm. ...” Lovell said decision on date, crew, and destination of Apollo 14 would be made after debriefings and investigation by Apollo 13 Review Board. If NASA “wants this crew to go back to Fra Mauro, we’ll be glad to go. If they decide to send another crew or not to go to Fra Mauro, that’s their decision.” (Transcript)
Apollo 13 editorials: Washington Post: “The footprints are still imperishably graven on the lunar dust and the flag still flies on the surface of the moon, but it all seems more distant, unreal and unattainable now. The loud bang that rocked Apollo 13 and echoed back to us from outer space last week did more than challenge our comfortable assumptions about manned space flight. It reminded us how much we have taken for granted, how much has been achieved and how far man has yet to go.” (WPost, 4/19/70, Bl) Washington Sunday Star: “. . .men, the world over, instinctively recognize the metaphysical importance of the reach into space. Lovell, Haise, and Swigert were not just three Americans on a dangerous mission. They, and those who will follow, are ambassadors of life to new, unknown regions. The success of these first halting steps into space has brought a new vision to a slightly weary world and given mankind a new pride in its humanity. It is a gift without price. It is an offering that must not be withdrawn because of a momentary setback and a dramatic demonstration of the dangers that have always been present.” (W Star, 4/19/70) Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin: “Of all the machines man has made to plumb the depths of space, surely none has served him better or more faithfully in desperate circumstances [than the LM]. So Aquarius and the men who designed and manufactured her earned the plaque in Smithsonian, just as the astronauts and the Apollo 13 ground crew earned the Freedom Medals President Nixon has awarded them.” (P Bull, 4/19/70)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were debriefed on Apollo 13 mission at msc, tape-recording details for almost eight hours. NASA released 6Vi-min 15-mm movie of mission, including scenes of astronauts after SM explosion. Film showed Lovell rubbing his hands vigorously as if trying to warm them, Haise sleeping with his hands folded inside his spacesuit to keep them from floating free in weightlessness, and Swigert studying flight plan. (AP, WPost, 4/21/ 70, A4)
Aviatrix Ruth Law Oliver, exhibition flyer who set speed record in 1916 by flying Curtiss biplane 1094 km (680 mi) from Chicago to Binghamton, N.Y., in 6 hrs 7 min, died at age 85. Mrs. Oliver had been co-owner of Ruth Law’s Flying Circus and had become known for being first woman to loop-the-loop and fly at night and for piloting aircraft over Washington, D.C., in 1917 as part df Liberty Loan campaign during World War I. (Hoffman, W Post, 12/4/70, B18) December 1-2:	Principal investigators of candidate experiments for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) met with NASA officials and study contractors at msfc. Meetings were part of preliminary design and definition study phase of program to prepare scientific carrier for astronomy experiments that would study universe from earth orbit after 1974 launch, (msfc Release 70-248) December 1-3:	Third annual Earth Resources Survey Program Review was held at msc. A.M. Woll of Bureau of Indian Affairs said Indians looked to NASA for help in management of their natural resources. He described project in which geologists had located possible water or mineral source by examining feature 6.4 km (4 mi) in diameter on photo taken by Apollo 9 astronauts to assist Indians at San Carlos Reservation in eastern Arizona to plan water and mineral resources. Photo had shown strange circular formation. Indians also hoped to locate minerals from photos taken from NASA aircraft. nrl scientist N.W. Guinard described use of radar to detect and map oil spills. Tests could be accurate in seas experiencing high winds in which photos would not show oil traces. Radar also was more effective than photography at higher altitudes and could be used in all weather. During meeting LaRC scientists proposed that Army Corps of Engineers, Federal Water Quality Administration, and NASA combine forces in technological assault on pollution in James River in Virginia. Wallops officials described plans for regional workshop in March with Smithsonian Institution and states of Maryland and Virginia to discuss need for regionalized environmental information system. (H Chron, 12/3/70; H Post, 12/4/70; Lannan, W Star, 12/20/70, 2; MSC PAO) December 2:	U.S.SR. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCCLXXXI, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 1013-km (629.5-mi) apogee, 967-km (600.9-mi) perigee, 104.8-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos CCCLXXXII, launched from Baykonur, entered orbit with 5040-km (3132-mi) apogee, 320-km (199-mi) perigee, 143-min period, and 51.5° inclination. By Dec. 7 spacecraft had changed orbit to 5072-km (3152-mi) apogee, 1615-km (1004-mi) perigee, 158.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Orbit changed again Dec. 8. By Dec. 31 it had stabilized at 5071-km (3151-mi) apogee, 2584-km (1605.6-mi) perigee, 171-min period, and 55.8° inclination. (Space-warn, 12/15/70; SF, 6/71,213-4; GSFC SSR, 12/31/70; SBD, 12/17/70, 190-1; 12/18/70,203)
President Nixon appointed Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman his Special Representative on Prisoners of War. Borman would immediately undertake special mission to seek help of third parties in countries around world in “securing the humane treatment and earliest possible release of all Americans held by the enemy forces in Southeast Asia.” Borman would be on leave of absence from his executive position with Eastern Air Lines. (PD, 8/10/70, 1031)
Tass announced Soviet efforts to aid recovery of Apollo 13 astronauts: fishing trauler Chumikan and two cargo ships were being sent to recovery area, several whaling ships in South Pacific were being diverted to Samoa, and Soviet ships throughout world had been alerted. President Nixon sent message to Soviet Premier Aleksey Kosygin expressing “deep gratitude” and said, “I will let you know fast if we need your government’s help.” Later, New York Times quoted “informed sources” as saying Chumikan was missile instrumentation ship which had already been deployed in area to gather data on Apollo 13 mission with electronic sensing devices. Times said 13 countries had offered to make ships available for recovery, at least six said they would permit U.S. aircraft to fly over their territory during recovery operations, and more than 70 countries had responded to U.S. request not to use radio frequencies used by recovery forces to avoid possible conflicts on airways. (Lindsey, NYT, 4/18/70,12)
President Nixon presented Presidential Medal of Freedom to Apollo Mission Operations team at MSC. Citation read: “We often speak of scientific ‘miracles’—forgetting.. .that these are the product of hard work, long hours and disciplined intelligence. The men and women of the Apollo mission operations team performed such a miracle, transforming potential tragedy into one of the most dramatic rescues of all time. Years of intense preparation made this rescue possible. The skill, coordination and performance under pressure of the mission operations team made it happen. Three brave astronauts are alive and on Earth because of their dedication, and because at the critical moments the people of that team were wise enough and selffiossessed enough to make the right decisions. This extraordinary eat is a tribute to man’s ingenuity, to his resourcefulness and to his courage.” Award was accepted by Sigurd A. Sjoberg, Director of Flight Operations, on behalf of himself, Glynn S. Lunney, Milton L. Windier, Gerald D. Griffin, and Eugene F. Kranz. Following award cereriiony President and Mrs. Nixon left Houston for Honolulu with Apollo 13 astronauts’ wives, Mrs. James A. Lovell, Jr., Mrs. Fred W. Haise, Jr., and parents of bachelor astronaut, John L. Swigert, Jr. In Honolulu, President Nixon presented Presidential Medal of Freedom to Apollo 13 astronauts. He said in part: “we have received over 100 messages from foreign governments—from the Soviet Union, from Poland, other countries behind the Iron Curtain, from countries in the free world. This is truly a welcome from all the people of the world to three very brave men.” Citation on each medal read: “Adversity brings out the character of a man. Confronted suddenly and unexpectedly with grave peril in the far reaches of space, he demonstrated a calm courage and quiet heroism that stand as an example to men everywhere. His safe return is a triumph of the human spirit—of those special qualities of man himself we rely on when machines fail, and that we rely on also for those things that machines cannot do. “From the start, the exploration of space has been hazardous adventure. The voyage of Apollo 13 dramatized its risks. The men of Apollo 13, by their poise and skill under the most intense kind of pressure, epitomized the character that accepts danger and surmounts it. Theirs is the spirit that built America. With gratitude and admiration, America salutes their spirit and their achievement.” (PD, 4/27/70,548-50)
Modularized equipment transport system (mets) to be used by lunar explorers starting with October 1971 Apollo 14 mission was described by MSC Chief of Crew Systems Div. Robert E. Smylie in interview at aiaa’s annual Aerospace Sciences meeting in New York. Two-wheel, rickshaw-like cart would double walking range on moon and increase sample collection. Other plans to improve astronauts’ mobility included more flexible spacesuits, modified lm that could stay more than two days on moon, and improved backpack to allow astronauts to work outside spacecraft for more than six hours at a time. Cart, 7.6 cm (30 in) high, weighing 9 kg (20 lbs), had been designed with attachments for cameras, tools, and scientific equipment. It would be carried to moon folded in compartment outside LM. (Wilford, NYT, 1/20/70,46)
Buddy secondary life support system (bslss) to be carried by Apollo 14 astronauts during surface EVA was described by MSC Roundup. If water cooling system in one of backpacks failed, astronauts could retrieve bslss from met cart and attach the 21/£-m (814-ft) hoses to their portable life support systems (plss). Tether snapped to waist restraint straps of astronauts’ spacesuits would prevent damage to hoses or spacesuits during return to lm. By sharing water supply between two crewmen, BLSS stretched time that emergency oxygen would last from 30 min to 60 min. (msc Roundup, 12/4/70,1; NASA Release, 12/13/70)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
With Apollo 13 proceeding “in almost textbook fashion,” newsmen at MSC were discussing “minor ‘glitches’ ” because “there had been nothing of major nature to talk about,” Los Angeles Herald-Examiner, said. Houston TV had failed to carry launch live and only 295 U.S. and 55 foreign journalists were covering MSC. Apollo 13 astronauts had prompted complaints from newsmen for being “too quiet.” Reason might be “that few newsmen have listened to find out whether the crewmen are talking or not.” (Bane, LA Her-Exam, 4/13/70)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, said chances were high that Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II would develop German measles next week and that, in his opinion, Mattingly’s lack of immunity would not permit him to fly on Apollo 13 April 11. NASA had not officially ruled out Mattingly for flight, but countdown was proceeding on schedule and backup cm pilot John L. Swigert, Jr., was undergoing intensive training in Apollo simulators at KSC. (O’Toole, WPost, 4/10/70, A2)
Families of Apollo 13 astronauts monitored flight communications on NASA squawk boxes and watched TV in their homes. Mrs. Marilyn Lovell and Mrs. Mary Haise kept older children home from school. Parents of unmarried Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., remained at home in Denver, Colo. (AP, NYT, 4/15/70,29)
Aircraft hijacking was discussed by David Hoffman in Washington Post: “That hijacking entails much more today than the Havana detour, a sidetrip costing passengers frayed nerves and the airline $3000, has begun to sink home in official Washington. It has now become an instrument of international policy, a play within a play about the cold war. Quite apart from whether a treaty might help, there exists no treaty. That testifies to the concern of governments, this one included.” {W Post, 9/9/70, A15) At meeting on future of Apollo, scientists proposed crater Tycho near moon’s south pole and Descartes, hilly region near Ocean of Storms, as sites for two of remaining four Apollo program lunar landings. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said, “If you had only two missions left to make, you’d send one of them to Tycho.” Tycho offered samples from area of one of last collisions of large meteor with lunar surface, samples from moon’s original southern hills, and samples from deep within moon that had come to surface after impact that had created Tycho. Flight path to and from Tycho would enable astronauts to photograph and examine almost half visible face of moon from lunar orbit. Astronauts could leave scientific instruments less than 1609 km (1000 mi) from moon’s south pole, to give earth-bound scientists listening post on lunar region that would otherwise go unexplored. Surveyor VII photos had shown Tycho landing to be strewn with many varieties of rocks. Difficulty with Tycho landing was that Apollo crew might have to use so much fuel getting to it that they would not have enough to return if they encountered difficulty on approach, Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., said. Donald K. Slayton, msc Chief of Flight Crew Operations, said NASA was studying possibility of Tycho landing: “Our position so far is that Tycho is a bad place. ... But, if we can figure the reasonable way to do it.. .and decide it’s a reasonable place to go, then Tycho becomes a candidate for landing.” Descartes, second site favored by scientists, contained relatively young volcanic material and also crust on surface away from volcanic highlands that might be as old as moon itself. It was thought to be one of two Apollo sites where tnoonquakes might be occurring; other was hills of Fra Mauro, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Alfred E. Ringwood of Australian National Univ. told seminar he had concluded from study of Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples that moon once had heat source 160-480 km (100-300 mi) beneath surface that was emitting 1500 K (2200°F) temperatures. Heat had emanated from abundance of radioactive minerals in moon’s depths, he proposed, and partially melted moon’s inner rock, which then flowed to lunar surface through pores or forced its way upward as it expanded where pores did not exist. Upswelling rock, Dr. Ringwood said, caused lunar features visible on moon’s face. He speculated that moon had lost most of its radioactivity and heat 2 billion yrs earlier. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, ARC scientist, said he had found “little bumps” of magnetism along lunar surface when studying signals from instruments left on moon. Bumps suggested that radioactive heat was coming to surface and causing parts of moon to behave as if they had magnetic field. Moon was “strong and rigid to depth of 200 mi [322 km],” Dr. Sonnett said, “but I believe that all you need is a porosity of about 10 per cent in that crust to have a warmer and more plastic material leak to the top.” Dr. Rolf Meisner of Univ. of Hawaii said analysis of data from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer led him to believe that moonquakes could not be caused by breaks in moon’s crust but were caused by warm gases escaping from beneath lunar surface in response to earth’s increased gravitational pull. He had recorded 14 moon-quakes, all of which seemed to come from about 240 km (150 mi) east-southeast of seismometer in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 was to land in February 1971. Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, argued that lunar maria contained dust and not lava. Lack of electrical activity of surface material and the way Apollo moonquake detectors had reacted to tremors and impacts could mean there was deep deposit of powder. Acoustical signal from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer was “compatible with a deep layer of a very homogenous nature in which the speed of sound is uniform.” (O’Toole, WPost, 9/12/70, A3; 9/13/70, A27; Hill, H Chron, 9/13/70)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Michael Collins attended unveiling of painting “Crew of Apollo 11” by Ronald Anderson of Dallas, Tex., at National Portrait Galley in Washington, D.C. Oil painting would be presented to Smithsonian Institution. (AP, W Star, 7/27/70, B4)	.
Impact of space requirements on U.S. computer industry was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, at ARCS (Achievement Rewards for College Scientists) Foundation Annual Scholarship Awards Banquet in Houston, Tex.: “In Project Mercury, ground-based computers were only required to determine quickly and accurately booster cut-off conditions. In Apollo, however, computers are used throughout the mission in real time, to calculate the trajectory to the moon and back, to compare three separate solutions for the lunar descent, to record and analyze thousands of bits of telemetered spacecraft information, to compare these to predicted values to detect trouble, and . .. to monitor the well-being of the crew. For Mercury, the computer program contained 40 000 computer words; for Apollo, a 1 500 000-word program was needed, while at the same time, the speed of the computers has increased sevenfold.” U.S. computer industry was doing $8 billion worth of business annually, paid highest average wages of any U.S. industry, and was “one of the most rapidly growing.” In 1960, U.S. exported $48 million worth of computers; in 1969, $728 million dollars worth. “U.S. computer exports have increased by over 1400 percent in the first decade of the space age. This impressive record was built on excellence of performance through continuing technological superiority. In a large measure it was the stimulus of NASA’s requirements that brought about these technological advances in the computer industry.” (Text) May 3; With exception of Mission Control, msc buildings normally open to public had remained open during Apollo 13 crisis, New York Times commented. Visitors could watch—from overhead catwalk in Building 5'—scientists and astronauts devising techniques for Apollo 13's return to earth. (Gordon, NYT, 5/3/70,7)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Alan L. Bean received special citation from aec, commemorating first anniversary of deployment of nuclear-powered generator on moon Nov. 19, 1969, during Apollo 12 mission. Bean accepted similar citations for fellow Apollo 12 crewmen Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during ceremonies at aec Hq. in Germantown, Md. (aec Release N-203)
Senate unanimously passed S.R. 388 “that the Senate of the United States commends the Apollo 13 astronauts ... for their fortitude and courage; extends its support to their families, their friends and all who are involved in their mission; and urges all businesses, commercial operations, communications media, and others who wish to and can comply to pause at 9 p.m. today, April 14, 1970, in order that all persons who so desire may join in asking the help of Almighty God in assuring the safe return of the astronauts.” (CR, 4/14/70,85644-5)
Timing of Apollo 13 could upstage U.S.S.R. ’s plans for “biggest ideological event in Soviet history, the Lenin centennial,” New York Times reported. Mission had been launched on 1970 Leninist Subbotnik—day when loyal citizens donated full day’s work to their country. Second day of Apollo 13 mission was Cosmonauts Day, anniversary of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin’s triumph as first man to orbit earth. Apollo 13 astronauts were scheduled to return to earth the day before the Lenin anniversary, “almost exactly at the hour that Secretary General Leonid I. Brezhnev is scheduled to crown his career by delivering the major address commemorating the founder of the Soviet system.” (Schwartz, NYT, 4/13/70)
Only medical side effect to astronauts found thus far from long periods spent in space was “some cardiovascular deterioration,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, told Los Angeles press conference. This was “normal response of the body to a less demanding environment.” But medical
Post-Apollo 13 poll showed U.S. public was opposed by 64% to 30% to major space funding over next decade, Louis Harris reported in Chicago Tribune. Of 1520 persons polled, 55% said they were very worried about fate of Apollo 13 astronauts following mission abort, 24% were somewhat worried, 20% were not very worried, and 1% were not sure. Total of 71% expected fatal accident would occur on future mission, 18% thought it would not occur, and 11% were unsure. (CTrib, 6/25/70, F12)
Safely home, the Apollo 13 crew stepped aboard the U.S.S. Iwo Jima recovery ship after splashdown in the South Pacific. Leaving the helicopter (at top, from left) are Astronauts Fred W. Raise, Jr., James A. Lovell, Jr., and JohnL. Swigert, Jr. Li the once-tense Mission Operations Control Hoorn at msc (at bottom), Dr. Donald K. Slayton (left of center), Director of Flight Crew Operations, shook hands with Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee as arriving Astronaut Lovell appeared on the TV monitor. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Dkector, stands behind Lee, with Flight Control Division Chief' Eugene F. Kfanz sitting at the console in front. (July 16-24, 1969) manned missions had successfully landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (NASA Proj Off; FonF, 4/16-22/70, 253-5; W Star, 4/12-14/70; NYT, 4/15/70; 4/18/70; 4/19/70; W Post, 4/15/70; 4/18/70, Al; msc Hist Off; Off NASA Administrator)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received Robert J. Collier Trophy for “their high courage and stunning success in accomplishing man’s highest adventure in recorded history—the first moon landing.” Award was presented at Washington, D.C., luncheon given by National Aeronautic Assn, and National Aviation Club, (naa Release; NR News, 5/15/70, 1)
President Nixon announced reorganization of Council on Physical Fitness and appointment of members. Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., President’s Consultant on Physical Fitness, would serve as Council Chairman. (PD, 9/28/70, 1264)
Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell described planned eva and equipment for Apollo 14 mission at Washington, D.C., press briefing. After landing LM on moon’s Fra Mauro, Mitchell and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would leave LM and explore lunar surface with equipment stored on 9-kg (20-lb) mobile equipment transporter (met). On previous lunar landing missions astronauts had ended up with more equipment than they could carry, met would carry cameras, special sample containers, work table, lunar portable magnetometer, trenching tools, hand tool carrier, extension handles, tether, and other tools, thus freeing astronauts’ hands, met would be pulled over lunar surface by special handle that could be held with pressurized glove without being gripped. (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/17/70, A5)
MSC announced award of $3 000000 NASA contract to Garrett Corp. AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. for portable astronaut life support assembly (alsa) to support extravehicular and intravehicular activity in Skylab program. (MSCRelease 70-43)
Responding to question on astronaut pay, Washington Daily News columnist Hy Gardner quoted NASA as saying astronauts received no supplemental allowance for flying space missions. During last weeks before mission launch, they were on temporary duty assignment at KSC where they resided at Government expense. Status continued until they returned home to Houston after mission. During temporary duty period, military astronauts received allotment of $2 per day and civilian astronauts, $3.20 per day. (W News, 3/26/70, 40)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., visited Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan, during world tour. They climbed out of mock spaceship in U.S. Pavilion and onto simulated lunar surface. (AP, W Star, 3/24/70, A2)
The city of Chicago welcomed the Apollo 13 astronauts anti flight controllers with ticker tape, confetti, and cheers during a parade around the Loop. Honorary citizenship awards were given John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (absent), and the city’s Medal of Merit was given to flight commander James A. Lovell. Jr, nated into a growing number of more precise disciplines—each becoming more productive the narrower its focus became.” But "in recent years this process has been reversed and we are now seeing the growth of interdisciplinary sciences and a striving for a more ali-encompassing grasp of the physical world and even broader relationships. . . . This type of growth is essential if science is to be the guiding force—as it must be—behind our evolving mankind.” (Text)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford attended dedication ceremony of Stafford Field, small airfield in Stafford’s hometown, Weatherford, Okla. Airfield was Weatherford’s memorial to Stafford who had piloted two Gemini missions. At dedication Vice President said: “While Stafford Field may not be equivalent in size to the giant airports of this country and the world, it. . .symbolizes the best of American traditions. . .harnessing that pioneering spirit of old.” (WPost, 4/27/70, A4; Text)
faa announced publication of new taxiway system design standards to increase airport capacity by speeding ground movements of large aircraft, including Boeing 747, McDonnell Douglas DC-10, and Lockheed L-1011. (faa Release 70-100) November 16-20; eva critical design review was held at Skylab mock-up area and Neutral Buoyancy Simulator (NBS)at msfc. Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart headed 10-astronaut team performing under normal earth gravity in Saturn Workshop mockup and nbs. (msfc Release 70-235)
President and Mrs. Nixon and party of Apollo 13 astronauts and families attended services at Kawaiahao Church in Honolulu commemorating National Day of Prayer and Thanksgiving [see April 17]. President said: “There are very deep ideological differences that divide the world today. But when it was learned that these men were in danger, there poured into the White House from all over the world messages from the Communist countries, from people of various religions, saying that they wished their best, offering their assistance. When they learned they were back, there was an outpouring of relief and rejoicing from people, regardless of their political or religious differences .... If only we could think in that way about every individual on this earth, we could truly have world peace.” Following service Presidential party flew from Hawaii to San Clemente, Calif. (PD, 4/27/70, 550-3)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s May 24-June 5 visit to U.S.S.R. was reviewed in Christian Science Monitor: “To those few Russians who saw him, the first man to walk on the moon was unquestionably a big hit. But overall, his 12-day goodwill visit was an unobtrusive affair that stayed very much in the realm of Soviet officialdom.” Armstrong had arrived in Leningrad May 24 to attend May 20-29 cospar Conference. “Although he was in Leningrad for five days, only one Leningrad newspaper made any mention of him and Russians for a long time were not aware he was even in the country.” It was only after his arrival in Leningrad that Armstrong was invited by Soviet government to stay longer in U.S.S.R. He had “no exposure to Soviet public” during Novosibirsk visit. In Moscow, press had given more coverage. Armstrong had told press he had been “most emotionally moved” by meeting with Mrs. Yuri Gagarin and Mrs. Vladimir Komarov, widows of Soviet cosmonauts. (Saikow-ski, CSM, 6/5/70)
Newspaper editorials marked lunar landing anniversary: New York Times: “. . .the Eagle’s landing was one of mankind’s finest hours. The scientific dividends from the new era of lunar exploration have already been very rich, and they will be even more abundant in the future when numerous astronauts from many nations will work on the lunar surface. Men now inhabit the earth-moon system, not earth alone, and much in tomorrow’s history will be shaped by the developments that will follow the Eagle’s triumph.” {NYT, 7/20/70,26) Washington Post: “The basic issue involved in NASA’s appropriations this year, as it will be in the next year and for many years to come, is whether this country should give up something it has done and which is going well, something that has brought it great international prestige and internal pride, and something that we believe may well hold the key to man’s future.” (WPost, 7/20/70)
NASA named flight and support crews for Apollo 15 lunar landing mission scheduled for autumn of 1970. Prime crewmen were Astronauts David R. Scott, commander; Alfred M. Worden, cm pilot; and James B. Irwin, lm pilot. Backup crew consisted of Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., Vance D. Brand, and Harrison H. Schmitt. Support crewmen were Scientist-Astronauts Karl G. Henize and Robert A. Parker. (NASA Release 70-46)
NASA’s Apollo 14 spacecraft was moved from assembly building to launch pad at KSC in preparation for launch toward moon Jan. 31. Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa told press at briefing that launch preparations had “gone quite smoothly” so far. Apollo 14 crew, he said, was “the only crew that’s been six months from launch four times. I personally will have close to 1000 hours in the command module simulator by the 31st of January.” In response to press query Roosa said he would attempt to photograph evidence of moonquakes detected by seismometers: “.. .the current consensus is that these quakes are coming from around the Rima Parry Five Rille and the southern edge of crater Fra Mauro. So this will be a specific photo target. Both with the Hy-con and with the Hasselblad to see if we can see anything new.” (Transcript; upi, NYT, 11/10/70,33)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were given ticker-tape parade welcome in Chicago, where they addressed 800 at luncheon and later spoke to 2500 high school students. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., third Apollo 13 astronaut, was indisposed, (upi, HPost, 5/2/70)
Hospital in Sydney, Australia, was using blankets coated with aluminum foil and lined with polyester film to keep infants warm, Chicago Tribune said. Both substances, used in astronauts’ spacesuits, had high-heat-retention properties. (CTrib, 3/16/70)
Alabama Space and Rocket Center at Huntsville opened with $10million exhibit of hardware from MSFC, Army Missile Command, and U.S. aerospace-missile companies. Speakers at dedication ceremonies included Dr. Wernher von Braun—NASA Deputy Associate Administrator and former MSFC Director—and Astronaut Frank Borman. Center, managed by Alabama Space Science Exhibit Commission, was financed by $1.9-million state bond issue and built on 14 hectares (35 acres) transferred by USA from Redstone Arsenal property. (Marshall Star, 3/11/70,1)
International reaction to Apollo 13 spashdown: European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that TV audience at splashdown might well have been biggest TV audience of all time. In American Samoa, girls were limbering up for siva-siva dance to greet astronauts. Pilgrims prayed their thanks in India. Press item from Johannesburg, South Africa, said witch doctor named Mago-mezulu had tossed bones which told him Apollo 13 astronauts would return safely but that “these men have interfered with God and he has turned them back. This is a warning that the Americans should stop landing on the moon.” Thousands in Lima, Peru, received permission to take early lunch to watch final moments of splashdown. In Canada, Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau expressed “great relief.” Queen Elizabeth wired congratulations from England to President Nixon. Roman Catholic Archbishop of Westminster John Cardinal Heenan said, “Thank God.” Telephone operator at U.S. Embassy in London was inundated with calls. She said, “People were sobbing with obvious relief and happiness. I just don’t know what to say to them” (Johnson, WPost, 4/18/70, Al; Arnold, NYT, 4/18/70, 1; Waldron, NYT, 4/18/70, 13)
At White House press conference former astronauts Michael Collins, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, and William A. Anders, NASC Executive Secretary, described arrangements that had kept President Nixon informed on Apollo 13 crisis. President had had access to direct TV, radio, and telephone contact with MSC Mission Control. He had talked with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, and Astronaut Frank Borman there. Collins and Anders had set up “squawk box” into Mission Control outside President’s office and briefed President and his staff on developments. President’s chief concerns had been CM-SM separation, and crew’s safety and physical condition. Collins said, “The fact that we had this incident really changes very little. We have always known that such a situation could develop and he [President] does not feel that it should unduly cloud the future when it comes to space exploration.” (Transcript)
Apollo 13 astronauts were taken in three helicopters from U.S.S. Iwo Jima to Tafunda Airport in American Samoa, to set foot on solid ground for first time since mission launch. They were greeted by Samoan Governor John M. Haydon. Governor presented IRS form 1040A to Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., who had forgoten to file his income tax before departing on mission. Colorfully dressed crowd of more than 3000 cheered astronauts during half-hour reception before their departure in usaf C-141 jet aircraft for Hawaii to meet President Nixon. (Trumbull, NYT, 4/19/70,1)
Ivory Coast President Felix Houphouet-Boigny presented gold plaques to Apollo 12 astronauts, who had arrived in Abidjan March 6. They would leave for Tanzania March 8 during world tour. (Reuters, WPost, 3/8/70, A7)
International reaction to Apollo 13 emergency continued: Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, General Secretary of World Council of Churches, said in Geneva that people of world were praying for astronauts. In Santa Ninfa, Sicily, devasted by earthquake in January, Mayor Vito Bellafore said, “After the first Apollo success people did lose interest; it seemed that it was only a mechanical exercise. Now we see again the human drama, and all of our worry is for those three lonely men.” London Times said Apollo 13 would leave “scar on the American space program.” Best outcome of accident would be “greater sense of deliberation in the exploration of space.” (Lyons, NYT, 4/16/70, 1)
White House announced in Key Biscayne, Fla., that President Nixon had asked Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L.Bean to visit Latin America, Europe, Africa, and Asia as his personal representatives. Tour, to take 40 days, would begin Feb. 16. Astronauts would be accompanied by wives. (PD, 2/16/70, 178-9)
Agreement under which 50 astronauts and wives would rhare $100000 for each program in series of TV documentaries on U.S. space program had been announced by David L. Wolper, President of Wolper Productions Inc., and Louis Nizer, New York attorney for astronauts, AP reported. (W Post, 9/23/70, B4)
Apollo II Astronauts Michael Collins (left) and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (right), were presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Dr. Robert C, Seamans, Jr. (center (eft), Secretary of the Air Force. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, represented Astronaut Nei! A. Armstrong, who was unable to be present. veloping itpr for use by NASA on Nimbus-E, scheduled for launch in 1972. (essa Release 70-28)
International reaction to Apollo 13 crisis: In Moscow, many persons relied on foreign radio broadcasts for information on Apollo 13 progress; Soviet news media continued to give only brief reports. At U.N. in New York, Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov, Soviet delegate to Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, said people of world were hoping for safe return of “courageous astronauts.” Pope Paul VI told audience of 10 000 Romans and tourists in St. Peter’s Basilica, “We cannot forget at this moment the lot of the astronauts of Apollo 13. We hope that at least their lives can be saved.” Japanese businessman said in Tokyo: “How could it happen? Why, they almost shuttled to the moon as safely as we ride commuter trains.” In Paris, radio stations interrupted regular programs with news bulletins and interviews with space experts. La Monde said, “The whole human race is participating with them in the agony of their return.” Thousands flocked to churches in Georgetown, Guyana. They were saying mission should have been called Apollo 12B or Apollo 14, rather than Apollo 13. In Australia, Sydney TV station superimposed Apollo 13 bulletins over film of “Lost in Space.” BBC continued newscasts until 4 am local time to report critical maneuver of spacecraft. Budapest woman said, “Oh God, I hope they return safely.” Hers was “common theme,” Washington Post said; “around the world people, whether lowly or mighty, paused to participate in the first life-and-death drama in deep space.” (Johnson, W Post, 4/15/ 70, Al; Arnold, NYT,4/15/70, 1)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, in invited testimony on space benefits and potential, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that during first 12 yrs in space U.S. orbital payloads had increased 10 000 times, from Explorer I’s 14-kg (30.8 lbs) to Apollo 13’s planned 136 000 kg (300 000 lbs); speed record 13 times, from 3000 km per hr (1900 mph) to 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph); and flight altitude 10 000 times, from 38 400 m (126 000 ft) to 377 400 km (234 500 mi). Astronauts had logged 5843 hrs in space, safely flying 113 400 000 km (70 472 000 mi). Twelve Americans had orbited moon and four had walked on its surface. NASA had launched 155 unmanned spacecraft to return scientific and practical data, 23 in cooperative international programs. “Today we live in a different world because in 1958 America recognized the challenge of space and boldly made the required national investment to meet it. Since then over a billion children have been born all around the world, the first space age generation. Because of the space program they will learn a new science, a new cosmology, and a new view of man and his destiny in the universe. . .. Today’s children can look ahead confidently to new opportunities and to great new strides that man will make in the twenty-first century.. . . Their generation will view the earth as a whole for the first time, and be able to deal with technology, with science, and with philosophy as a unified experience, common to all men of the blue planet earth.” Appendixes to prepared statement described NASA’s technology utilization program: 1.6 million scientific and technical publications distributed in 1969, including 3 211 500 microfiche copies; contribution to U.S. schools including spacemobile project, which had reached 3 306 410 students live and 20 391 500 via TV in 1969; and space research laboratories built at 34 institutions of higher learning during 1960s, in which more than 1000 students had worked towards doctorates. NASA had received 968 830 letters in 1969; its exhibits were viewed by 37.6 million persons and its films, by 9.8 million directly and by 248 million on TV. News media coverage of NASA activities in 1969 included 3497 newsmen from 57 countries accredited to Apollo 11. (Testimony; Schlstedt,B Sun, 4/7/70)
Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail D. Millionshchikov said at second national Convocation on Challenge of Building Peace in New York that exchange of experience in space between U.S. and U.S.S.R. would be “very fruitful.” It was “very dangerous to make a race ... because the lives of human beings are at stake.” Astronaut Frank Borman, chairman of panel discussion, suggested “Soviet-American committee to chart the exploration of the solar system, a group to develop and formulate policy and interchange of ideas, both in the manned and unmanned fields.” (Wil-ford, NYT, 4/30/70)
New Haven Register editorial commented on intention of Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., to end active participation in space after commanding Apollo 13 mission: “The space agency can ill afford to let go of Jim Lovell, whose 24 days in space give him a world’s record. When he concludes the Apollo 13 mission he will be, without doubt, the best qualified man in the agency. A top administrative post should be found for him.” (New Haven Register, 2/9/ 70)
SoyuzlXCosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, on 10-day U.S. visit, toured Washington, D.C., and placed wreaths on graves of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee in Arlington National Cemetry. At NASA Hq. press conference they said U.S.S.R. did not plan to put man on moon and had disbanded training program for female cosmonauts. (Valentine, W Post, 10/20/70, A2)
Photos of central Alabama taken by Apollo 9 astronauts had been of major significance for geological exploration in the state, AP reported. Alabama State Geologist Philip LaMoreaux had said photos were “new aid and approach in locating stable areas for construction, exploration for minerals and studying geologic structures as an aid in oil and gas exploration.” (Huntsville Times, 2/3/70)
Apollo 12 astronauts began goodwill tour of Europe with one-day visit to Lisbon, Portugal. (NYT, 2/24/70)
NASA Hq. press briefing cited background events leading to scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. Moscow meeting on compatible space docking procedures and hardware [see Oct. 12]. Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said government-to-government discussions with U.S.S.R. had begun in 1962 “when some substantive possibilities were explored and. . .first agreements were reached.” These had included coordinated meteorological satellite projects, joint mapping of earth’s magnetic field in space for joint use of Echo satellites, and joint approach to publication of U.S. and U.S.S.R. achievements,in space medicine and biology. There had been “continuing overtures” since 1962, which “moved to a more accelerated pace beginning in.. .April 1970, when Dr. Paine took a personal interest in the problem and addressed a number of letters. . .to academician Keldysh.. .President of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union.” Compatible docking procedures had been discussed for first time by Dr. Paine and Soviet academician Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov in New York in April 1970. Subject had been discussed on subsequent Moscow visits by Dr. Philip Handler, NAS President; Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman. First formal proposal for exploration of subject had been made by Dr. Paine in letter to Keldysh July 31, 1970. Frutkin said U.S.S.R. had chosen compatible docking for discussion out of “long list of initiatives from the U.S. side.” Space rescue and joint experiments had not been discussed. Release of news of impending U.S.-U.S.S.R. discussions’ [at future iaf space rescue committee meeting] from iaf conference in Constance, Germany, Oct. 8 had been coincidence; NASA overtures had been direct, not through iaf. (Transcript)
Nine astronauts, headed by Richard H. Truly, began walk-through of Skylab Workshop tasks in week-long Saturn Workshop crew-station review at msfc. (MSFC Release 70-189)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, NASA oart, at Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and NASA officials. (Daily Appointments Calendar)
Time magazine named “the Middle Americans” its Men and Women of the Year: “They sent Richard Nixon to the White House and two teams of astronauts to the moon. They were both exalted and afraid. The mysteries of space were nothing. . .compared with the menacing confusions of their own society.” Middle Americans admired “men like Neil Armstrong and, to some extent, Spiro Agnew.” Apollo 11 and 12 were “a quintessential adventure of American technology and daring.” Astronauts were “paragons of Middle American aspiration. Redolent of charcoal cookouts, their vocabularies an engaging mix of space jargon and ‘gee whiz,’ the space explorers gave back to Middle America a victory of its own values. It was little noted, except in Middle America where such things still matter, that among Neil Armstrong’s extraterrestrial baggage was a special badge of his college fraternity, Phi Delta Theta. He used it symbolically to establish Moon Alpha Chapter.” Some liberals had “grumbled that the Apollo program’s $26 billion would have been better spent on curing hunger or the urban malaise.” Yet Middle Americans “reveled in the lunar landings precisely because they were victories purely accomplished; in Vietnam, in the carious slums, in the polluted environment, no clear victories seemed possible any longer.” (Time, 1/5/70, 10-2)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins at ceremonies in Washington, D.C. Medal honored exceptional research, exploration, and discovery. (Program; upi, WNews, 2/16/70)
U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IX (launched June 2) set new manned flight endurance record at 6:35 pm Baykonur time, when it surpassed 13-day 8-hr 35-min record set by NASA’s Gemini VII(Dec. 4-18, 1965). Apollo Astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., sent congratulatory telegram to SoyuzIXcrew: “Your accomplishments are adding new evidence supporting the capability of men to live and work in extended periods in space. We wish you continued success in this important mission and a safe return to earth.” Lovell told press in Houston that mission suggested U.S.S.R. would develop permanent earth-orbiting space station: “Soyuz now seems to be purely an aeromedical flight, pushing men to their limits to see how weightlessness and the pure oxygen environment affects their work in space. It all fits very naturally with the space station concept.” (Astrachan, WPost, 6/16/70, Al; SBD, 6/16/70,211)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., was named “SwedishAmerican of the Year” and presented Vasa Medal during Swedish-American Day ceremony in Stockholm. Aldrin and his family were . beginning 10-day visit to Sweden, (upi, P Inq, 8/3/70; AP, W Star, . 8/3/70)
Ninth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight, by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in Freedom 7Mercury spacecraft. Apollo 13 astronauts visited Grumman Aerospace Corp. plant at Bethpage, N.Y., where lm Aquarius was built. Astronauts received rousing cheer from 15 000 workers. Aquarius received rousing cheer from astronauts. (UPI, W Star, 5/6/70, A2; MSC Hist Off)
Series of reviews to select flight design of Saturn Workshop, part of Skylab program, was announced by msfc. Government engineers, astronauts, and industry representatives would determine any changes necessary before final approval of Workshop scheduled for 1972 launch into earth orbit. In Sept. 9-10 review at msfc, astronauts would study Workshop procedures in mockup. Sept. 14-18 critical design review at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Huntington Beach, Calif., facility would be attended by more than 200. At Workshop crew station review Sept. 21-24 at msfc, astronaut crewmen would “walk through” Skylab tests. Results of reviews would be considered during preliminary review at Huntington Beach Sept. 28-29 and at Workshop Critical Review Board meeting at Huntington Beach Oct. 2. (msfc Release 70-181)
Dynalectron Corp. announced it had been awarded $3 805 000 NASA contract for maintaining and servicing lunar landing training vehicles and aircraft used by astronauts and management at msc. Contract was one-year renewal of agreement under which Dynalectron had carried out management, maintenance, engineering, technical, and logistic functions in support of aircraft at MSC. (Dynalectron Release)
Visiting Soviet SoyuzlX Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov took turns with Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., flying Boeing 747. They were accompanied by Boeing test pilot during flight from Boeing facility near Seattle, Wash. (AP, B Sun, 10/28/70)
U.S. observed national day of prayer in gratitude for safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts. In New York 150 persons attended sunset service at Temple Emanuel. Invocation of gratitude was added to Sunday mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral, expressing hope that space exploration would contribute to peace and welfare of mankind. Greek Orthodox Primate of North and South America, Archbishop Iakovos, delivered special message for faith’s Palm Sunday observances. He said he believed “God permitted the agony of these last four days” to aid men in “overcoming the temporal with the spiritual, the temporary with the eternal.” Church and interfaith councils in St. Petersburg, Fla., made combined appeal for prayer in area churches and kept chapels open during day. In Marietta, Ohio, Jaycees completed petition containing 50 000 signatures, opposing efforts to ban prayers in broadcasts from space. Petition was later presented to space officials in Washington, D.C. Gov. Nelson D. Rockefeller proclaimed “day of prayer and thanksgiving” in New York State. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said crisis refuted claims that space exploration dealt fatal blow to religion. “The manner in which great numbers of Americans attended special prayer services. . . has been inspirational.” J. F. Meredith, treasurer of Central State Conference of the Seventh Day Adventists, said in Kansas City, “We feel that this points up the fact that despite all of man’s knowledge and ingenuity there is still a supreme being in control of things, and that we have to trust him.” (NYT, 4/20/70,28; 4/19/70, 54)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Fred W. Haise, Jr., held press conference at msc. Lovell announced final code names for lm and cm had been selected according to theme of mythology, lm would be called “Aquarius” after mythical Egyptian water carrier who brought fertility and knowledge to Nile Valley. Code name originally selected for CM— “Auriga,” for constellation Auriga—had been dropped in favor of “Odyssey,” epic Greek poem about long adventures and wanderings of Odysseus in Greek mythology. Lovell said Apollo 13 crew had “already had quite an odyssey just getting trained” for mission. Landing of Aquarius on moon would be different from previous landings, Lovell said. Key to landing was Cone Crater on Fra Mau-ro. LM was “being targeted for a spot that we don’t want to land at,” uprange about 1/2 km from desired site; “we’re not sure of the actual height of this ridge [of Cone Crater]. . .so we’re targeting uprange to make sure we get over it.” Reason for going to Fra Mauro was “its peculiar geologic formations there and.. .a place called the Mare Imbrium. . .a large circular basin that was formed early in the moon’s history.. .by a large impact. In the formation of this impact it made hummocky ridges, radiating outward from the center of the impact down into. . .Fra Mauro. ... Now, by going to Fra Mauro, we hope to. . .bring back some of the basin type material that was thrown out by this catastrophe.” (Transcript; upi, C Trib, 3/15/70)
Abolition of 21-day quarantine for astronauts returning from moon was recommended to NAS panel by NASA officials and representatives of Interagency Committee on Back Contamination. Panel Chairman, Dr. Allan H. Brown of Univ. of Pennsylvania, said his. group would relay decision to NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. (UPI, NYT, 2/18/70, C17)
Astronauts Alan L. Bean, R. Walter Cunningham, and Joseph P. Kerwin, grounded Dec. 23, 1969, for minor infractions of aircraft flight rules, resumed training in T-38 jet aircraft at msc. (upi. W Star, 1/21/70, A7)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., told news conference at Coast Guard Academy in New London, Conn.: “In the past it has taken a war to force technology to advance at an abnormal rate. The space program did it in peacetime, and to me this makes much more sense.” Swigert defended proposals for Mars exploration: “If we can learn more about our solar system and have those benefits accrue to the economy, I would say it is worthwhile.” (AP, W Post, 9/10/70)
Apollo II Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Dr. Thomas D. Barrow, President of Humble Oil & Refining Co., had been named cochairmen of Goals for Texas in the Coastal Zone Conference to be held in Houston, Sept. 10-11, Houston Chroicle said. (H Chron, 8/28/70)
Motorized wheelchair controlled by sight-switch perfected by space engineers was delivered to Texas Medical Center in Houston by msfc for evaluation. Second wheelchair would be delivered to Ron-cho Los Amigos Hospital in Downey, Calif., in November. Switch, worn on head, enabled user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movement with his eyes and move easily without assistance. Switch had been developed to help astronauts in training operate essential equipment under extreme flight conditions. Manufacturer, Hayes International Corp., was extending application of switch as control device for handicapped, (msfc Release 70-218)
Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., described plans for EVA on lunar surface at KSC news conference. Haise said he and Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., would explore hilly region, collect samples, and climb 180-220 m (250-400 ft) up Cone Crater. “We hope to get back to at least the base. . . . From a sampling standpoint there really is a very definite ejecta blanket of rock fragments that’s thrown out of the hole at the base of the cone and it would certainly be of interest to get up to the rim, . .and even if you just got pictures of that it would be of extreme interest. Another benefit. . .high ground would give you a magnificient panorama. You could see a good deal more of the countryside that you can see from. . .walking around. ...” Haise would drill three holes 3 m (10 ft) deep in lunar surface— two to hold heat sensors and one for sample collection—using battery-powered, rotary-percussion drill. Depth of 3 m (10 ft) “compared to the center of the moon may not be very deep, but it does give a look-see through the surface structure at least in place that in time represents several million years.” (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research, described Soviet Tu-144 as “striking” supersonic aircraft “every bit as attractive” as Anglo-French Concorde, during luncheon meeting of Aero Club of Washington and Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C. Armstrong said visit to Tu-144 hangar had been highlight of Moscow visit. He said Tu-144’s four engines were similar to those on U.S. B-70 bomber and interior resembled McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Tu-144 pilots had told him aircraft had flown at twice speed of sound and handled well at all speeds. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/11/70, A3)
MSFC engineer Hans F. Wuenscher was awarded U.S. patent 3 534 926 for machine to manufacture materials and articles in space. Cylindrical tank would be used in space station to produce new metal alloys and glasses, metal membranes, metal foam, high-precision ball bearings of hollow steel, and optical components in zero-g condition, where heavy materials did not settle out because of lack of buoyancy. Astronaut outside tank would control admission of liquid metal, gases, and other materials, and regulate heat, ventilation pressure, spinning, and agitation. (Jones, NYT, 10/23/70,43)
NASA announced selection of RCA Corp. Astro-Electronics Div. to receive $ 1.62-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for ground-command TV system for last four Apollo lunar exploration missions. System, which would permit color cameras to be operated either manually by astronauts on moon or remotely from earth, would be used with portable lunar communications relay unit (LCRU) being developed under separate RCA contract. (NASA Release 70-131)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell took fourhour walk-through of planned eva activity in ksc training area in preparation for Apollo 14 lunar landing mission Jan. 31, 1971. (Marshall Star, 12/9/70,1)
NASA released photo of emblem selected by Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Fred W. Haise, Jr., for Apollo 13 mission. Emblem, designed by Lumen Martin Winter of New York, depicted three horses pulling sun chariot from earth to moon, with Latin phrase “Ex luna scientia” (From the moon, knowledge), (nasapao; B News, 1/25/70)
msc announced rca had received $3-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification for final development and production of lunar communications relay units (LCRU), bringing total contract to $10 million. LCRU would be carried on Apollo missions beginning with Apollo 15 to transmit astronaut voice, TV, and telemetry communications directly from moon to earth. On earlier Apollo lunar landing missions astronauts communicated with earth via lm on moon. (MSC Release 70-106)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.—in Lucerne, Switzerland, on European goodwill tour—visited Swiss Transport Museum and Longines Planetarium. They were shown representation of view of earth from Mars. (nasa Hist Off)
At Washington Heart Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C., Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, received Spacemedic Award “for outstanding contributions to the study of hearts in space.” He also reported evidence from Apollo 12 mission that prolonged space flight might intensify action of some bacteria normally found on human skin. Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Charles Conrad, Jr., had sustained temporary post-flight infections from staphylococcus bacteria carried from earth, which had increased in virulence during flight. (AP, HPost, 2/3/70; W Post, 2/3/70)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were honored by City of New York at luncheon in Philharmonic Hall. Astronauts were greeted by Mayor John V. Lindsay and serenaded by N.Y. Police Dept. band. (AP, B Sun, 6/4/70, A3)
Four-man LaRC team emerged from space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, Calif., after successful completion of 90-day test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft [see June 13]. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong greeted crewmen John H. Hall, Terry Donlon, Stephen G. Dennis, and Wilson Wong. Project chief engineer Karl Houghton said test could have continued beyond scheduled 90 days. (AP, NYT, 9/12/70, 8; Langley Researcher, 9118/70, 1)
Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as CM pilot on Apollo 13 mission April 11, Dr, Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced. Mattingly, exposed to German measles, had not developed immunity and was expected to show symptoms of disease next week. “The recommendation of ApriMO: nasa announced that Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as cm pilot on Apollo 13 mission. Cancellation of the mission had been considered following Mattingly's exposure to German measles. Below, Dr. George M, Low (left). Deputy Administrator, conferred with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at April 10 launch status meeting at Kennedy Space Center. everyone. . .was unanimous that Apollo 13 be launched tomorrow,” Dr. Paine told press at ksc. Decision was made after Swigert demonstrated in intensive training that he could replace Mattingly on short notice. “When it comes to the problems you can get into in the command module. . Jack [Swigert] literally wrote the book on the malfunctions and how to overcome them,” Dr. Paine said. Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said Swigert had performed critical maneuvers flawlessly in training. “Our simulator people said it couldn’t be done. . .but we anticipated more problems than we had. We were all surprised. It went very smoothly.” (Wilford, NYT, 4/11/70, 1; O’Toole, WPost, 4/11/70, Al)
On first anniversary of Apollo IVs first manned lunar landing, Apollo 11	Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, visited Apollo 11 spacecraft exhibit at state capitol in Jefferson City, Mo., and received plaque from Missouri Gov. Warren E. Hearnes. Later they flew to New York, where they presented 113 g (4 oz) lunar sample to U.N. Secretary General U Thant. Sample would remain on exhibit at U.N. Presenting sample, Dr. Paine said: “What the full significance of Apollo will be to the world of the future, no one can yet predict. We must await the verdict of history. But as we continue to learn and to explore, I am inclined to think that our first moon landing may some day be thought of as the turning point when man first demonstrated that he can open new worlds, where eventually exciting new extraterrestrial societies will be founded. Mankind will move onward to settle and colonize other worlds, and the United Nations will encompass new territories, if not new dimensions.” NASA centers and tracking stations around world celebrated anniversary throughout week. (NASA Release 70-125; upi, NYT, 7/21/70; Text)
Editorial comment as damaged Apollo 13 attempted safe return to New York Times: “An emergency in a space craft on the voyage between earth and moon was bound to occur sometime. The enormous hazards of the long journey through the most hostile of environments, the ever present possibility of failure by one or more of the millions of components contained in an Apollo vehicle, the ubiquitous threat of human error, all these combine in lunar flights to make them the most dangerous expeditions human beings have ever undertaken. In retrospect, the remarkable fact is not that such ominous peril has arisen in the now-aborted trip of Apollo 13, but that the actually hazardous trips to the moon and back by Apollos 8, 10, 11, and 12 were accomplished in safety.” (NYT, 4/15/70) Washington Post: “Lindbergh gave up a continent, as the astronauts gave up a planet, because he had measured the risks and found them reasonable, for all the possibility of disaster lurking around the corner—it does so every day for men and nations. So if we are going to apply the glories, we must confront the dangers along the way. All we can do now, as that unlikely looking craft limps back from the moon, is to hope that the men who ride in it and the men in Houston who guide it can find what Lindbergh found. ‘Somewhere in an unknown recess of my mind,’ he wrote T’ve discovered that my ability rises and falls with the essential problems that confront me. What I can do depends largely on what I have to do to stay alive and on course.’ ” (WPost, 4/15/70) Baltimore Sun: “The safety record of the Apollo program has, except for one hideous ground accident, been a perfect one. Perhaps we have too easily assumed that therefore all expeditions would begin and end without serious and unforseen breakdown, without the torments of suspense when the line between splendid accomplishment and bitter tragedy is drawn very fine. The truth is, of course, that exploration, especially in a realm new to man, can never be free of deadly hazards. But the astronauts and the men associated with them in their ventures have always known it.” It was clear astronauts were equal to emergency, “but they remain at the mercy of machinery which in some still unexplained way has failed them. The rest of us can only wait from desperate hour to hour, trusting that superlative skill, universal hope and fervent prayers will prevail over cruel chance.” (B Sun, 4/15/70)
Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin sent message to President Nixon: “We follow with concern the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 13 in which failure developed. I want to inform you the Soviet government has given orders to all citizens and members of the armed forces to use all necessary means to render assistance in the rescue of the American astronauts.” Italian Defense Ministry ordered Italian armed forces to be ready to give immediate help as needed if Apollo 13 splashed down in Mediterranean. Reuters reported that U.K. Prime Minister Harold Wilson pledged help of Royal Navy ships for possible recovery work and that French President Georges J. Pompidou made similar offer of his navy, (upi, W Star, 4/15/70; Reuters, WPost, 4/16/70)
Instruments placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts recorded 306 K (91°F) drop in temperature and 40% decline in light intensity as moon went through partial eclipse, msc scientists said no other significant readings were recorded. (AP, W Post, 2/21/70, A3; WPost, 2/22/70, A2)
New mineral found in Apollo 11 samples had been named “armalcolite,” incorporating letters of Apollo 11 astronauts’ names, Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, msc announced. Name had been included in Proceedings of Apollo 11 Lunar Science Conference of Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta (cq.), dedicated to Apollo 11 crew, and had been approved by Nomenclature Committee of International Mineralogical Assn, (msc Release 70-82)
Nomination by President Nixon of Apollo 10 astronauts Cdr. John W. Young and Cdr. Eugene A. Cernan, both USN, for permanent promotion to captain was announced by White House. President and Mrs. Nixon honored Apollo 13 astronauts and wives at White House dinner. (PD, 6/15/70,756)
Washington Post quoted German police as saying Astronaut Joseph H. Engle had escaped uninjured from head-on automobile collision in Southern Bavaria. Engle was in Germany to visit Noerdlingen Crater with Apollo 14 crew on mission to familiarize crew with rocks similar to moon rocks expected to be encountered. (W Post, 8/16/70, A30)
Apollo 12 astronauts and wives arrived in Bucharest, Romania, only Communist capital on their world tour itinerary. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said it was “warmest welcome we’ve had yet,” as crowd of estimated 15 000 persons braved icy winds along 16-km (10-mi) motorcade route from airport. In rare exception to strict rules, Romanian authorities allowed vehicles in motorcade to fly U.S. flag, practice usually reserved for official or state occasions. After stopover in Vienna, astronauts and wives would continue to Africa. (UPl, W Star, 3/1/70, A17)
Arthur S. Flemming Award was presented by Downtown Jaycees of Washington, D.C., to 10 young men for outstanding and meritorious service in Federal Government, including Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and Eugene F. Kranz, Chief of MSC’s Flight Control Div. (WPost, 2/16/70, B6)	.
Second volume of third edition of new Soviet encyclopedia Bolshaya Sovetskaya Entsklopediya—to go on sale in October— displayed “factual approach” to U.S. space program, AP said. Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong received half-column biography and small photo as first man to walk on moon. Apollo missions were given nearly two pages, including two-column photo of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., on moon and diagram of lunar landing. (AP, LA Times, 911110)
U.S. reaction to Apollo 13's successful splashdown: Sign at msc was changed from “Our hearts are with the Apollo 13 crew,” to “Sigh of relief party here tonight.” Mission Control broke into applause before whipping out traditional cigars to fill huge room with blue smoke. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, observed that mission had not been complete failure. Spacecraft had gone around moon—feat that would have caused sensation two years before. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said later in day, “I’m a little tired and bedraggled but I’m feeling 10 or 20 years younger than I did yesterday.” In New York, thousands watched recovery on giant TV screen at Grand Central Terminal. Loud applause sounded when capsule appeared in sky, at splashdown, and when astronauts appeared. Hot dog stand operator at Vanderbilt Ave. and 47th Street assured pas-sersby, “It’s all right.” Long strands of multicolored ticker tape and bushels of confetti poured from skyscraper windows. At City Hall, Mayor John V. Lindsay said, “Now they are safely back and New Yorkers join with men everywhere in saying’welcome home.’” Church bells pealed throughout Nation. Traffic came to standstill in Indianapolis, Los Angeles reported no crime for brief period, and dice stopped rolling in Las Vegas briefly. Richmond, Va., department store manager, watching crowd before store TV set, said everybody “had a quiet smile, but it was curious the way they stood iooking at all that good news—silently and almost as if they were still praying.” (WPost, 4/18/70, Al, All; NYT, 4/18/70, 1, 13)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
Editorials on Apollo program cutback: New York Times: “Throughout the last decade this newspaper opposed the top priority then accorded Project Apollo on the ground that too much money was being diverted from urgent social needs. But now that these huge sums have been spent the need is to obtain the maximum yield, scientifically and otherwise, from that investment. Surely, NASA, which has been able to reach the moon, can find a better solution than the one now offered for adjusting to austerity in space research. One desirable alternative would be to enlist foreign resources in the exploitation of Apollo technology, perhaps by offering to send teams of British, French or Soviet astronauts on the journey pioneered by Apollo 11.” (NYT, 9/4/70)
Dr. Wernher von Braun (feff), former msfc Director, was sworn in as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning by Dr, Thomas O. Paine, Administrator. lifting-body vehicle and to Apo//o 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, William A, Anders, and James A. Lovell, Jr., for first manned Right to moon. (Program; afsc Newsreview, 4/70)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent brief medical examination, donned spacesuits, and practiced countdown procedures at KSC for 2 1/2 hrs in preparation for launch toward moon April 11. (AP, NYT, 3/27/70, 23)
Atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair carried her suit to ban broadcast and telecast of prayers by astronauts in space to U.S. Supreme Court. She appealed Dec. 2, 1969, decision of U.S. District Court that prayers were individual decisions of astronauts. (AP, NYT, 2/ 17/70, C3)	.
Seismic data from impacts of Apollo 12 lm and 3rd stage of Apollo 13 booster (S-IVB), relayed by seismic station installed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts, were described in Science. Team of lunar scientists headed by Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal seismic investigator for Apollo program, made report. Unusually long reverberations suggested “that the lunar mare in the region of the Apollo 12 landing site consists of material with very low seismic velocities near the surface with velocity increasing with depth to 5 to 6 kilometers per second [3.1-3.7 mps] (for compression waves) at a depth of 20 kilometers [12.4 mi]. Absorption of seismic waves in this structure is extremely low relative to typical continental crustal materials on earth. It is unlikely that a major boundary similar to the crust-mantle interface on earth exists in the outer 20 kilometers [12.4 mi] of the moon. A combination of dispersion and scattering of surface waves iqiplies the presence of heterogeneity within the outer zone of the mare on a scale of from several hundred meters (or less) to several kilometers. Seismic signals from 160 events of natural origin have been recorded during the first 7 months of operation of the Apollo 12 seismic station. At least 26.. .are small moonquakes. Many.. .are thought to be meteroid impacts.” (Science, 11/6/70, 620-6)
News conference on results of Apollo 12 lunar surface experiment’s was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, said first anniversary of alsep was “scientific and technological triumph. The design specification was for one lunar day and night. Our design goal was for one calendar year.” Year after deployment alsep had received and processed over 6500 commands, had undergone 2600 533-K (500°F) swings of temperature, and was still being operated remotely 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said unmanned vehicle, such as U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I, could not explore surface as well as men could because men could deploy more equipment more effectively, perform more experiments, and collect more samples. He noted that Apollo 11 had collected 22.7 kg (50 lbs) of samples; Apollo 12, 34 kg (75 lbs); and Luna XVI, 90 g (0.2 lb). Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory said seismic events were being recorded at rate of about one per day; some were impacts from grapefruit-size meteoroids and some appeared to be small moonquakes. In region of Apollo 12 station there were at least nine places at which moon-quakes occurred “every month at or near the time when the moon comes closest to earth in its monthly orbital cycle.” Most active zone for moonquakes was about 193 km (120 mi) southeast of al-SEP, near rilles in Fra Mauro crater, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Charles P. Sonett of arc said data indicated moon’s temperature increased very slowly with depth below surface, probably rising no higher than 1273 K (1332°F)—too cool for molten core characteristic of volcanic body. Dr. Conway M. Snyder of jpl described behavior of thin cloud of ionized gas detected after ascent stage was crashed into moon. Solar wind of ionized particles should have blown the gas downwind; it traveled upwind and was detected by alsep instruments. Cause of acceleration of the particles was unknown. (Transcript; Schmeck, NYT, 11/19/70,32; O’Toole, WPost, 11/19/70, A14)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell visited Noerdlingen Crater near Tuebingen, West Germany, during field trip to familiarize themselves with kinds of rock they expected to find on moon. (AP, WPost, 8/12/70, A7) August 12: Development by MSFC scientists John W. Kaufman, Dennis W. Camp, and Robert E. Turner of “maxometer” that could record Seak hurricane velocities of more than 320 km per hr (200 mph), was escribed in Marshall Star. One version of maxometer was antispark severe-environment sensor that could withstand extreme temEeratures of Saturn rocket engine exhausts and acquire peak ex-aust-gas-flow speeds during launch. Other version was ambient environment sensor for recording peak wind speeds in thunderstorms, squall line activity, tornadoes, and hurricanes. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. had turned concept into dynamic pressure disc-spring device to measure 555-km-per-hr (345-mph) speeds to study air flow from launch of Saturn vehicles, essa had installed maxometer at National Hurricane Center at Miami and at Booth-ville, La., to gather hurricane data. (Marshall Star, 8/12/70, 1)
President Nixon made brief appearance at banquet for Republican leaders in Washington, D.C., after learning of Apollo 13 astronauts’ safe return. He told group that when he called mission commander James A. Lovell, Jr., after splashdown, Astronaut Lovell had said he was sorry mission had not been completed. “My reply,” President said, “was: ‘Captain, you and your colleagues did complete the mission.’ ” President told group, “After what happened this tumultuous week, let’s not take American wealth and strength for granted. . .where machines failed, we had to turn to man, and man came through.” President said it had been “proudest day of my life and in the life of the country.” Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said “social levelers of the New Left” would seize on Apollo 13 neardisaster to demand space budget be “soaked down into the nearest slum.” It would be “shortsighted tragic blunder” to heed warnings of “fair weather friends” of space program who were “readying the life-boats for a quick exit.” (Hope, W Star, 4/18/70, A2)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., one of seven original Mercury astronauts, was resigning effective July 31 to become President of National Exhibits, Inc., and member of Board and engineering consultant to Intersales, Inc., in Washington, D.C., NASA announced. Cooper had participated in Faith 7 mission launched May 15, 1963, and eight-day Gemini V mission launched Aug. 21, 1965. (NASA Release 70-103)
Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at National Press Club Luncheon in Washington, D.C., denied interest in running for office of Senator from Wisconsin: “I’m a public servant and I intend to be that way.” He hoped to devote “next two years at least” to helping develop strong, well-balanced space program. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/30/70)
Testimony on Apollo 13 mission was given before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator; Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director; and Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was unable to attend. Dr. Paine said: “The Apollo 13 mission was a failure. We did not succeed in America’s third lunar landing attempt and we were therefore unable to explore the moon’s Fra Mauro formation. This hilly region remains a high priority objective in our lunar program. . .. We cannot yet say which of the remaining Apollo missions will be sent there. Although the Apollo 13 mission failed, we regard the recovery actions that followed.. .as a gratifying success which will contribute greatly to the nation’s space flight competence.” There was no reason “why this setback should be—or should be made to be—the occasion for a major change in the course of the nation’s space program. We have clearly demonstrated the basic soundness of the Apollo system and of our operational procedures. ... From a technical standpoint, there is no question but that we are prepared to move forward in the 1970’s with the space program we have outlined to you....” Dr. Paine said President Nixon “fully shares this view.” (Testimony) Dr. Petrone testified: “This long arduous voyage continuously presented the challenge to balance the spacecraft systems required to perform necessary functions against the availability of consumables, of water, electrical power, oxygen, and the lithium hydroxide to remove the carbon dioxide. The options available to flight and ground crews in every case permitted acceptable courses of action to be selected. During this emergency situation, the remaining systems performed in an outstanding manner meeting the unusual demands placed upon them. At the same time, the flight and ground crews demonstrated exceptional confidence in meeting these sets of unusual circumstances.” Mission ended with “set of consumables which were within about two percent of what we had predicted back at 63 hours or about seven hours after the problem occurred,” Lunney told Committee. “If the consumable posture. . .had worsened or if we had absorbed another failure. . .we would have had to resort to scheduling communication times with the crew.” Although probably within 12 hours to 24 of running out of most critical consumable, water, “had we proceeded into.. .duty cycling the communications gear onboard, we probably could have stretched that period.” Astronaut Lovell described crew’s feelings during crisis: “We soon realized that our only hope of survival was to go into Aquarius, power up its systems and use the systems and the consumables on board. . .for a return home. And it was here that we realized that it was now a case of survival.” Spacecraft was on trajectory that “would have entered us in a sort of permanent orbit, some . 230. . .thousand miles [370 000 km] in apogee, and maybe a thousand [1600 km] or so in perigee. ... Again, the ground came through, and gave us. . .the free trajectory burn, which was required to get us back to earth. My main concern at this point was to get this spacecraft back within the earth’s atmosphere.” (Transcript)
Cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19 had eliminated six more astronauts from chance at moon trip, NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said in MSC interview. Of 49 astronauts on flight status, 39 had not yet flown in space. Many would not have opportunity for at least five years because of NASA budget cutbacks. Five astronauts had resigned since Apollo 11 lunar landing and further resignations were “very possible.” Slayton said he would not deter astronauts from resigning. “The facts of life are, we don’t need them.” (upi, NYT, 9/10/70, 54)
City council of Roermond, the Netherlands, had announced it would name street after Apollo 13 and include names of Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., in street signs, AP reported. (WPost, 4/20/70, A8)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations, described medical phenomena encountered by Apollo 12 astronauts in keynote address at Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine seminar in San Antonio, Tex. Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean had observed brilliant flashes of light on closing eyes in darkened portions of spacecraft. They were believed to be caused by charged particles or rays from sun or from space. Astronauts also experienced sensitivity to lunar dust, body changes including face fullness, reddened eyes, and flushed faces during early part of flight, and increase in skin bacteria beyond amount normal on earth. Dr. Berry blamed body changes on pooling of fluids in head from lack of gravity. Behavior of bacteria might make doctors consider altering normal skin surface bacteria content by special baths for astronauts before flight. Dr. Berry also said that woman might share in planetary exploration but tests were needed to ensure “she doesn’t create more problems than she solves. I think it would definitely be more comfortable if we took women along.” (Huntsville Times, 2/10/70; Huntsville News, 2/10/70)
Apollo 13 editorials: National Observer: “At a time when Americans were becoming bored with successful flights to the moon, the ordeal of Apollo 13 reminded the nation of the dangers and difficulties of space. But because of courage, care, and uncommon resourcefulness—because, in fact, of history’s most dramatic field expedient—the astronauts made their way safely back to earth. The first walk on the moon was a wonder of wonders, but the return of Apollo 13 was the gladdest moment of them all.” (National Observer, 4/20/70) Wall Street Journal: “Assuming all feasible precautions are taken, then, the issue of death potential should not really be a major factor in assessing the space program, and particularly the very costly moon program. That program should be judged on whether any gains from it are proportionate to the totality of its costs. Some scientists and laymen believe the costs are disproportionate. At any rate, that is the proper criterion for weighing the future of space exploration, not the admitted and awesome danger of death in eternal orbit.” (WSJ, 4/20/70)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on Communist Chinese satellite launch: “Of course Peking still runs far behind America and Russia in nuclear and space development... . But not nearly so far behind as only a few years ago. And apart from conjectures about progress in missilery, "Following Star' [satellite] is a reminder of the potential military dimensions of space which may acquire a new importance now that China has entered the extraterrestrial realm.” (B Sun, 4/28/70, A10)	_ April29: Members of Apollo 13 Review Board entered Apollo simulator alMSC and, using recorded data, reconstructed tense moments after explosion disabled spacecraft April 13. Board member Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said purpose of reconstruction was to give investigators better appreciation of accident from crewmen’s point of view. (W Post, 4/30/70, A27) *	Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, presented Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy to Apollo If crew—astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, since named Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs—in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award, established by National Geographic Society in 1961 for USAF members and units, honored crew for making most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress during 1969 by accomplishing first manned lunar landing, (dod Release 35970)	.	. *	essa announced award of $1.6-million contract to Gulton Industries Data Systems Div. to construct infrared temperature profile radiometer (ITPR), advanced satellite instrument for obtaining temperature sounding through atmosphere to earth’s surface, essa was de
Firemen in Evendale, Ohio, had worked two years to perfect new firefighting uniform of aluminum-beta glass, material used in astronauts space suits, UPI said. (W News, 4/20/70, 4)
Senate confirmed nomination of Col. James A, McDivitt (usaf), Apollo 9 astronaut and Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager at MSC, to be brigadier general. (CR, 1/2/71, S21852)
Former Astronaut Michael Collins was sworn in as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs in Washington, D.C. He would be responsible for State Dept, relations with U.S. public, particularly youth. (State Dept Release 3)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and wife, Janet, participated in ceremonies in Rome, Italy, during which Mrs. Armstrong christened Alitalia Boeing 747 named for her husband. Later Armstrong and wife flew in 747 Neil A. Armstrong from Rome to New York. (C Trib, 6/6/70)
Univ. of Southern California conferred degree of M.S. in aerospace engineering on Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Astronaut had pursued graduate studies under usc-Edwards afb program from 1955 to 1960 and had nearly completed degree requirements when he was transferred. Lecture delivered Jan. 22 by Armstrong on “Lunar Landing: Techniques and Procedures” completed requirements. (AP, W Star, 1/23/70)
Apollo 15 prime and backup crews were among 14 astronauts who observed explosion by Canadian Defence Research Establishment of 453 500 kg (500 tons) of TNT in international test near Suffield, Alberta. Blast produced 70-m-dia (230-ft-dia) crater 4.6 m (15 ft) deep, with central uplift similar to that observed in many lunar craters. Astronauts had been invited to view processes in crater formation. Explosion was second 453 500-kg detonation in series to determine effects on military equipment and civilian shelters of blast forces and ground shock equivalent to those from small tactical nuclear weapon, (msc Roundup, 7/31/70,1)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent comprehensive medical examination at ksc, including laboratory tests' to determine their immunity to German measles (rubella). Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, said crew was “in good physical condition and good shape to carry out the mission and the lunar surface activities,” but expressed concern that astronauts could develop German measles during mission. They had been exposed to rubella virus when Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., member of backup crew, developed disease April 5. (Wilford, NYT, 4/7/70, 1)
