Author Norman Mailer said in San Francisco that Americans were as interested in Apollo 14 as they would be in “border war in Bolivia.” He criticized images of astronauts projected by NASA. They were “tough men—daredevils” but nasa presented them as “priests.” NASA was “asking this country to love saints and Americans are not noted for that.” (AP, W Post, 1/31/71, A24)
Lagos, Nigeria, Morning Post congratulated Apollo 15 astronauts for successful mission, which they attributed to ingenuity and resourcefulness of NASA. Lunar explorations, Post said, would strengthen faith in and appreciation of God’s work. (FBis-Nigeria-71-153, 8/11/71, W6)
Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., received Honorary Knight of St. Patrick Award from College of Engineering, Univ. of Missouri at Columbia, Mo. (NASA Activities, 4/15/71, 61)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., retired from nasa to become Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif. He had logged 289 hrs 53 min in space during astronaut career. (AP, W Post, 7/2/71, A3)
NASA announced tentative schedule for 12-day Apollo 15 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft, carrying three-man crew, would be launched from ksc at 9:34 am edt July 26. Apollo 15 lm would land near moon’s Hadley Rifle at about 6:15 pm edt July 30. Two astronauts would spend 67 hrs on moon making three trips across surface on lrv. Spacecraft and crew would splash down in Pacific at 4:46 edt pm Aug. 7. (nasa Release 71-73)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, announced at msc that Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had become first man to gain weight while in space. Other two crew members had lost weight: Edgar D. Mitchell had lost 0.5 kg (1 lb) and Stuart A. Roosa had lost 4.5 kg (10 lbs). Shepard had gained 0.5 kg (1 lb). NASA physicians were making fluid tests on astronauts to determine reason for weight loss during space flight. (Altman, NYT, 2/11/71, 40)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented LM similar to those used for Apollo 11, 12, and 14 lunar landings to Michael Collins, Director of Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum and Apollo 11 astronaut. LM would remain on permanent display at museum. (Smithsonian Release 111—71; NASA PAo)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa began preflight semiquarantine at ksc to minimize their exposure to disease or illness that could delay Jan. 31 liftoff toward moon. Astronauts would be restricted to three buildings and contacts would be limited to 160 persons, all of whom had undergone comprehensive medical examinations, (upi, W Star, 1/11/71, A9)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 11484, bill permitting sale of land at ksc for Chapel of the Astronauts. (CR, 11/2/71, D1109; H Rpt 92-600)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 15 lunar landing: “Today, tomorrow and Monday will come the payoff for the years of work by the astronauts and thousands of others who made possible last night’s success. The trek across the moon’s surface these next three days will be the longest both in time and in distance to date, partly because of the availability of the lunar rover to permit moon rides as well as moon walks. The vast variety of geological conditions in the neighborhood of the Falcon’s landing site suggests that these excursions may be extremely fruitful.” (NYT, 7/31/71)
U.S. Postal Service public relations officers had asked Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to accompany cancellation of lunar landing commemorative stamp on moon during Apollo 11 mission with dialogue from two “casual, conversational” scripts, Julian W. Scheer, former nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, said in Washington Post article. “But NASA, figuring the first manned lunar landing was hairy enough without ceremonials, declined politely and, instead, Armstrong and Aldrin quietly canceled the first moon stamp and came home without postal fanfare.” Washington Post editorial commented on article: “While we have not cast the roles and read the script aloud, timer in hand, it is our definite impression that this spontaneous little exchange might have been good for the better part of one orbit of the moon and good also for a veritable barrage of phone calls from a flabbergasted public.” (W Post, 8/17/71, A14)
More than 15 astronauts were taste-testing three meals daily for five days in msc experiment to evaluate proposed food items for 28- and 56-day Skylab missions in 1973, msc announced. Tests would determine astronauts’ preferences and each astronaut’s energy requirements. They were coordinated by Technology, Inc., and conducted in msc Life Systems Laboratory. (Msc Release 71—74)
CBS commentator Walter Cronkite received Bradford Washington Award of Boston Museum of Science for “outstanding contribution toward public understanding of science.” Award, which included $5000 and gold medal, was presented by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at dinner commemorating museum’s 35th anniversary. Cronkite was cbs anchorman for coverage of most NASA manned space flight missions. (AP, Denver Post, 11/22/71; Lovell Off)
Economist editorial discussed lunar science investigations: “The growing importance of all this peering at, prodding, pounding, baking and growing plants upon moon soil is that the results are contradicting most of the moon theories of the past 15 years. It is not often that scientific concepts are set by the ears, and the piquancy this time lies in the way that the bulk of serious scientists originally believed that putting men on the moon was an unnecessary extravagance; instruments and unmanned probes could do the job, they felt, for a fraction of the cost and none of the risk. But, as it turns out, they could not. The instruments that were sent to the moon ahead of the astronauts did not produce the same results that the actual collection of rock samples has done, and it will be interesting to see if the Russians have done any better out of the robot shovelling of Luna 16.” (Economist, 1/9/71)
Findings that linked light flashes experienced by astronauts in periods of otherwise total darkness to high-speed cosmic rays passing through eye retina were reported at nasa and American Nuclear Society Conference in Las Vegas, Nev. Findings were from studies by scientists of Univ. of Washington at Seattle and Univ. of California at Berkeley. Dr. Cornelius A. Tobias and Dr. Thomas F. Budinger of Univ. of California at Berkeley had twice exposed themselves to low doses of cyclotron-accelerated cosmic rays aimed at their eyes in effort to reproduce flashes described by Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell. Scientists said they saw flashes that differed from visual phenomena associated with x-rays or electrical and magnetic exposures. They concluded that flashes came from ionization and excitation of atoms in retina as it was bombarded by cosmic rays. Evidence indicated flashes were detected by retinal rods, structures in eyes that allowed night vision. Radiations were not believed to be hazardous to astronauts on short flights, but long-duration effects had not yet been evaluated. (Wilford, NYT, 3/4/71, 18)
President Nixon was host to Apollo 15 astronauts and families at White House dinner. (PD, 9/20/71, 1288)
New York Times editorial commented on discovery of water on lunar surface [see Oct. 15]: “The possibility that the water vapor that has now been detected on the moon was originally brought there by Apollo astronauts cannot yet be dismissed. Nevertheless, even before Drs. Freeman and Hills announced their finding it was becoming increasingly clear that the moon is a much more complex body than had been supposed. We are still in the very infancy of the era of moon exploration, and its development for the benefit of the human race.” (NYT, 10/19/71, 40)
Cold-cathode ion gauge left on moon by Apollo 14 astronauts had discovered first hard evidence of gas escaping from lunar surface, Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said at MSC. At same time, seismometer left at Apollo 14 mission landing site had detected moonquake, suggesting quake might have released gas from moon or that sudden venting of gas trapped in cavern beneath lunar surface initiated quake. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/6/71, Al)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for “most complex and carefully planned scientific expedition in the history of exploration.” (nasa Release 71—242)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins assumed duties as Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. He had served as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs after leaving NASA. (Smithsonian Ann; Smithsonian Pio)
Scientists at msc, after studying Apollo 14 photos and questioning crew, reported Astronauts Mitchell and Shepard had turned back within 25-50 m (80-165 ft) of Cone Crater during second eva period. Crew was apparently misled by slight downhill slope around top of Cone Crater which led them to believe it was not part of crater. Ridge astronauts were struggling to reach appeared to have been southeast of Cone. (AP, B Sun, 2/17/71, Al)
Federal court in Orlando, Fla., had dismissed $5-million damage suit filed by widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, on grounds it was filed after statute of limitations expired, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 5/13/71, A9)
nasa published Mariner-Venus 1967, Final Project Report (nasa SP—190). In foreword, Project Manager Glenn A. Reiff said Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967, toward Oct. 19, 1967, flyby of planet Venus), apart from significant contributions to knowledge of deep space, had achieved secondary objective, “to gain engineering experience by converting a spare Mariner-Mars 1964 spacecraft into one that could be flown to Venus,” with substantial savings. Cost of mission had been 10% less than anticipated. (Text) During 1971: U.S. orbited 51 spacecraft in 29 launches—including Apollo 14 and 15 csms Kitty Hawk and Endeavor with lms Antares and Falcon and their S—IVB stages intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 97 payloads in 83 launches; Japan, 2; U.K., 1; France, 1; Italy, 2 (1 for U.S. on U.S. booster); and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 33 orbited by DOD in 17 launches and 19 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for USAF on behalf of NATO, 1 for France, and 1 for U.K. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launches of Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 manned lunar landing missions. Mobile equipment transporter, used for first time on Apollo 14 to carry equipment and samples, allowed astronauts to explore 3.5 km (2.2 mi) of lunar surface and collect 43 kg (94.8 lbs) of samples. On Apollo 15, astronauts traveled 28 km (17.4 mi) over lunar surface on four-wheeled, battery-powered lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover and collected 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples, including one white anorthosite rock about 4 billion yrs old. Unmanned program was highlighted by Mariner 9 Mars probe, which traveled 400 million km (248 million mi) to Mars and began transmitting photos of major Mars dust storm and, later, of details of Martian surface and moons Deimos and Phobos. Mariner 8 launch vehicle malfunctioned at launch. Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory—rescued from initially incorrect orbit by ground command—made first x-ray observations of beginning solar flare and revealed that sun had “polar caps.” Other unmanned missions included lntelsat-IV F-2 and Intelsat-IV F—3 for ComSatCorp and Explorer 43, Explorer 44, and Explorer 45 (the last launched for NASA by Italy). Launched as secondary payloads were Subsatellite on Apollo 15 and Tetr 3 on Oso 7. All elements of Skylab flight system reached final manufacturing and checkout in preparation for 1973 launch and intensive engineering studies on Space Shuttle were conducted throughout year. In joint NASA—usaf lifting-body program, M2—F3 and X—24A lifting bodies made 17 flights, including first supersonic flight by M2-F3. X-24A reached 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) before completing program and beginning modification for new flight program as X—24B. In aeronautics NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing - made 27 successful flights. USN F-14 fighter aircraft successfully demonstrated first automatically programmable variable sweep wing. USA CH—54B helicopter set new world altitude record of 5120 m (16 798 ft) while carrying 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) payload. New v/stol Wind Tunnel at LaRC became operational, providing greatly improved testing capability for scaled models. GE quiet experimental engine successfully completed initial tests in NASA program to reduce jet engine noise, and NASA let competitive design contracts for development of quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) transport U.S.-U.S.S.R. Space Activity, 1957-1971 Successful Launches to Earth Orbit or Beyond aircraft, sst program ended, with Congress voting to terminate program. In sounding rocket program, 126 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations and to make astronomical observations in x-ray, uv, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum. DOD’s 33 payloads included orbiting of 2 Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs-2) military comsats, 2 ov—i scientific satellites, and Cannonball 2 and Mmketball. U.S.S.R.’s 83 launches set an all-time record in number of flights. The 97 payloads included 81 Cosmos satellites, 2 Luna, 2 Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 2 Mars, 1 Intercosmos, 4 Meteor, 2 Molniya I, 1 Molniya II, and Oreol (launched for France). Soyuz 11, carrying three-man crew, Summary of Soviet and United States Space Payloads by Mission Category Soviet Union						United States 1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total		1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total Earth orbital science			 5	10	3	9	7	59	12	16	14	4	11	137 Earth orbital engineering								6	1	5	1	10	50 Communications				...... 4	4	2	5	3	23	19	11	6	6	6	83 Navigation/ferret			6	6	16	27	84	3	1		1 .		25 1	1	1	1 .		17 Military observation: Low orbit recoverable			 22	29	32	29	28	202	19	16	12	9	7	198 Low orbit nonrecover 		..... 8	10	12	12	12	67	7	7	11	4	6	77 4 .						10 Synchronous or higher 								2	1	3	5	1	18 Q	2	1	2	1	17 . 9	5	2	4	8	25 . Earth orbit man-related 			 3	4		i	2	20	1 .		1 .			11 Earth orbit manned			1	5	i	3	19 .						14 Lunar man-related			3	1	2 .		8	1	2 ,		1	3	13 Moon-unmanned programs			1	3	3	2	25	8	1 ,				21 Venus 		...... 2 .		2	2 .		17	1 .					2 5	10 .			2 .		1	5 Subtotal 				77	71	91	102	602	87	64	66	39	53	764 Orbital launch platforms			 6	8	6	10	7	59 . From Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Staff Report, Soviet Space Programs, 1971, 92d Cong., 2d Sess., April 1972, p. 5. ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971	During 1971 successfully rendezvoused and docked with unmanned Salyut 1 to form first orbital scientific station, but cosmonauts died during earth reentry because of improperly sealed hatch. Mars 2 and Mars 3 dropped instrumented capsules on Mars surface. Mars 2 capsule crashlanded and Mars 3 capsule transmitted 20 sec. Lunokhod 1 lunar rover carried to moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, continued to explore lunar surface until October 1971, when isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night. Japan launched two satellites—Tansei and Shinsei. China launched Chicom 2, France launched Tournesol, U.K. launched Prospero, and Italy launched San Marco 3. (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Lifting Body Off; GSFC Sounding Rocket Br; NASA Exec Secretariat; Sheldon, United States and Soviet Progress in Space, Library of Cong, 1/22/72) • NASA’s scientific and societal achievements advanced national goal of alleviating environmental problems and expanding basic research on behalf of humanity, as public pressed for immediate, usable returns from research in all fields. Apollo manned missions swelled storehouse of lunar information. Unmanned astronomical missions gathered unique data, including new clues to Martian atmosphere. NASA-developed inventions saw increased use beyond space exploration—in environmental sciences, communications, medicine, industry, and agriculture. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space meetings set stage for future joint space missions. And balanced program of space and ^aeronautics, despite low funding level, continued to raise U.S. prestige as aerospace pioneer while it worked to improve man’s future. Some observers, however, warned of higher rate of technological advances abroad than in U.S. and of ever-growing U.S.S.R. space program and technological capability. Soviet expenditures on space were estimated at level about double U.S. peak expenditure of l°/o of GNP when combined nasa-dod space program was at highest level and four times present level. Dr. James C. Fletcher was nominated new nasa Administrator by President Nixon. President of Univ. of Utah and former aerospace executive, Dr. Fletcher took office April 27. He succeeded NASA’s third Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, who had resigned Sept. 15, 1970, to return to industry. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, had served as Acting NASA Administrator in the interim. Operating at lowest budget level since 1962, nasa in 1971 continued phase-out of Apollo program with successful completion of Apollo 14 and 15. Man’s fourth landing on moon, in Apollo 15 mission, proved to many that man had an effective scientific role in space. At year’s end, Apollo 16 had been scheduled for March 1972, with Apollo 17 to complete program later in year. Reduced funding forced additional reduction of personnel as well as program cutbacks, stretching out remaining Apollo missions, delaying first Skylab flight, and slowing studies of space shuttle, nerva nuclear rocket engine program was reduced to holding action. Bioscience funding was eliminated. Aerospace employment in industry throughout nation also fell, reflecting cuts in DOD spending as well as in NASA’s. During year, however, Skylab hardware manufacture neared completion and space shuttle work continued. Shuttle preliminary design contracts were extended so that nasa could examine alternative configurations, contingent on Administration approval of shuttle development. In erts program, aircraft tested remote sensing devices for gathering earth resources data and first satellite for global monitoring of resources was scheduled for 1972. During 1971, instrumented aircraft measured air pollution, investigated corn blight infestation, and sought hidden natural resources. Pioneer-F spacecraft for planned 1972 launch and December 1973 Jupiter flyby went into final manufacturer’s tests. Increased emphasis on aeronautics included research into aircraft noise reduction, increased air transport efficiency with use of supercritical wing, and STOL aircraft for transportation. To emphasize practical goals of space science, NASA established new Office of Applications, increased technology utilization budget from $1 million to $5 million, and issued request for proposals for additional uses of space-developed technology to solve problems of society. Among NASA projects were nsf contract to investigate use of solar cells to electrify homes and buildings and hud contract to study application of space technology to sewage recycling. Joint nasa-dot study resulted in recommendations for civil aviation R&d policy (card). Research achievements at NASA centers included ARC discovery of amino acids—building blocks of life—in second meteorite. Discovery strengthened case for chemical evolution of life elsewhere in universe. NASA FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion was $27 million more than requested $3,271 billion and $29 million above FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion—halting downward trend but far below 1965 peak of $5,250 billion. (A&A 1971; O’Toole, W Post, 1/2/72, Al; Sheldon, Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70, Senate Doc 92-51)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 14 lunar landing: “. . . no one who sat entranced before the picture of yesterday’s historic events can have doubted that Antares has scored a major triumph in the effort to advance lunar exploration. Today Shepard and Mitchell will face new problems and grasp new opportunities as they lope their way toward Cone Crater and its geological riches. These two brave and highly skilled men—along with their partner, astronaut Roosa, in lunar-orbiting Kitty Hawk—are writing another brilliant and memorable chapter in man’s still-infant probing of earth’s nearest neighbor in the vast reaches of space.” (NYT, 2/6/71, 28)
Washington Post editorial criticized nasa agreement with New York Times Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for byline articles by Apollo 15 astronauts [see July 23] and reprinted excerpt from Sept. 19, 1963, New York Times editorial that had scored earlier NASA agreement with publications. Post said: “. . . we would like to record . . . some reservations about the practice of commercializing the space program by permitting any of its official participants to sell personal accounts of their experiences. Strictly in legal terms, there is not much doubt that such material is subject to copyright protection. But, leaving aside regulations, there is a question of propriety, first raised back in 1963, when the Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Life Magazine nailed down contracts totaling $1 million for the personal stories of 16 astronauts over a four-year span.” New York Times editorial in 1963 had said sale of astronauts’ stories represented “stain of commercialism on the record of the space program,” and that astronauts “should not be permitted to reap enormous private profits from outside sources on the basis of their participation in a great national effort.” (W Post, 7/29/71, A14)
Appointment of James T. Murphy as Director of faa Office of Air Transportation Security was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Murphy, former fbi special agent, had been serving on acting basis since May 1971. (faa Release 71-153) September 24^-25: Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were honored by usaf Academy at Colorado Springs, Colo., with parade and special civic day. They received usaf Distinguished Service Medals from Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nominations of representatives and alternates to 26th session of U.N. General Assembly. They included Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of msc Astronaut Office, as alternate. {PD, 9/13/71,1257, 1261) C.	Jones presented papers on space vehicle docking mechanisms. (nasa Release 71—169; arc Astrogram, 9/16/71, 1)
Retirement of Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., from NASA and usn, effective Jan. 1, 1972, was announced by nasa. Gordon, pilot of Gemini II (Sept. 12-15, 1966) and cm pilot for Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969), would join John W. Mecom, Jr., organization in New Orleans, La. Retirement would reduce number of astronauts to 46. (nasa Release 71—243)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by Univ. of Miami in Oxford, Ohio. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
President Nixon announced appointments to Citizen’s Advisory Committee on Environmental Quality, including Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman. {PD, 7/19/71, 1056)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received 14th annual Sylvanus Thayer Award from U.S. Military Academy Assn, of Graduates in ceremony at West Point, N.Y. Citation read: “For his selfless devotion to this nation’s aviation and space efforts reflecting the ideals symbolized in the West Point motto—Duty, Honor, Country. His outstanding accomplishments, spanning more than two decades of aeronautical history, have made him an acknowledged leader among American space pioneers.” Earlier he received sabre from 1800-member cadet corps and told cadets, “As I stood on the Sea of Tranquility and looked up at the Earth, my impression was of the importance of the small, fragile, remote blue planet.” Asked about future of U.S. space programs, Armstrong told press, “I am certainly optimistic, but we’re doing considerably less than we’d like to. But space is here to stay for all humanity.” (nasa pao; Everly, AP, NY Post, 5/5/71, 17)
KSC launch complex where Apollo 15 spacecraft and Saturn V booster stood ready for liftoff had been struck by lightning 11 times during past six weeks, Washington Post reported. First strike, June 14, had been equivalent to 98 000 amps—almost three times as powerful as average lightning strike and two thirds as strong as biggest lightning strike ever recorded in Florida. Two more strikes had followed within 15 min of each other and a 31 000-amp strike had hit launch pad one day later. On July 20 five separate lightning bolts with total amperage July 26-August 7: ApoJlo 15 carried three astronauts on the fourth successful lunar landing mission, returning them with 77 kilograms {170 pounds) of samples after 66 hours 55 minutes on. the moon’s surface. During prelaunch activities in Firing Room 1 of the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Control Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, Nisi. Administrator {right), spoke utith nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders; i/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), former Apollo Program Director; and Dr. Wernher tton Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning (left to right). of almost 100 000 amps had been recorded. Ninth strike of 22000 amps had occurred June 25, and last—weakest to date at 6600 amps— had occurred July 19, Neither spacecraft nor launch vehicle had been damaged. Apollo 15 was first spacecraft to have even a near miss from lightning strikes while being prepared for launch. [W Post, 7/25/71, A16) July 26—August 7: nasa’b Apollo J5 (AS—510) carried three-man crew on fourth successful lunar landing mission. LM-10 Falcon landed on moon’s Hadley-Apennine region and two astronauts conducted experiments, rode first manned lunar roving vehicle (lrv) on moon, and explored lunar surface. After 66 hrs 55 min on surface, Falcon rejoined orbiting CSM-112 Endeavor and astronauts transfered for safe return to earth with lunar samples, Spacecraft and S-1VB combination entered parking orbit with 171.4-km (106.5-mi) apogee and 169.4-km (105.3-mi) perigee. Translunar injection (tu) was achieved at 2:56 get and csm separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:22 get. Docking of csm with lm at 3:34 get was shown clearly by onboard color TV. S-IVB aps burns were conducted at 5:48 get and 10:00 get to send stage toward moon. Separated S-IVB/iU impacted lunar surface at 79:25 get (4:59 pm edt July 29) at 1° south latitude and 11.9° west longitude, 188 km (117 mi) northeast of Apollo 14 landing site and 355 km (221 mi) northeast of Apollo .12 landing site. Impact was detected by Apollo 14 seismometer 37 sec after impact and by Apollo 12 seismometer 55 sec after impact. . First midcourse correction (MCC-1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Shortly after csm-lm docking, telemetry data indicated electrical short in service propulsion system (sps). Troubleshooting isolated problem and MCC—2 at 28:41 get used sps bank A to analyze apparent intermittent short. Data indicated bank A could be safely operated manually. Modified procedures were developed for using bank B alone for remaining midcourse corrections except lunar orbit and transearth insertions, which would be dual bank burns. Scott and Irwin entered lm at 33:56 get, 50 min earlier than planned, to check out LM communications and other systems. TV pictures of csm and lm interiors were shown between 34:55 and 35:46 get. During checkout crew discovered range/range-rate exterior glass cover had broken, removing helium barrier. Crew began lm housekeeping V/2 hrs earlier than scheduled and vacuumed broken glass. At 61:13 Get, during preparations for water chlorination, water leak developed in cm chlorination septum gland but was stopped by crew, following repair instructions from ground, and water was absorbed with towels. Door of scientific instrument module (sim) was jettisoned at 74:06 get. July 29—August 4: Apollo 15 entered lunar orbit with 314.8-km (195.6-mi) apolune and 107.5-km (66.8-mi) perilune after LOI burn at 78:32 get (4:06 pm edt July 29). “This is really profound . . . it’s fantastic,” Scott said of view from moon. Apennine Mountains looked unreal. “They stand out in tremendous relief. They appear to be smooth or rounded. But they are cratered and in many places rough in texture. We don’t see any jagged peaks. They don’t look like . . . any other mountains we’ve seen on earth.” csm-lm undocking and separation maneuver was initiated during 12th lunar revolution, on far side of moon at 100:14 get, but spacecraft did not undock. Worden entered tunnel to inspect csm—LM umbilical and found plug was loose. After he reconnected plug and adjusted spacecraft attitude, undocking and separation were achieved at 100:39 get—about 25 min later than planned. lm Falcon touched down in moon’s Hadley-Apennine region near Salyut Crater at 104:42 get (6:16 pm edt July 30) about 600 m (656 yds) north-northwest of planned target. “OK Houston,” Scott said after touchdown, “the Falcon is on the plain at Hadley.” He said LM’s engine had stirred up so much dust that landing site had been completely obscured from 15-m (50-ft) altitude to touchdown: “We flew ifr from then on down.”	> Stand-up extravehicular activity (seva) to observe and photograph landing site and surrounding area began after cabin depressurization at 106:43 get. Scott put his head out of upper hatch and described and photographed area for 33 min. Scott said he could describe site July 29-August 4; Apollo IS entered lunar orbit July 29 and the lm Falcon touched down in the moon’s Hadley-Apennine region July SO for three eva periods of exploration. The lunar room# vehicle Rover, deployed during the first EVA July 31, was photographed by Astronaut James B. Irwin near Hadley RiUe (right center above), with the Hadley Delta in the background and St. George Crater partially visible at the upper right edge. Astronaut David R. Scott was working at the Rover. In the photo at right Irwin scooped a trench, with Mount Hadley in the background. A gnomon indicated the local vertical and the sun angle. Meanwhile CM pilot Alfred M. Worden, orbiting Hie moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography. for hours. Area was covered with craters, but strewn with very few large boulders; it was hilly, hut not rocky or rugged. First EVA began July 31 at 9:04 am EDT. Scott climbed down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded his descent, and stepped on lunar surface. Irwin followed and, while Scott removed TV camera from mesa and deployed it on tripod, Irwin collected contingency sample. Crew had difficulty deploying lev Rover; during checkout they found that front steering mechanism was inoperative and that there were no readouts on lev battery No. 2 amp-volt meter. Battery was found to be operating satisfactorily and decision was made to perform EVA-1 without LEV front-wheel steering. Crew mounted LEV and proceeded on EVA-1 traverse at 121:45 CET. Crew described EVA as “exploration at its greatest," and repeatedly used words “fantastic,” “breathtaking,” and “spectacular” to describe features as they rode Lrv at about eight km per hr {five mph). Scott said Rover handled quite well: “It negotiates small craters quite well, although there is a lot of roll. The steering is quite responsive . . . and 1 can maneuver pretty well. . . . There is no accumulation of dirt in the wire wheels.” Stops at stations where crew collected lunar samples and took photos were broadcast on TV with excellent transmission. At end of traverse alsef was deployed. Scott and Irwin reentered LM after 6 hrs 33 min exploring surface, 28 min sooner than planned because Scott used up more oxygen than anticipated.	' After resting inside LM, recharging and repairing portable life support system (plss), and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:15 get (7:49 am Edt Aug. 1). Lrv was powered up, circuit breakers were cycled, and lrv front steering was found to be completely operational. EVA—2 traverse included stops at Spur Crater, Dune Crater, Hadley Plains, and area between Spur and Window craters. Numerous samples and photos were obtained and TV transmission was good. Crew completed heat Sow experiment initiated during EVA—1, collected core sample, and deployed U.S. flag. After stowing sample container and him in LM, astronauts reentered LM at 149:27 GET, after 7 hrs 12 min on surface during EVA-2. Third eva began at 163:18 get (4:52 am edt Aug. 2), 1 hr 45 min later than planned because of cumulative changes in surface activities timeline. Late start and requirement to protect nominal liftoff time required shortening EVA. Alternate EVA plan was devised with traverse west from lm to Hadley Rifle. Astronauts traveled to Scarp Crater, “The Terrace” near Rim Crater, and Rim Crater, collecting samples and photographing lunar surface features. Scott tripped over a rock July 29-August 4: The command and service modules were photographed in lunar orbit from the lunar module, giving a view of the scientific instrument module (sim) bay, housing cameras and sensors to record data from the moon’s surface and atmosphere. and fell, but experienced no difficulty in getting up. Astronauts retrieved drill-core-stern sections and samples near ALSEP, returned to LM, off-loaded LRV and stationed it for TV coverage of lm liftoff, and reentered lm at 168:08 get, after 4 hrs 50 min—bringing total EVA time to 18 hrs 35 min. While lm was on moon Worden, orbiting moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. His observations included discovery of fields of cinder cones made by volcanic eruptions, delineation of landslide or rock glacier on northwest rim of crater on lunar farside, interpretation of ray-excluded 2one around crater P roc ulus as result of fault system, and discovery of layers on interior walls of several craters, suggesting volcanic collapse craters of calderas in maria. Scott and Irwin depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized LM, and lifted off lunar surface with 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples at 171:34' get (1:11 pm edt Aug. 2)—66 hrs 55 min after landing on moon. Liftoff, accompanied by usaf anthem “Off We Go Into The Wild Blue Yonder” taped and broadcast by astronauts from LM, was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully at 173:36 GET, as TV viewers watched. Scott and Irwin transferred from LM to csm with samples, equipment, and film, csm-lm separation and LM jettison were delayed one revolution to verify that CSM and LM hatches were completely sealed, LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 26° 22' north latitude and 15' east longitude at 181:30 get, 93 km (59 mi) west of Apollo 15 alsep site. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, Apollo 14, and Apollo 15 seismometers. Orbit-shaping maneuver was performed during 73rd lunar revolution in preparation for subsatellite launch. Scientific subsatellite was launched at 222:39 get (4:13 pm edt Aug. 4) into lunar orbit with 141.3-km (87.8-mi) apolune and 102.0-km (63.4-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 36-kg (80-lb) satellite 79 cm (31 in) long and 36 cm (14 in) in diameter carried three experiments and was housed in SIM bay with seven other new experiments. Satellite extended three l^-m (5-ft) booms, one with magnetometer to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and two for stabilization. Satellite also carried charged-particle sensors and equipment to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Transearth injection maneuver at 223:49 get put CSM on trajectory for home after 85 hrs 18 min (74 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Endeavour separated from sm at 294:44 get. Drogue and main parachutes deployed but one of three main parachutes partially closed during descent, causing harder landing than expected. CM splashed down in mid-Pacific about 10.1 km (5.5 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. Okinawa at 295:12 get (4:47 pm edt Aug. 7)-—12 days 7 hrs 12 min after liftoff. Astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, were carried by helicopter to biomed area* on recovery ship for post-flight examinations. After being declared in very good shape, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam afb, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. CM was retrieved and placed on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb, and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 15 objectives: to make seleno-logical survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Hadley-Apennine region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased eva operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for intermittent short circuit in Delta V thrust switch A, CSM—LM failure to undock properly, and increase in CM tunnel pressure preceding lm jettison. Flight crew performance was excellent. Accomplishments included first use of Lrv, lunar surface navigation device, direct lunar communications without lm relay, and ground-controlled remotely operated TV camera on moon; largest payload in earth orbit (140 310 kg; 309 330 lbs) and largest payload in lunar orbit (33 803 kg; 74 522 lbs); longest lunar surface stay time, lunar surface eva, distance traversed on lunar surface (28 km; 17.4 mi), and lunar orbit time (74 orbits); first subsatellite launched in lunar orbit; and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth. Apollo 15 was 12th Apollo mission to date, 9th manned Apollo mission, and 4th successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 14 mission had been conducted Jan. 31—Feb. 3. Apollo program was directed by OMSf; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by CSFC under overall direction of otda. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 7/26-8/7/71; W Post, 7/27-8/8/71; gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; nasa Special Release; NASA Release 71-119K; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/71, A1; AP, W Star, 8/1/71, A10)
Soviet President Nikolay Podgorny sent message to President Nixon: “Please accept . . . our congratulations on the successful conclusion of the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 14 and on the safe return of the American astronauts.” Tass said he also asked President Nixon to forward best wishes to “courageous crew.” (Reuters, C Trib, 2/11/71)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held press conference at msc. Astronauts described plans for Jan. 31 lunar landing mission and said they were eager to fly on what Mitchell called “a more mature spacecraft” in which “residual risks go down.” (Lannan, W Star, 1/11/71, A4)
Election of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins to International Aerospace Hall of Fame was announced by Hall of Fame President Martin R. Engler, Jr. Awards for 1971 would be presented to astronauts in San Diego, Calif., Oct. 23. Astronauts had been nominated “in view of their epic flight and its representation as one of the greatest single scientific achievements in the history of man.” (Letter to nasa Historian)
Safely back on earth after a nine-day journey to explore the surface of the moon, the Apollo 14 astronauts watched a pararescueman close their command module hatch following splashdown in the planned Pacific Ocean landing tone. of spectrum was high. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Data would be compared with data from similar launch jan. 29. (NASA Rpt srl; NASA Release 71-1)
NASA announced availability of two new publications. First, Implantable Biotelemetry Systems (SP—5094), listed biomedical telemetering instruments developed by NASA for monitoring physiological functions in human beings and animals and described devices and techniques for radiotelemetry physiological monitoring. Analysis of Apollo 10 Photography and Visual Observations (SP—232) described Apollo 10 mission and contained miniature halftones of photos taken by Apollo 10 astronauts, which could be obtained for study, (nasa Release 71-30; nasa Hq WB, 7/12/28)
Tenth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight. Freedom 7—Mercury spacecraft launched May 5, 1961—had achieved objective of putting man into suborbital flight when Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., went to 185-km (115-mi) altitude during 15-min flight. Anniversary was observed at KSC with exhibition of Mercury spacecraft and Redstone launch vehicle in main auditorium, motion pictures on Freedom 7 and Apollo 14, and guided tours. Following commemorative ceremony, Shepard visited Freedom 7 Elementary School in Cocoa Beach, Fla., where he told students he had made his last venture into space and would step aside to give younger astronauts a chance, (msc Release 71-28; msc pao; W Star, 5/6/71)
Apollo 14 astronauts completed test of ability to react to inflight emergencies in ksc simulators. During four-hour session, engineers simulated malfunctions that could occur during flight and monitored astronaut reactions. (AP, B Sun, 1/28/71, A10)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, described Apollo 15 crew’s medical status to press at msc. Astronauts James B. Irwin and David R. Scott had suffered brief periods of irregular heart rhythm on moon, probably as a result of extreme fatigue. Irwin also had dizzy spells in space. Arythmic heartbeats and dizziness had not been disclosed to press earlier, Dr. Berry said, because tests were still being conducted and complete information was not known. Until Aug. 13 Irwin was still suffering from effects of weightlessness; he still had mild dizzy spells and, when lying prone, felt as if his bed were tilted downward about 30°. Astronaut Alfred M. Worden’s medical data during transearth coast EVA had been close to predicted, and Worden was adjusting better than Scott and Irwin. None of the three, however, had returned to preflight norms, but there was “no medical danger” as far as crew was concerned. “Things from past space flights were all going in a pattern and now suddenly these guys don’t fit the pattern.” In assessing astronauts’ return to normal it was important to note how Apollo 15 differed from previous manned space flight missions. Important factors were longer time spent on lunar surface, longer lunar orbit stay time, and longer time spent in 100% oxygen atmosphere. Heartbeat irregularities, which had lasted about 10 heartbeats, were usually associated with fatigue, low potassium level, and increased adrenalin flow—all of which were present in astronauts. Because of fatigue levels of which astronauts were often unaware, flight surgeons were considering recommending that first evas on Apollo 16 and Apollo 17 be shortened. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 8/14/71, 1)
Miniature analytical clinical laboratory to monitor astronauts’ health on spacecraft was being developed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, aec announced. “Gravity-Zero” system would permit astronauts to perform quickly and automatically 16 parallel chemical tests on samples of plasma or serum, based on colorimetric determinations. Test results would be automatically radioed to ground control, which would recommend action to astronauts, (aec Release 0—51)
President Nixon presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa at White House dinner. President recalled briefing of President Eisenhower after Soviet launch of Sputnik 1: “And the briefing was a very exciting one by one of the scientific advisers to the President. . . . But then I shall never forget that at the conclusion . . . the one who was briefing the President . . . turned to him and said, ‘Mr. President, members of the Cabinet, I simply want to say that probably the most important discovery we will make in our exploration of space is not on this chart.’ And that was a lesson for me. It was a great lesson for the American people. Exploration . . . involves going into the unknown.” In space, “we think we know what we want to find and what we may find, but the more we explore we break into new vistas of knowledge. . . . America must continue to be a great nation. We must explore the unknown, not because of what we are going to find or think we are going to find, not because of the uses that we expect to get from space, but because there is something there, something there that we must explore. It’s there to find. . . . this Nation with all of its capability and with all of its promise is first in space today and America, as a great nation, must set as its goal remaining first in space, because that’s the way to continue to be a great nation. This is a goal that we must set for ourselves. “Now, to do this requires thousands of men and women on the ground, devoted and dedicated men in the scientific field, in the engineering field and other areas. It requires very brave men going on these journeys into outer space with all of the uncertainties that we saw on Apollo 13 and very brave women waiting at home with their children, their fathers, and their mothers.” (PD, 3/8/71, 407—11)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4067 designating day as National Moon Walk Day, “to commemorate the anniversary of the first moon walk on July 20, 1969, and to accord recognition to the many achievements of the national space program.” He said, “Two years after the first landing . . . other brave men are following in the footsteps of [Astronaut Neil A.] Armstrong and [Astronaut Edwin E.] Aldrin to explore the unknown and advance scientific knowledge for the benefit of all mankind.” (PD, 7/26/71, 1068)
NASA manned space flight officials proposed four-launch program to place astronauts in earth orbit to map U.S., study earth resources, and study pollution, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D.	Myers said in AP-reported interview that program was in preliminary stages and would require additional funding from Congress. MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said project would keep U.S. in maimed space flight business during period when U.S.S.R. would probably be very active in the field. Project would fill four-year gap between Skylab and manned space shuttle tests. It would also directly benefit mankind, Kraft explained: “The two-man crews will fly at a higher inclination than we’ve ever flown before in earth orbit. Using photographic and other sensing equipment developed in the space program, they could accurately map the entire United States, including Alaska. The astronauts also could make earth resources and environmental measurements.” (AP, W Star,	A16)
Analysis of discolorations on camera that had landed on moon with Surveyor 3 April 19, 1967, was reported in Science by JPL scientist Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe. Camera had been retrieved from lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts Nov. 20, 1969. Discoloration pattern indicated that camera had been whitened by impact of particles blown from lunar surface by exhaust of LM as it landed and also that many particles had moved at very low angles to the horizontal. (Science, 2/28/71, 798-9)
Senate and House met in Joint Session to receive and pay tribute to Apollo 15 astronauts, who reported on mission. Mission commander David R. Scott said of Apollo 15 lunar samples, “As I approached a fragment freshly deposited on the slopes of the Apennine, I realized it had been undisturbed since before life came out of the sea on earth.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden said first thing noticed after launch, “particularly when we got into earth orbit, was that we had a further view—we were further away from earth, and our view was expanding. We did not see any area around Cape Kennedy. What we saw were continents and oceans. . . . After we left earth orbit and foT the remainder of the flight our view was one of the earth.” Astronaut James B. Irwin described Hadley-Apennine campsite as “friendly, beautiful spot, like a valley in the high mountains of the earth; and it was with some reluctance that we left our valley on the moon.” He told Congress: “The future of man’s role in space lies in your hands. We realize very well the grave responsibilities in these days. The decisions you make will determine man’s travels and explorations in space. We think that an investment in space technology is an investment in America. America needs space to grow.” (CR, 9/9/71, H8224-5)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received rear admiral stars from Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee during Pentagon ceremonies. Shepard was first astronaut to achieve rear admiral rank. (W Post, 8/27/71, Al)
Newspaper editorials praised U.S. exploration. New York Times: “The Apollo program was born a decade ago as an element in Soviet-American rivalry for prestige and political advantage. But the program’s brilliant success has made obsolete the nationalistic considerations that seemed so important in the early 1960’s. Now it is evident that lunar exploration and eventual settlement offer rewards and challenges for all mankind. Do Washington and Moscow have the courage and imagination to begin making that prospect a reality?” (.NYT, 8/8/71) Washington Post: “There seems to be very little doubt that the mission completed yesterday by astronauts Scott, Irwin and Worden has been the most productive in the history of the Apollo program. The yield of scientific data has already been large and much more is sure to come as laboratories around the world analyze the rocks, pictures and other material. . . . The trip has been a bonanza . . . and it may well go down in history as one of the most useful expeditions ever conducted in helping mankind understand the universe in which it lives.” (W Post, 8/8/71)
Apollo 15 Astronauts Alfred M. Worden, David R. Scott, and James B. Irwin rode in motorcade to City Hall in New York, where they received gold medals from Mayor John V. Lindsay. Astronauts presented Mayor Lindsay with flag carried on Apollo 15 mission. Later astronauts were welcomed to U.N. by Secretary General U Thant, to whom they presented replica of plaque they had placed on moon to commemorate astronauts and cosmonauts who had died in performance of duties. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 147-8; Kaufman, NYT, 8/25/71,1)
Apollo 14 astronauts and families visited both houses of Congress. Astronauts reported to Senate and House on mission. Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., told Senate they had “a totally successful mission, not only from the areas of scientific and technical endeavors achieved, but also in the areas of international prestige and the tremendous posture of this country.” (CR, 3/2/7\, S2306-7)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 14 difficulties in docking CSM with LM [see Jan. 31-Feb. 9]. New York Times said that “as the world waited tensely for the outcome of the struggle to solve the problem, there was a deep sense of disappointment at the possibility that all the effort, training and planning that went into this mission have been imperiled.” (NYT, 2/1/71, 30) Washington Evening Star editorial called Apollo 14 “pressure mission.” It had “already qualified for several entries in the record book. It is the first Apollo mission to be crewed entirely by men who have never before flown in earth orbit and commanded by a veteran whose total previous time in space was 15 minutes. The mission is led by the oldest man to go into space, the first American to ride a rocket, the only astronaut to return to active duty after a medically enforced period of idleness. It is the first Apollo shot to be delayed because of weather. It is the first to run into a major problem on its first day out. It is a mission that, in the opinion of many in the top ranks of the space agency, will decide the future of manned space flight.” (W Star, 2/1/71) _	_
Rep. Leonor K. Sullivan (D-Mo.), Chairman of Consumer Affairs Subcommittee of House Banking and Currency Committee, sent to ftc material on Franklin Mint, private corporation that produced silver medallions carried on Apollo 14 mission Jan. 31—Feb. 9. She suggested ftc investigate promotional use by Franklin of medallions, which had been melted down into ‘minimoons’—coins advertised as containing silver that had been to the moon. Washington Daily News said Rep. Sullivan’s action had been prompted by order issued by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of Astronaut Office, that no more Franklin Mint medals be carried on NASA missions. Shepard had noted, News said, that Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 Franklin medallions in CM (which never left lunar orbit), had distributed 150 to friends and relatives on mission’s completion, and had returned 50 to Franklin with understanding they would be made into coins for members of Franklin Mint Collectors Society, but not used to promote sales. (Thomasson, Scripps-Howard, W News, 9/2/71, 24)
Columbia Journalism Review editorial criticized New York Times for Aug. 15 publication of “soap-opera style exclusive interviews with the families of Apollo 15 astronauts obtained through the newspaper’s purchase of their personal stories.” Times had “condemned this kind of exploitation, by other publishers, only eight years ago.” (Columbia JournRev, 11/12/71, 6)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was named Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC. Veteran of four space flights totaling nearly 30 days in space, Lovell would assist in overall management of Science and Applications Directorate, (nasa Special Release; msc Release 71-34)
President Nixon transmitted nasa’s 22nd Semiannual Report to Congress covering July 1 to Dec. 31, 1969. In letter accompanying report, Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, wrote, “The two successful Moon missions [Apollo 11 and 12] fulfilled the national goal of a manned lunar landing and safe return within the decade of the sixties and convincingly demonstrated the technological competence of the Apollo program.” Flights had shown “value of the space program as a unifying force in international relations, for interest in the Moon landings and in the astronauts transcended national boundaries. This Nation, in turn, took the view that the achievement was a triumph for all mankind even though the deed itself was performed by American astronauts.” (Text; CR, 3/17/71, H1631)
NASA board investigating Jan. 23 helicopter crash in Indian River near ksc—in which pilot, Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, escaped injury— had named misjudgment in estimating altitude as primary cause, nasa announced. Mitigating factors were lack of familiar objects on Indian River surface to help pilot judge altitude, possible visual focusing on false water surface because of water’s smoothness, change in sun reflection on water caused by change in course, and possibility that Ceman’s experience with high-speed aircraft might have contributed to altitude misjudgment in slower craft. Board said Cer-nan’s survival training as astronaut and naval aviator was major factor in his escape from submerged wreckage and burning fuel. (nasa Release 71-206)
Langley Visitor Information Center was dedicated in formal ceremonies at LaRC. Dr. James C. Fletcher attended, in first official visit of new NASA Administrator to any NASA center. Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) said in dedication speech: “Space flight has opened up new vistas of flight and of the mind to understand the universe and our place in it. Our technology has become the world’s best and has brought us prosperity in a highly competitive environment.” Dr. Fletcher said center would give public broad understanding of what was happening in aerospace technology. Science was “part of our everyday life.” Technological society would continue “for the next 100 or perhaps 1,000 years.” Center displayed model aircraft, model spacecraft, lunar sample, and suit used by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., while training for Apollo 14 mission. (Langley Researcher, 5/28/71, 1; 6/11/71, 1: Text)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) died of heart attack in Washington, D.C. He had been ranking Republican member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics and member of House Committee on Foreign Affairs. In 1958 Rep. Fulton had volunteered at committee hearing to serve as astronaut. Washington Post obituary said he had fought hard for programs to keep U.S. from “dropping out of the space race.” (Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
Marine* 9, launched, from the Eastern Test Range on a 398-million-fdlometer (247-million-mile) direct-ascent trajectory, headed toward the planet Mars. Encountering Mars Nov. 13, the spacecraft would be the first to orbit a planet other than earth. Mariner 9—weighing 1000 kilograms (2200 pounds) and spanning almost 7 meters {22% feet) with its solar panels extended—would orbit Mars 90 days to study the atmosphere and surface in detail and map 70 percent of the surface. during 1971 opportunity; Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) launch attempt May 8 had failed because of malfunction in Centaur stage of booster. Scheduled for arrival at Mars on Nov. 14, Mariner 9 would make detailed study of Martian surface and atmosphere and map 7G^o of surface during planned 90-day orbit of planet. Launch vehicle performance and spacecraft injection were nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed four solar panels at 6:40 pm, and locked sensors on sun at 7:16 pm, soon after leaving earth’s shadow. About four hours into flight Canopus sensor was energized and spacecraft rolled 55° and locked onto star Achernar. Canopus acquisition was achieved at 10:26 pm and spacecraft would remain in sun-Canopus orientation for mission except during maneuvers. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. Mariner 9 weighed 1000 kg (2200 lb) at launch and carried six scientific experiments: infrared radiometer to measure surface temperature; uv spectrometer to investigate composition and structure of atmosphere; infrared interferometer spectrometer to measure surface and atmospheric radiation; S-band occultation experiment to study pressure and structure of atmosphere; TV cameras to transmit low-and high-resolution photographs of surface; and experiment to investigate Martian gravity field. Orbit of spacecraft was designed to guarantee it would not hit Mars for at least 17 yrs, to avoid contamination of planet before studies on surface were made by landing spacecraft. ossa assigned project responsibility to Jpl, including mission operations and tracking and data acquisition. Launch vehicle was responsibility of Lenc, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Division, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 71—75) May 30-June 6: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa during visit to France attended Paris Air Show; inspected aerospace facilities at Bretigny, Toulouse, and Salon-de-Provence, and attended reception by Mayor of Dijon, (nasa Release 71-84; msc pio)
Apollo 15 astronauts on European tour met with Pope Paul VI in Rome. Pope told them he hoped their voyage to moon would help men appreciate God and live in harmony. (AP, W Post, 11/18/71, H3)
Dr. Donald L. Holmquest, scientist-astronaut selected in August 1967, had been granted one-year leave from NASA for teaching and medical research at Baylor Univ. School of Medicine in Houston, NASA announced. Dr. Holmquest would pursue “sub-specialty studies in the field of nuclear medicine in addition to general medical research and research related to NASA programs, such as a more convenient method of measuring changes in body calcium.” He would return to astronaut program May 15, 1972. (msc Release 71—73)
Washington Post editorial commented on plans for new Air and Space Museum: “We are glad that skyrocketing costs have brought the proposed National Air and Space Museum down to earth. The trouble with the design architect Gyo Obata prepared several years ago was not only that it would now cost $70 million to build. It was also far too grandiose, bold and ambitious.” U.S. air and space accomplishments “have a very prominent place in the hearts of the American people . . . they should also have a prominent place in the nation’s capital. But that is not to say that we need or want a monumental aircraft hangar.” Museum Director, Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins, had described new museum as “national center for education about the science and technology of flight and its economic, social, cultural and political meaning.” New model, Post said, “shows a pleasing and interesting structure that is well behaved. ... If it lacks architectural excitement, that is not what we want on the Mall.” Post also published letter from Gilmore D. Clarke, former Chairman of Commission of Fine Arts, protesting construction of Air and Space Museum on Mall, “on a site of restricted size whereon the structure cannot be enlarged in the course of years as the science of aviation and outer space technology advances. Whatever is built will, within a decade or two, prove to be too small,” (W Post, 11/23/71, A18, A19)
Gold issues of first annual United Nations Peace Medal, issued to coincide with U.N.’s 26th anniversary, had been presented to Apollo 15 astronauts, AP reported. For collectors, medals would be in silver and bronze. (B Sun, 11/14/71, A3)
Washington Post editorial commented on NASA’s public information policy: “There is something strange about the decision ... to bring in a New York lawyer, Paul Sawyer, as a consultant on its public affairs policies. NASA has had, for a decade now, what seems to us and to most journalists to be the most effective and most honest public information program in government. It is hard to see why public monies should be spent to study it, particularly when the man chosen to make the study has represented the astronauts in recent months in negotiating private contracts for the stories of their activities.” (W Post, 3/27/71, A18)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified on aerospace unemployment before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 authorization hearings: From number of studies of unemployment of scientists and engineers, estimated 30 000 to 40 000 were out of work at end of 1970. “The majority of these came from aerospace-related industries. Projections indicate that this number could more than double by June 1972, which means that as many as 30 percent of the Nation’s aerospace scientists and engineers will be unemployed. The effect of this national trend—in terms of an individual scientist or engineer being reemployed—is magnified by the concentration of this unemployment, geographically and by training and experience. . . . This not only causes great personal hardship but . . . represents the loss of a tremendous national resource.” NASA-sponsored survey by Battelle Memorial Institute of persons laid off by group of nasa contractors from June 1968 to September 1970 had made preliminary findings: only 31% had found permanent jobs, 32% had found temporary jobs, 32% were still unemployed, and 5% had left work-force. Average person was unemployed 31 weeks. Of those who had found permanent jobs, only 18% returned to aerospace. Of those permanently employed outside of aerospace, only 12% reported having positions highly related to aerospace skills and 50% reported new positions unrelated to aerospace. Unemployment rate of those over 50 was 48%. Of those who had found permanent work outside, 31% said they would not return to aerospace if given opportunity; 16% said they would. Preliminary results of survey indicated “we are losing much of the aerospace capability that is an indispensable ingredient of our long term economic strength and national security.” In closing, Dr. Low made point that there was “no either/or choice between technological advances and social advances. Without technology, we cannot maintain the capability to deal effectively with any national problem.” Dr. Low was questioned on his testimony that U.S.S.R. was spending more on R&D than U.S. was spending in total science and technology area. He answered that Soviet space program, with apparent Soviet policy of steadily increasing r&d investment, would soon match and then surpass U.S. program in size and accomplishment. “For this comparison, I am dealing with the combined civil and military space programs of both nations; to try to differentiate between civil and military activities of the U.S.S.R. would be speculative at best. The most difficult comparison to try to make between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. economies or programs is in terms of absolute costs: each national economy is geared and motivated to produce a different, nonparallel mix of goods and services.” (CR, 7/31/71, E8611—2) Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed future of Apollo program: “We can now move with confidence to the final phase. ... In these last missions, we will expand the capability of the system very dramatically. Design changes in the spacecraft and supporting equipment will allow the two astronauts in the lunar module to remain on the moon up to 67 hours, as compared with 34 hours on Apollo 14. The scientific payload landed on the moon will be doubled to above 1200 lbs [544 kg]. Changes in the command and service modules will permit up to 10 days total flight time and major increases in orbital scientific activities. During the Apollo 15 and 16 missions small subsatellites will be placed in lunar orbit and will continue to make scientific measurements long after the astronauts return to earth.” In Skylab program, “three separate three-man Skylab flight crews will be selected during the coming year. Scientist astronauts will be included. . . . They plan to perform about 50 experiments in various disciplines. Twenty of these are in the life sciences, to determine how human beings adjust and perform under the conditions of prolonged space flight, up to 2 months’ duration. “They will also operate the Skylab Earth Resources Experiment Package in the second space flight phase of NASA’s earth resources program. These observations will be in conjunction with [and] complementary to those [of] the automated earth resources test technology erts, to be launched in 1972.” FY 1972 request for space shuttle of $100 million would provide for broad spectrum of studies, including analysis of new alloys and promising external materials for thermal protection; test demonstrations of design concepts for structures; wind-tunnel tests to define aerodynamic heating, launch aerodynamics, etc.; design of long-leadtime hardware, subsystems, and test devices; initiation of scaled model for flight tests; dynamics testing; electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing; and integration of upgraded fuel-cell electrical power subsystem with other components for proof-of-concept testing. (Transcript) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, testified on dod applications of space transportation system and dod-nasa teamwork on space shuttle: “Present dod satellite communications program consists of two major systems: The long distance point to point or strategic system and the local-area multiple-user or tactical system. . . . We are pursuing a new system called Defense Satellite Communications System, Phase II, which can provide many voice channels to selected limited areas of the earth. These present and proposed systems give us the flexibility for voice and teletype communications from our forces overseas and allow rapid transmission of photographic images from operational theaters to the United States.” In conjunction with NASA studies, usaf was analyzing defense applications of space shuttle to provide better insight into utility of concept for dod. usaf was providing NASA with data to help ensure that configuration was of maximum utility to dod. nasa and usaf had worked jointly on engine development. Air Force “has supported advanced development efforts on liquid rocket engines in the past, and more recently concluded a hydrogen/oxygen high performance engine demonstration program.” Engine, XLR-129, had “provided the basis for selection of the reusable high pressure rocket engine concept for the shuttle. It also provided design data for a 250 000-pound [1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which supports the current shuttle engine design concepts.” In operational testing area, “usaf and NASA recently conducted unpowered approach and landing demonstrations with F—Ills and B-52s. . . . These demonstrations investigated terminal area energy management for maneuvering reentry vehicles and have a relationship to the Space Shuttle operational concepts.” (Transcript)
Safe splashdown-—with an extra bump. The Apollo 15 command module, completing its 12-day lunar mission, descended to the waves on two of its three parachutes. The third parachute collapsed, increasing impact velocity to 35 km per hr 122 mph), but did not endanger the astronauts or the spacecraft.
Dale D. Myers, Nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on nasa FY 1972 authorization bill: “With the Apollo 14 scientific instruments operating properly, we now have begun to develop the networks of instrumentation at different locations on the lunar surface which will allow us to use normal triangulation procedures to establish the details of the moon’s structure. We have two passive seismometers and two suprathermal ion detectors in operation, one each at the Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 sites, about 115 miles [185 km] apart. Last week severed moonquakes were reported . . . when the moon reached its perigee. Our instruments pinpointed the location of these events . . . close to the Fra Mauro crater area. “We also have a laser ranging retroflector at the Apollo 11 Tranquility Base and another at Fra Mauro—750 miles [1200 km] apart. The laser ranging team at the MacDonald Observatory in Texas has reported high-quality returns from the Apollo 14 reflector. As the world’s observatories refine their ability to use these instruments, we hope that they will be able to detect random wobbles of the earth’s rotational axis. If so, this may contribute to the ability to predict major earthquakes.” During past year, design and essentially all phases of development testing had been completed for Skylab and flight hardware was in fabrication. Definition of space shuttle was nearing completion. To develop limited capability to rescue Skylab astronauts from space, NASA had initiated design action on modification kit to give Skylab CM capacity to carry two men up to orbit and five men back to earth. Stranded astronauts could use Skylab cluster as shelter while modification kit was installed and Apollo-Saturn IB launch vehicle assigned to next revisit was made ready for launch. (Transcript)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden arrived in London to begin two-week, five-country tour of lectures and meetings with European scientists, (upi, C Trib, 11/8/71)
DOD signed $25-million contract with Lockheed Space & Missiles Corp. for definition and development phase of new-generation submarine-launched ULMS (underwater long-range missile system) with maximum 10 000-km (6200-mi) range. (Reuters, B Sun, 12/1/71, A12; W Post, 12/1/71, A14)	,	-.. November 30—December 2: Apollo 15 investigator’s symposium was conducted at Lunar Science Institute in Houston, Tex. Apollo Photo Science Team members Robert D. Mercer of Dudley Observatory and Lawrence Dunkelman of GSFC described photos of sun and interplanetary dust taken by Apollo 15 cm pilot Astronaut Alfred M. Worden. Photos showed features of solar corona and zodiacal light never before observed. Preliminary examination of photos showed “light levels less than can be seen by the best telescopes on earth.” Analysis of photos would permit direct, comparative measurements of solar phenomena’s relative brightness to obtain information on mechanisms by which energy left sun and on distribution of particles outward from sun. (msc Release 71—97) November 30-December 3: Joint meeting of nasa and European Space Conference (esc) was held in Washington, D.C., to identify candidate areas for possible European participation in post-Apollo space programs. Meeting had been proposed in Sept. 1 letter from Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson to Belgian Science Minister Theo Lefevre, esc Chairman, (nasa Release 71—235, 71—241; nasa pao) During November: arc research into heat shields to protect aircraft passengers in crash fires was described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by ARC and Avco Corp. scientists. Concept of surrounding passenger compartment by fire-retardant shell to protect occupants long enough for fire to burn out or be extinguished had been made possible by Apollo program research into fire-retardant materials polyisocyanurate foam and intumescent paint. “Exposed to heat . . . paint expands to many times its original thickness and insulates the surface underneath it. The thermal-protection mechanisms of these materials operate on the same ablative principles . . . that protect our astronauts during re-entry of the Apollo spacecraft.” (Neel, Parker, et al., A&A, 11/71, 18-26)
Newspapers commented on Apollo 15 mission, while astronauts were exploring lunar surface. Christian Science Monitor editorial praised Apollo 15: “Once again, a superbly synchronized lunar mission has proven man’s capacity to focus the knowledge of hundreds of specialists to achieve a singular goal. Apollo 15 is one more grand historic achievement. It testifies to the benefit that science and technology, properly harnessed, can reap for mankind.” (CSM, 8/2/71) French novelist and TV critic Jean Dutourd commented on Apollo 15 TV coverage in France Soir. It had made him walk away from TV set. “It must be confessed,” he wrote, “that these experiments are an unspeakable bore.” (Reuters, W Post, 8/3/71, All) New York Times editorial defended manned space flight: “After Apollos 16 and 17 next year, there are no known plans of any nation to send any more men to the moon. A vast and complex technology developed at the cost of many billions of dollars over the last decade is being abandoned even as its vast potentialities are being demonstrated. If American resources do not permit manned lunar exploration beyond the end of next year, the United Nations should take over the task, appealing to all governments for funds and soliciting contributions as well from private individuals and private business enterprises. The dusty planet that is the moon could become the planet of human cooperation, a new frontier of hope for all mankind.” {NYT, 8/2/71, 22)
Spencer M. Beresford, NASA General Counsel, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during hearing on H.R. 4545, Chapel of the Astronauts bill. NASA had agreed to consider request by Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., to purchase up to seven acres (three hectares) of land adjacent to ICSC Visitor Information Center for construction of “nondenominational, nonsectarian, nonprofit public facility for worship or meditation and a memorial to the astronauts.” NASA was then “actively engaged in the defense of a law suit arising from the reading of portions of the Bible by the crew of Apollo 8 while in space.” Wishing to avoid a further suit, NASA had sought assurance that Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., purpose was “truly nondenominational.” Corporation had complied with NASA’s request for assurance. “It is my professional opinion that ... if present plans for the Chapel are followed and it is operated with sound discretion, the Chapel Corporation, NASA and the United States Government are as secure from successful legal attack as is possible.” (Proceedings)
U.S. Dept, of Justice asked Supreme Court to deny atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair’s request that U.S. astronauts be prohibited from undertaking religious activities during lunar missions. Solicitor Gen. Erwin Griswold said astronauts carried only personal religious items which improved their morale and contributed “to the success of the flight.” (upi, H Post, 2/17/71)
Wapakoneta, Ohio, birthplace of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, celebrated second anniversary of first moon walk by Armstrong with display of flags and model of lm on concrete blocks on street comer. For third anniversary, in 1972, Armstrong expected to return to home town for dedication of $l-million Armstrong Museum being constructed at edge of town. Daniel R. Porter, Director of Ohio Historical Society, had said museum would feature Ohio’s contributions to aerospace age from early balloon ascents through achievements of Wright brothers, who had lived in Ohio, to space exploits of Ohioan Astronaut John H. Glenn. Exhibits would include experimental aircraft flown by Armstrong as test pilot, gallery of flight artifacts, “nasa Room” containing space travel exhibits, and “infinity cube,” mirrored room with lighting to give effect of projection into infinity. (Wilford, NYT, 7/21/71, 22)
European interest in U.S. space program had “with notable exceptions” dwindled since Apollo IPs first lunar landing and “trouble-fraught” Apollo 13, New York Times said. Despite extensive press and TV coverage, Europeans had taken Apollo 14 for granted. “In some countries local events overshadowed man’s third visit to the moon,” but in West Germany opinion poll had shown that 64% favored continuation of manned space flights. Frankfurter Rundschau editorial had said, “What Shepard and Mitchell carried off couldn’t have been done by a Lunokhod.” Polish newspapers had given equal prominence to Lunokhod 1 and Apollo 14, but stressed technological feat of unmanned vehicle. Soviet press had highlighted Apollo 14 difficulties to suggest superiority of unmanned vehicles. Soviet man in street “seemed bored with space exploration, although some Russians went out of their way to ask Westerners about the United States moonshot.” Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet youth daily, had praised astronauts’ “indisputable bravery.” In U.K. Apollo 14 had been overshadowed by unrest in Northern Ireland and collapse of Rolls-Royce Ltd. Live TV coverage of Apollo 14 had been less than of previous Apollo missions. Earthquake and civil disorders had crowded Apollo 14 from front page of Italian newspapers, and Feb. 7 power blackout in New York had received as much space as launch. Italian radio and TV coverage had been thorough but audiences seemed smaller than for previous Apollos. Pope Paul VI had praised Apollo 14 as advance for all mankind. In France interest had waned as mission progressed. Newspapers and TV offered comprehensive coverage but “excitement of two years ago” had vanished. Spaniards, too, were losing interest in space exploration and public interest had declined in Hungary and Yugoslavia. Communist student, leader in Zagreb had said, “If the Americans and Russians would cooperate in space instead of carrying their rivalries to the moon, maybe there could be some scientific progress on earth and maybe the smaller nations could be helped to contribute their knowledge instead of being shut out of science by the expense.” (NYT, 2/10/71, 24)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held 25-min press conference, televised from spacecraft during transearth coast. Mitchell called mission “quite a success” in spite of failure to reach Cone crater during second EVA: “I think the majority of the type rocks we would find at the rim were in the boulder field that we were working, although it was a disappointment, just as a matter of challenge, not to get up there. I think we accomplished the scientific objectives that we went for.” Shepard explained major problem was “the undulating terrain where you simply couldn’t see more than 100 to 150 yards [90 to 140 meters] away from you. Consequently, you were never quite sure what landmark would appear when you topped the next ridge. We were very surprised when we . . . approached the ridge which we thought to be the rim of Cone Crater, to find there was another one behind it. And that was the beginning of the real problem. As far as we were concerned, our only problem was the amount of time allotted for the excursion. To us it was just a matter of working against the clock. I don’t believe that we were disoriented or lost any time. I think if we had wanted to reach the top of the crater and did nothing else, that we could have done that within the time period allotted. But I think the method to which we reverted ... of collecting rocks from a point not quite near the top of the crater provided a lot more geologically and gave us a better cross-section of the rocks in the area . . . than had we gone to the crater and back and not collected as many rocks.” (NYT, 2/9/71, 26)
Dangers inherent in separation of science and government were discussed in New York Times article by Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Prizewinning Hungarian biochemist at Marine Biological Laboratories in Woods Hole, Mass. “Among our 450 representatives in Washington there is not a single scientist, so they do not know that problems are like equations which cannot be solved by trickery, blows or bombs, not even atomic bombs.” With different assumptions different selfconsistent systems could be constructed; each seemingly logical. “Ptolemy placed the earth at the center of the universe, Copernius the sun. Each system is perfectly logical and self-contained. Copernicus himself never dared to give preference to his own. The only way to decide between the two is to see where they lead. An astronaut basing his calculation on Ptolemy would end in the nowhere. Our present political system leads to poverty, inflation, unemployment, crime, drugs, war and the neglect of our priorities toward a final catastrophe. The solution is not separating science from politics . . . but making it penetrate into politics.” (NYT, 10/23/71, 33)
Extrasensory perception tests aboard Apollo 14, launched Jan. 31, were described by Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell during press conference at Foundation for Research on the Nature of Man at Durham, N.C. In unauthorized experiment, Mitchell had tried to send messages to four “receivers” on earth while en route to moon. He had carried cards bearing ESP test symbols and concentrated on random order of cards while receivers on earth wrote down order in which they believed he was	“transmitting.” While	plan	had called for “transmission” once daily	for six	days, Mitchell	had	been able to	perform experiment for only four days. Two of his receivers had reported “receptions” for all six days, one for one day only, and another for two days. Mitchell said preponderance of wrong answers was significant because it was	“so far	below chance	that	the odds are	approximately 3000 to one	against	it being a chance	result.” If it	was not chance, Mitchell said, results indicated “extrasensory exchange.” Mitchell declined to identify his receivers, but Olof Johnsson of Chicago had said he was one psychic who had participated. (AP, NYT, 6/22/71, 22; upi, W Star, 6/22/71, Al)
Newspapers published preliminary summary of Apollo I5’s scientific and technical achievements. Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post: “The voyage of Apollo 15 did far more than extend man’s reach into the heavens. It showed dramatically that man belongs in space. At the end of their three days on the moon and six in lunar orbit, the astronauts . . . had gathered more scientific information about the moon than all the manned and unmanned spacecraft that had flown before them.” Cameras and instruments in SIM had made first extensive observations from lunar orbit. One of first findings was confirmation that moon was not perfectly round and was dimpled. Evidence from seismometer was backed up by bistatic radar in which spacecraft signals were used to penetrate lunar surface to core. Seismometer’s reception of LM’s impact on moon indicated that even small explosion or impact could be recorded at extreme range and verified earlier hypothesis that meteorite impacts were being recorded daily from all over lunar surface. Addition of Apollo 15 station to existing seismic net completed triangular array of instruments for determining focal points of moonquakes. Data from cold cathode gauges at Apollo landing sites and mass spectrometer in orbiting Endeavour confirmed presence of thin lunar atmosphere. Spectrometer picked up pockets of neon and argon and scooped up carbon dioxide that had apparently burst from fissure near where sun was lighting lunar surface at daybreak. Other data obtained by Endeavour’s instruments indicated lunar highlands were rich in aluminum and deficient in magnesium. Waterless basins were rich in magnesium and deficient in aluminum. Most highland regions contained three times as much aluminum as lowlands, and one mountainous region had five times as much aluminum as typical lunar basin. Magnetometer on subsatellite launched into lunar orbit discovered moon had electromagnetic boundary layer. Camera system recorded data for comprehensive map of areas never before flown over, with details and resolution previously impossible. Report by Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin of terracing along sides of Hadley Rille identical to terracing noted on sides of two tallest mountains in Apennine group—Hadley Delta and Mt. Hadley— suggested mountains and Hadley Rille had been thrust up from moon by internal pressures that built up inside moon when object the size of state of Rhode Island struck moon and created Sea of Rains 4 billion yrs ago. Scientists had previously thought Hadley Rille to be younger than mountains and independent of their formation. Samples might hold clues to sun’s history and its effects on earth climate, past and future. Walter Sullivan said in New York Times: “Sun-determined changes in the earth’s climate have controlled man’s history, from the ice ages that plagued the cave men to the desiccation that buried Middle Eastern civilizations, not under invading armies but invading sands. By understanding the role of the sun in these past events, man may be able to assess the effect our parent star will have in determining climates of the future.” (W Star, 8/8/71, A10; W Post, 8/8/71, Bl; NYT, 8/8/71)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, told press at msc that preliminary examination of Apollo 15 crew had revealed astronauts were in good health, but were not returning to normal as rapidly as expected. Examination had also revealed that Astronaut David R. Scott had ruptured blood vessels . under four fingernails—apparently during first eva on moon. Ruptures had resulted from increased pressure on fingers from spacesuit as Scott moved his arms to conduct experiments. Although Scott had mentioned some discomfort to his hands after EVA—1, officials had assumed discomfort was typical hand cramp experienced by previous astronauts. Dr. Berry said Scott’s injury was not serious enough to warrant space-suit modifications: “It’s just one of those things that you’ve got to put up . . . with, and we keep trying to make suits better all the time, and I think this current suit is probably as far along the line to being comfortable and providing mobility as any suit we’ve ever had. . . .” (Transcript)
President Nixon honored Apollo 15 astronauts in address on economic program before Joint Session of Congress: “Later today, in this great chamber, the Congress will pay tribute to three splendid Americans back from the moon. Theirs was a magnificent achievement, a stunning testament to their personal skill and courage, and also to what American technology can achieve. “Let us find the means to ensure that in this decade of challenge, the remarkable technology that took these Americans to the moon can also be applied to reaching our goals here on earth.” (PD, 9/13/71, 1250-6)
The white anorthosite “Genesis rocU' collected on the moon by Apollo 15 astronauts was about 4.1 S billion years old, scientists announced. In the photo the sample, oldest lunar rock collected so jar, was in the nonslerile processing line oj the Lunar Receiving Laboratory at the Manned Spacecraft Center. “This is unquestionably one of the most important rocks ever returned from any lunar mission. It has a recording in its minerals of many series of events in lunar history-events of high temperature and high pressure.” (Auerbach, W Post, 9/18/71, A3; AP, B Sun, 9/18/71, A10; NYT, 9/18/71, 25) *	MSC announced start of series of cold weather environment tests on performance of Skylab CM postlanding and recovery systems in Climatic Laboratory at Eglin AFB, Fla. Objectives were to determine performance characteristics and limitations of Skylab cm in cold weather, determine cm test crew response to cold and to interior environmental conditions of CM, and determine extent of ice buildup on CM exterior and effect of ice on systems performance. Tests, conducted in chamber with 274 K (33°F) water temperature and 269 K (25°F) air temperature, were necessary because spacecraft would pass over areas colder than previously experienced and, in event of emergency landing, cm and crew limitations had to be known, (msc Release 71-70)
Newspapers reviewed Of a Fire on the Moon by Norman Mailer. In New York Times Book Review Morris Dickstein said book aimed at confrontation with “brave new world of science and technology.” Mailer found himself “frustrated at every turn. The event seems packaged, distant, unapproachable. . . .” Mailer gave “rather depressed personal account of his attempt ... to make an approach to the mission, especially to the astronauts and their machines.” Mailer felt “betrayed by the gap between his romantic expectations and the gray hut immense realities. Seeking to understand, he turns the book into an account of the other America, the Wasp hinterland.” In end Dickstein concluded, “This is not perhaps the book on the impact of technology that we needed, but it is important nonetheless, and offers much to ponder and prey on.” (NYT Book Review, 1/10/71, 1, 42-45) In Washington Sunday Star, Day Thorpe said: “Mailer wasn’t a passenger on Apollo 11, but in his motel rooms in Houston and Canaveral, and in his home in Provincetown ... he has put together a long and excellent book about the flight, the story not only of what the adventure meant to the three astronauts who lived it but, no less interesting, what it meant to Mailer himself. The bureaucrats Mailer encountered first in hermetic Houston and then in hermetic Canaveral were unlike all other bureaucrats. They were infallibly courteous, considerate and helpful, and they invariably told the truth.” Mailer showed Apollo 11 astronauts as “three human beings, as similar as necessary for their mission, but as unlike one another as experimental prototypes should be.” (W Star, 1/10/71, D 6)
MSC scientists reported instruments left on moon by Apollo astronauts had apparently survived sudden drop in temperature during lunar eclipse. Instruments registered no unusual seismic events or radiation fluxes during eclipse. Temperature at Apollo 12 site dropped from 348.9 K (168.3°F) to 170.4 K (-153°F), a 178.5 K (321.3°F) change. Temperature at Apollo 14 site dropped from 341 K (154.1°F) to 170.4 K (—153°F). {NYT, 2/11/71, 40)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced H.R. 11487 for himself and cosponsors. Bill would authorize sale of up to seven acres of unimproved land adjacent to ksc Visitor Information Center to Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc. Organization was nonprofit Florida corporation interested in constructing and operating nonsectarian chapel on property, No federal funds were involved in proposed transaction. (Text; H Rpt92-600)
U.S. Supreme Court refused to grant hearing to atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair on appeal of suit charging nasa had knowingly used taxpayers’ money for religious activities by permitting astronauts to conduct Bible readings and prayer services while orbiting moon. (Reuters, B Sun, 3/9/71, A3)
Office of Management and Budget had released $98.1 million in FY 1972 funds voted for science education and institutional support, while impounding $30 million, Aviation Week & Space Technology noted. “The 25% holdback of funding at the basic science level is considered by some in Congress as highly destructive because it will tend to reduce the number of future scientists.” It was viewed as “direct contradiction of the pro-science policy they have been led to anticipate.” (Av Wk, 9/20/71, 15) Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott told opening session that analysis of 2.7-m (9-ft) Apollo 15 lunar core sample had disclosed 58 distinct layers that represented 58 “chapters in the history of the sun.” Number of “pages in each chapter” awaited further analysis. Later Scott said in interview that Dr. Liaquat Husain, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientist who had analyzed Apollo 15 “Genesis” rock, was concerned that alteration of rock by shock when it impacted with site at which it was found might have partly invalidated determination of rock’s age at 4.15 billion yrs. arc engineer John C. Arvesen described development of method for monitoring biological productivity from air by detecting signs of chlorophyll. Monitoring device, when tested over California lakes and offshore areas, had produced results that conformed closely to readings obtained by arduous direct sampling of waters. Ultimate goal was to develop satellite-borne system that could monitor global productivity of oceans. Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said newly completed studies of medical data from Apollo 14 had shown radiation exposure to crew that was more than twice that of previous Apollo missions. Primary reason for higher exposure was passage of Apollo 14 spacecraft close to Van Allen radiation belts. Dr. Berry said radiation dose was “of no hazard or biological significance.” Soviet scientists said later that cosmonauts carried special antiradiation drug on all space flights but had never used it. Dr. Berry said Apollo 14 Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had lost 27% of fluid within his body cells during mission. His total body water had dropped 18% and red cells in his bloodstream had decreased 9%. Losses had been far less for other Apollo 14 astronauts and no such dramatic losses had been recorded for Apollo 15 astronauts, indicating that individual responses to space varied widely. Heavy loss of “exchangeable” potassium had been noted in astronauts during extended missions. On Apollo 15, loss had been as great as 15%. Potassium was deemed exchangeable because it could move readily in and out of tissues and thus could be purged from body. E. G. Johnson, Equipment and Facilities Branch Chief in NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office, described program for development of teleoperator systems in which remote-controlled devices could perform tasks in situations dangerous to health or safety of humans. In space, teleoperator could enter high radiation environment of space station’s nuclear power plant to change fuel elements or make repairs. Johnson said optical or radioastronomy observatory on moon’s far side could be run for 40 to 50 yrs using computer-controlled teleoperators whose control could be assumed from earth when necessary. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium was held during iaf congress. Sessions discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries in regard to earth resources research. iaa Fifth History of Astronautics Symposium on Sept. 23 was chaired by JPL Historian R. Cargill Hall. Soviet Cochairman V. N. Sokolsky did not attend for unexplained reason. Papers read included “From the History of the Development of Powder Rockets in the U.S.S.R.,” by Soviet Academician Yu A. Pobedonostsev, which traced work on Soviet solid propellants leading to Katyusha rocket in current use; “Comparative Analysis of Projects for Jet Planes Constructed up to the 1940’s,” by V. N, Sokolsky; “Evolution of Spacecraft Attitude Control Concepts before 1951,” by R. E. Robertson of Univ. of California at San Diego; and “Memoir: The Evolution of Aerospace Guidance Technology at M.I.T., 1935-1951,” by Dr. C. Stark Draper. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium, held during Congress, discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries. Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award was presented to Professor Luigi Broglio of Univ. of Rome for achievements in experiments with floating platforms to launch satellites into equatorial orbits. Only cosmonaut attending IAF Congress was Boris B. Yegorov, only physician to travel in space (launched in Voskhod 1 Oct. 12, 1964). (iaa Annual Rpt 1971; Sullivan, NYT, 9/21/71, 9/23/71, 9/27/71; Proceedings)
NASA announced it had signed agreement with New York Times Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for one byline article each by Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden after mission and three articles by Scientist-Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt while crew was on lunar surface. Agreement, extending to 30 days after mission’s end, provided for payment by Special Features of 50% of gross proceeds from syndication of articles. It also permitted still photos in Apollo 15 astronauts’ homes and interviews of family members. Agreement did not infringe on NASA policy of free flow of information to all media nor limit NYT coverage of all aspects of space program, (nasa Release 71-138)
William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary and Apollo 8 Astronaut, and Astronauts John L. Swigert, Jr., William R. Pogue, and Jack R. Lousma met with President Nixon at White House to report on their visits to 17 college campuses from October to December 1970. At White House press conference later, Anders said meetings with students had been “very positive.” Students had been “very curious about the Space Program.” (PD, 3/15/71, 475; Transcript)
Former astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, who had also been aquanaut in USN’s Sealab Project, testified before Senate Committee on Commerce’s Subcommittee on Oceans and Atmosphere. Carpenter, president of Sea Sciences Corp., said man must explore ocean floor if he is to understand it, just as he had to explore lunar surface to understand it. Subcommittee was examining ocean pollution. (CR, 10/18/71, D1039; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/19/71, Al)
Training models of Sky lab’s Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount arrived at the Manned Spacecraft Center from fabrication at the Marshall Space Flight Center. They would be used for training crewmen for the 1973 mission, planned to include three separate crews of three astronauts each—the first crew to stay for 28 days and the next two for 56 days each. The overhead view above shows crew quarters in the 1-g trainer model of the Workshop. At the top is the general control and working area with several experiments. At the right is the wardroom, where crewmen would prepare and eat food and spend leisure time. At the lower center is the waste management compartment, or “space bathroom.” At the left is the sleep compartment. perigee, 116.6-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/71; fbis-Sov-199-3, 10/14/71, LI; SF, 4/72, 132)
GSA had said it would take bids on towers and equipment from two Saturn launch complexes at icsc, AP reported. Equipment from Complexes 34 and 37, to be sold in one lot, included cranes, boom hoists, 298 km (185 mi) of copper and steel cable, and five towers weighing total of more than 8.2 million kg (9000 tons). NASA had said complexes, which cost $147 million to build, were obsolete. Complex 34 was scene of Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire that took the lives of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Roger B. Chaffee, and Edward H. White II. It was also launch site of Apollo 7 (Oct. 11-22, 1968), first manned mission in Apollo program. Complex 37 had been used for pre-Apollo unmanned missions. NYT, 12/24/71, C7; icsc Hist Off)
On second anniversary of its emplacement on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, atomic battery designed to power Apollo 12 experiments for one year was still generating at more than 70 w. Battery had been designed to produce 63.5-w power. Apollo 12 instruments were still reporting data. Identical batteries, fueled by radioactive plutonium 238 and taken to moon by Apollo 14 and 15, were generating more than 70 w. Apollo 16 and 17 would land similar batteries on moon during 1972 missions, aec reported, (upi, W Post, 11/20/71, A3)
Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Gold Medal for Aero-dromics was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), samso Commander and former NASA Apollo Program Director, at ceremonies commemorating Smithsonian’s 125th anniversary. Medal, presented periodically for “meritorious investigations in connection with the sciences of aeronautics and astronautics,” was established in memory of Dr. Samuel P. Langley, aviation pioneer. Among recipients had been Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1964 and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in 1967. (Smithsonian Release SI-131-71) Gold Space Medal, Federation’s highest award for space achievement, was presented to Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., for “his courageous achievements and leadership as the Commander of Apollo 13.” In recognition of achievements of entire Apollo 13 crew, Astronauts Lovell, Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., received iaf’s V.	M. Komarov Diploma for 1970. Diploma had been created in memory of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov, killed during Soyuz 1 mission April 24, 1967. Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov were awarded Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for 1970 for achievements as crew of Soyuz 9, June 2—19,1970. Gold Air Medal, highest iaf award for aeronautics, was presented to Capt. Henry T. (Dick) Merrill for contributions to aviation over 50 yrs. Capt. Merrill, civilian pilot, had flown Atlantic in 1935 and 1937. Concorde technical team of bac and Aerospaciale employees received group diploma for “valuable example set by . . . effective collaboration developed since 1962 between the engineers of British Aircraft Corp., Aerospaciale, Rolls-Royce and Snecma, operating as a single industrial team.” During conference lrv was presented to Swiss Transport Museum. (Letter to NASA Administrator, 6/10/71; letter to NASA Historian, 9/29/71; W News, 9/30/71, 42; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 9; bac pio; NAA PIO )
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, directed four-hour physical examination of Apollo 14 astronauts and declared them “certified and ready to fly.” Countdown for launch began on schedule at 9:00 am EST in preparation for liftoff toward moon at 3:23 pm est Jan. 31. (AP, B Sun, 1/26/71, A5)
Astronaut Information: American and Soviet (Revised) (71—204 SP) was published by Library of Congress Congressional Research Service. Paper provided general reference on astronauts and cosmonauts, table of U.S. and Soviet space flights, and description of highlights of each flight. (Text)
Preparations for Apollo 15 mission were proceeding on schedule with liftoff planned for July 26, Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Apollo Mission Director, told press in Washington, D.C. Astronauts would be able to remain on lunar surface for long EVA periods because of new spacesuit that would give astronauts greater mobility and facilitate experiments. New suit had neck and waist convolutes to permit bending at neck and waist, improved zipper for pressure control, improved thermal garment, more abrasive material protection, and increased water and oxygen supply. Suits also had pocket for fruit bar so astronauts could take bites during mission. (Transcript)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial described plight of McDonnell Douglas Corp. in “aerospace depression”: Total employment was off almost a third from high of 43 500 in mid-1967 and layoffs were continuing though at declining rate. “The loss of these 14,100 jobs is equivalent to a loss of income for all the families in a city of 35,000 persons. . . .” In one 30-day period, 1600 McDonnell Douglas workers had been laid off. “That is equal to 20 per cent of the workforce from a city the size of Berkeley, where the corporation has its headquarters.” Hope for McDonnell Douglas “rests in large measure with the company’s plans to produce the F—15 fighter-bomber. Already Congress is looking at this program with a wary eye, and . . . there are indications that production may be slowed as part of an increasingly cautious congressional approach to military spending.” (St Louis P—D, 6/21/71) Delegates discussed possibility of joint test flights to test requirements being developed for docking systems. Experiments “might be conducted between spacecraft of the Apollo and Salyut station types and between spacecraft of the Soyuz and Skylab programs,” NASA statement said. Soviet visitors were escorted on tour of msc by Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and John W. Young. Several “flew” computerized simulators used to train Apollo astronauts to dock cm and lm for lunar landing, (nasa Release 71—111; Transcript)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa completed final dress rehearsal for scheduled Jan. 31 launch toward moon. Countdown began at 9:23 am est, with simulated liftoff on time at 3:23 pm est. (P Inq, 1/20/71, 3)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were greeted by crowd of 3500 persons during brief stopover in Hawaii en route to Ellington afb, Tex. On arrival in Texas astronauts were cheered by 2500 persons who waved banners and flags while band played “Fly Me to the Moon.” Astronauts were first to return from moon without being required to undergo quarantine. (Stevens, NYT, 8/9/71,1; AP, C Trib, 8/10/71)
National Capital Planning Commission approved plans for Smithsonian Institution’s new $40-million National Air and Space Museum after hearing testimony from Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 astronaut. During 90-min debate, Commission member Paul Thiry described museum building, designed by architect Gyo Obata, as “industrial type” from “elevator-air conditioner school of architecture” lacking “classic proportions.” Collins said museum would possess “flavor of air and space.” Commission stipulated that building’s roof remain clear of mechanical equipment and that use of granite and marble be considered for construction. Final approval of plans would be considered following Nov. 17 meeting of Fine Arts Commission. (Combes, W Post, 11/5/71, A14)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden held press conference at MSC, during which they showed films and described mission. Irwin and Scott praised performance of LRV Rover and said it had exceeded their expectations. Showing film taken from Rover during traverse, Irwin said he hoped simulated ride didn’t make viewers seasick. Ride on LRV, he said, “is kind of a combination of a small rowboat in a rough sea and a bucking bronco.” Scott said only change he would recommend for Rover was “some manner of strapping yourself in the vehicle other than just pure seat belts.” He also said moon should be explored to far greater extent than was currently planned, with “a whole base of scientists” and “a Rover that can carry 6 to 10 men. I think we can . . . establish bases on the moon similar to those in the Antarctic and explore it and discover a vast amount of data that we don’t even know we have up there.” Core sample drilling, Scott said, was “one of the best things we ever did on the moon. It was very difficult, very time consuming and at times it was rather perplexing . . . because we did not expect the regolith or the surface material to be quite as well integrated or packed as it was. There was nothing wrong with the equipment, it was just that we encountered the unknown. And we had to compensate for that and . . . that’s why man goes to the moon. His subjective mind can evaluate the situation and come up with a fix far better than a machine. The machine would have stopped. It would have never gotten the drill.” Scott said in closing, “We went to the moon as trained observers . . . to gather data, not only with our instruments on board, but with our minds, and I’d like to quote a statement from Plutarch . . . : ‘The mind is not a vessel to be filled, but a fire to be lighted.’ ” Astronauts later revealed they had left plaque and tiny silver figure of a fallen man on moon as memorial to 14 astronauts and cosmonauts who had died in pursuit of space exploration. Plaque, bearing names of eight astronauts and six cosmonauts, had been left in small crater about 6 m (20 ft) north of rille. (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 8/13/71, Al)
Apollo 7 Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham announced his resignation from NASA, effective on or about Aug. 1, to become Vice President of Operations for Century Development Corp., developers of Greenway Plaza in Houston, Tex. (nasa Release 71—110)
Widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, one of three astronauts killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, filed $10-million suit in Brevard County Circuit Court against North American Rockwell Corp. and subsidiaries North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. Mrs. Betty Grissom charged negligence in fire which killed her husband and Astronauts Roger B. Chaffee and Edward H. White II. Suit asserted spacecraft did not have proper fire extinguisher system, had no emergency egress, and was “defective” because electrical wiring permitted electrical arc to flash in cabin. (AP, W Star, 1/19/71, BIO)
nasa announced it was requesting proposals from potential U.S. and foreign experimenters for investigations of data to be acquired from earth resources experiment package (erep) to fly on manned Skylab spacecraft in late 1972. Data would be used to appraise value and direct applications of space observations in agriculture, geography, forestry, geology, hydrology, oceanography, and cartography. Objectives of erep were to extend use of sensors; use man to observe, discriminate, and select study areas; and provide early source of unique research data for analysis. Three-man experimental space station would be manned by three different crews for total five months during eight-month mission in circular orbit of 435 km (270 mi) with 50° inclination. Astronauts would investigate solar astronomy, space medicine, space physics, bioscience, and material processing in addition to operating erep sensors, including six high-precision, 70-mm cameras, infrared spectrometer, multispectral scanner, microwave radiometer/ scatterometer and altimeter, and passive radiometer, (nasa Release 71-5)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans held press conference at msc. Ph.D. geologist Schmitt defended his selection for mission and declared his readiness to “compete with anybody” in flying Apollo spacecraft. Schmitt, selected over Astronaut Joseph E. Engle, said Engle was “one of the most outstandingly qualified test pilots in the business” and speculated that Engle, transferred to space shuttle program, would “probably . . . contribute for the next 10 or 15 years a ... lot more than maybe even we can contribute by a lunar mission.” Sending a “professional observer” like himself to moon, Schmitt explained, would significantly increase knowledge gained, particularly concerning early history of earth and sun. (Transcript; Reuters, W Post, 8/20/71, A2)
NASA announced decision to discontinue quarantine of astronauts, spacecraft, and lunar samples for remaining three Apollo flights. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said NASA had concluded from analysis of Apollo 11, 12, and 14 quarantine information “that there is no hazard to man, animal, or plants in the lunar material. These results have been reviewed by the Interagency Committee on Back Contamination, and that committee has recommended that further lunar missions need not be subject to quarantine.” (NASA Release
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Aug. 25 resignation from NASA of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong: “Offhand, it is regrettable to see any of these accomplished men leave the program they helped make such a smashing success. But Mr. Armstrong will be teaching engineering and it will be no surprise if some of his students wind up in future space exploration. So count his ‘defection’ to education as another spinoff benefit of the space program.” (W News, 8/30/71, 22)
Distribution of about 6.8 kg (15 lbs) of the 42.6 kg (94 lbs) of samples returned from moon’s Fra Mauro area by Apollo 14 astronauts had begun, NASA announced. To date, 187 scientific teams in U.S. and 14 foreign countries had been scheduled to receive samples. Additional proposals for consideration under Apollo 14 through Apollo 17 sample program were under review. More than 700 scientists would analyze samples, believed to include material formed at same time as original lunar crust. Investigating teams in U.S. were at 65 different institutions in 30 states and Virgin Islands. The 56 foreign teams were at 41 institutions, (nasa Release 71-62)
New York attorney Paul Sawyer, who had joined nasa to evaluate agency’s public relations efforts on March 22, had taken 30-day leave from law firm in which he represented astronauts in negotiating exclusive rights to their stories for magazines, Washington Post reported. Sawyer had said he would not be representing astronauts during NASA assignment. (W Post, 3/26/71, A3)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried gsfc payload to 115.9-km (72-mi) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with all 19 grenades exploded and recorded as planned. Launch was part of series of similar experiments at three sites [see Jan. 7]. (nasa Rpt SRl) arc team of scientists headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett announced that first measurements of moon’s interior indicated moon had basaltlike mantle 338 km (210 mi) deep surrounding “cool core of primordial olivine-like rock.” Measurements suggested moon’s outer layer was melted during first billion years of its 4.5-billion-yr history. Measurements had been made with arc magnetometer placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts and also made by Explorer 35 moon-orbiting satellite launched July 19, 1967. (arc Release 71—2) Cornell Univ. astrophysicist Dr. Thomas Gold said stratifications found in Apollo 12 lunar surface samples were caused by earth in same process that made near side of moon different from far side. Moon passed behind earth with face turned earthward for four days during regular monthly cycle and was bombarded by high-energy electrons in earth’s magnetic field. Dr. Gold said he and coworkers had reproduced lunar surface markings inside vacuum chamber by bombarding finely ground earth material and small amounts of lunar soil with high-energy electrons up to 800 ev. Dr. Gold’s theory of “electrostatic motion” was disputed at meeting by Univ. of California physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey. (Lannan, W Star, 1/12/71, Al) NASA announced plan to continue lunar exploration with unmanned robots after last Apollo manned lunar landing in 1972. Plan would cost minimum $1 billion. Robot vehicles would travel 965 km (600 mi) across lunar surface and return to earth with samples or would rendezvous with other robot spacecraft that could return samples to earth. NASA spokesman said, “We sincerely hope that collaboration with the Russians takes place in space. A common program to explore the moon with instrumented spacecraft remotely controlled from earth might be the best way to help that collaboration take place.” (O’Toole, W Post, 1/14/71, Al)	_	_ Dr. Gerald R. Taylor, msc scientist, described laboratory experiment in which three highly resistant strains of bacteria were killed within 10 hrs of contact with one core sample from a number of centimeters below surface of moon’s Sea of Tranquility. Micro-organisms in protein soup had been exposed to lunar soil. Dr. Narenda Bhandari of Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India, reported that analysis of cosmic ray tracks on moon had provided “conclusive proof” of existence in lunar soil of fossils from chemical elements far heavier than any previously discovered in nature or in laboratory. If verified, discovery would greatly extend periodic table of elements. (Wilford, NYT, 1/14/71, 9) Dr. P. Buford Price of Univ. of California at Berkeley, said during interview that Apollo 12 lunar samples might contain first real evidence of “magnetic monopoles,” basic force units that were to magnetism what electrons were to electricity. If their existence could be confirmed, it would mean rewriting books on magnetism and electrodynamics. Dr. Price’s group of scientists appeared to have found two fossil tracks of nuclear type of particles which, theoretically, could have been made by monopoles in two lunar cysts. (Lannan, W Star, 1/14/71, A3) Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Soviet academician and Director of Vernadsky Institute for Analytical Chemistry in Moscow, told conference U.S.S.R. would continue to explore moon with unmanned spacecraft and would attempt bolder missions in future. He believed U.S.S.R. would exchange lunar samples with U.S. beginning with samples of Sea of Fertility returned by Soviet Luna 16. He said main task for Lunokhod 1, Soviet moonwalker still on moon, was to determine how eight-wheeled vehicle could best move about moon and how it could best be used in future. “We discovered that the moonwalker can move in very large angles and can go down into craters at angles of 20 degrees. The mechanical qualities of this car are very good.” Dr. Vinogradov said Lunokhod 1 carried instrument to analyze soil, but device had not done so thus far. He described Luna l6 samples as bearing no evidence of water or life on moon. Drill used to dig samples had been stopped at 330 mm (13 in) below lunar surface because it hit rock. “We were afraid to send it any deeper.” Dr. Vinogradov described Sea of Fertility as “blackish powder” sprinkled with “cosmic beads.” Luna 16 sample was similar to soil brought back by Apollo 12 from Ocean of Storms and not very different from samples returned by Apollo 11 from Sea of Tranquility. Age of Sea of Fertility had been calculated at 4.6 billion yrs, older than some rocks returned by Apollo missions. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/15/71, Al) Dr. Paul W. Gast, chief of msc Earth and Lunar Sciences Div., reported discovery by msc scientists of “exotic components” in lunar soil believed to be fragments from primitive crust that covered moon 4.5	billion yrs ago. Fragments differed from other Apollo lunar samples and were thought to be pieces of crustal bedrock scattered by impact of meteorites pounding more ancient lunar highlands. Discovery, through chemical analysis, supported theory that moon once had hot, molten surface and that crust had hardened as it began cooling off. Discovery also helped explain why lunar soil was mostly one billion years older than lunar rocks. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory described norite found in chemical analysis of five soil samples. Norite was lighter in color than most Apollo samples and did not appear to be chemically native to landing sites. Most norite represented “nearsurface material in an ancient lunar crust.” Coarser grained relative of norite might have come from “somewhat deeper in the moon— perhaps several miles.” If discovery proved true, samples would go back in age to beginnings of solar system. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg—Cal Tech physicist who had dated Apollo 12 Sample 13, oldest rock yet found, at 4.5 billion yrs (other Apollo 12 rocks were about 3.4 billion yrs old)—said Sample 13’s oldest parts were granite that crystallized early in lunar history and could fie some of original crustal material and some of “magic component” that accounted for difference in ages of lunar rocks and soil. Dr. Wasserburg believed that fact there was always some missing ingredients in lunar soil meant soil contained debris from granites and other materials originating elsewhere on moon. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, reported Apollo 12 seismometer was recording weak but frequent moon-quakes along rilles near landing site. He suggested rilles might be “fault zones,” where slight movements in lunar surface were occurring. (Wilford, NYT, 1/17/71, 4:7; Gast, msc)
Smithsonian Institution’s revived plans for construction of $40-million Air and Space Museum on south side of Mall in Washington, D.C., were described by Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 Astronaut, in interview published by Washington Post. Plans for building, to contain exhibit areas and galleries with displays on history of aviation and science and technology of flight, would be presented to National Capital Planning Commission in November. Collins said only best items in Smithsonian’s collection would be exhibited in new museum, designed by architect Gyo Obata, who had designed previous building that would now cost $70 million to construct. Collins said Smithsonian would ask Congress to appropriate funds for new building in FY 1972. (Scharfen-berg, W Post, 10/28/71, Bl)
Dr. Vasily V. Parin—Soviet physiologist, former President of Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, and member of Soviet Academy of Sciences—died at age 68 of liver ailment. Dr. Parin had been known primarily for his work during 1960s on human physiological problems during space flight and had authored studies on effect of weightlessness on functioning of heart and circulatory system. He had received Order of Lenin, U.S.S.R’s highest award, in 1963 for his work in developing Soviet medical science. (AP, NYT, 5/Yl/ll, 42) Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified June 15 on nasa policy on backup spacecraft and Centaur reliability: “In the manned program, all possible steps are taken to assure the safety of the astronauts. Single point failures are reduced to an absolute minimum. Missions are planned to build upon the previous missions so as to reduce the number of unknowns.” Within missions, “plateaus are established so that all systems can be checked out in real time prior to committing to the next plateau. Vigorous testing procedures coupled with redundancy and in many cases dual redundancy are adopted before a system is ‘man-rated.’ ” In Skylab “we are building a back-up workshop which will be brought right up to the point of actual checkout. This will permit us to proceed with the program even in the event that the first workshop would not be successfully launched. Similarly, we will have a single back-up Command and Service Module-Saturn IB capability for the three manned visits to the workshop.” Capability was built into program and was “key to the plan for a rescue capability in Skylab which we recently adopted.” In earth-orbital automated programs “we generally plan a series of related missions, using identical or similar hardware. If we have a mission failure, decisions will then be made, based on all available factors, whether we will (1) prepare and fly a specific back-up to the mission which failed, (2) modify succeeding flights ... to achieve the objectives, or (3) defer achieving the mission objectives to future years.” In planetary programs, with launch opportunities at only discrete intervals, NASA usually had provided for two identical launches. Each launch in dual mission was planned to complement its twin, while at same time serving as backup if twin were lost. This year Manner 9 was backup, flying hybrid mission. Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle had history of 3 failures out of 16 operational vehicles, without apparent relationship between failures, giving probability of success of 80% if based solely on past experience. Launch vehicles for automated missions—such as Scout, Delta, and Atlas-Centaur—were “complex systems without much redundancy, and cannot be expected to achieve reliabilities much greater than about 90% without very major and costly changes. They certainly cannot be considered ‘man-rated’ vehicles.” Addition of redundant systems would be investigated again but was not complete solution. Redundancy added weight, reduced payload capability, and was expensive. For launch vehicles of size of Titan-Centaur, which would carry Viking and Grand Tour payloads, additional redundancy might be practicable and desirable and would be actively studied. Major increase in reliability of achieving orbit would be one of important attributes of space shuttle. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on June 16 continued testimony on backup philosophy, expanding on application in ossa: “We do not schedule backup missions for observatory spacecraft. We always buy, and intend to fly, at least two flight units of a new series of observatory-class spacecraft. When we have a failure or a malfunction in a spacecraft or a launch vehicle we will always do everything possible to thoroughly understand and correct all other future missions which could conceivably be subject to a similar malfunction. When we have a failure we will always review the effect of the loss on the program, determine the alternative recovery plans by which we can attain the objectives of the lost mission, assess the cost and any other impact of those alternatives on the program and then decide which alternative to choose.” Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified June 17: “In the basic considerations which establish the philosophical approach to reliability of unmanned space vehicles, the over-riding necessity for protection of the lives of human passengers is absent. The result is an approach to reliability in which cost and simplicity play a much larger part. We have not imposed a requirement for total elimination of single point failure modes, but have concentrated upon reducing the probability of failure by careful design, parts application, major quality and reliability efforts, and, most importantly, tender loving care. Our launch vehicles . . . are characterized as simplex systems, implying lack of the complexity characteristic of redundancy.” (Testimony; Subcom Rpt, 10/71)
Kansas City Times editorial commented on “ambiguous” announcement of progress in NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings to develop compatible space docking system [see Dec. 3]: “The first interpretation was that agreement soon would be reached on a joint mission involving astronauts of the two countries in an orbital linkup. In hasty clarification, NASA explained that the mooted accord covered only the technical matters which could make such a mission possible. . . . Either way, the conclusion is obvious: The two space powers are moving at last, and seriously, toward the sort of shared space planning that logic and economics have long indicated but which competition and secretiveness have prevented.” (KC Times, 12/8/71)
Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) which would transport astronauts John W. Young and Charles M. Duke, Jr., on moon during Apollo 16 mission had successfully completed prelaunch checks and been installed on lunar module for flight, KSC announced. Astronauts Young and Duke would make three excursions on LRV in Descartes area of moon during mission, scheduled for March 1972. Final approval of LRV flight readiness was given by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, after installation review. LRV was managed by msfc and was built by Boeing Co. (ksc Release 259-71)
Cuban internal radio newscasts gave detailed account of ApoUo 15 mission. Radio reloj, all-news station in Havana, read reports of astronauts’ activities on moon. (NYT, 8/3/71)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell had tried personal experiment in mental telepathy during flight to moon and back, AP reported. Mitchell, who had life-long interest in psychic phenomena, had concentrated at prearranged times on symbols. Psychic in Chicago had concentrated at same time in attempt to receive signals. Mitchell confirmed that he had conducted experiment, but declined to reveal details. (AP, B Sun, 2/13/71, Al)
New York Times editorial on NASA decision to continue Apollo 14 mission: “Space officials know that they have taken on an extra degree of responsibility with the ‘go’ decision, and have opened the way for massive recrimination should their judgment be proved wrong by later developments. Nevertheless there is some reassurance in the fact that the original docking problem—which for a time seemed certain to abort the flight—was successfully overcome by the astronauts thousands of miles from earth. The nation and the world will be watching this flight with renewed hope—and admiration for the brave men embarked upon it.” (NYT, 2/2/71, 34)
Apollo 15 astronauts would wear pressure suits—instead of flight coveralls as originally planned-—during lm jettison, nasa announced. Requirements for crew to wear suits had been reevaluated after deaths of three cosmonauts during reentry from June 6-30 Soyuz 11 mission. (nasa Release 71—134)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4060 Commemorating World Law Day. He said: “We can see many heartening evidences that law is becoming stronger and more just around the world under the pressures which reason and necessity exert. Within the nations, human rights and ecological wisdom continue to gain stature in the law. Among the nations, security and cooperation—on every front from space to the seabeds—are being enhanced through negotiations, treaties, and conventions. The United Nations is entering its second quarter of a century, and many other international organizations are working effectively through and for world law.” {PD, 6/21/71, 942) June 17—July 2: Fourteenth Plenary Meeting of Committee on Space Research (cospar) was held in Seattle, Wash. International meeting of scientists hosted by NAS included symposia and working groups on 1970 total solar eclipse, astronomical observations from space, use of stratospheric balloons in space research, and lunar lasers. Grumman Aerospace Corp. scientist Dr. Henry C. Courten, professor of astronomy at Dowling College, said mysterious tracks on photographic plates he made during 1966 and 1970 solar eclipses appeared to be of small planet or asteroid belt inside Mercury’s orbit. Cal Tech scientist and lunar expert Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg told cospar meeting four rocks gathered by Apollo 14 astronauts had ages ranging from 3.85 billion to 3.95 billion yrs. Ages were surprising “since it was anticipated that Fra Mauro would yield rocks of greater antiquity.” Discovery suggested that volcanism was active on moon far longer than had been thought and was still forming lunar crust more than 600 million yrs after moon came into being. It also suggested that Sea of Rains had been carved by collision 600 million yrs after moon’s formation, or 100 million to 150 million yrs later than lunar experts had originally believed. Soviet scientists Yuri G. Nefyuduv, L. I. Kakurin, and A. D. Yegorov said Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov “found it difficult to keep the upright posture and had to be assisted while walking” during first three hours after return from June 2-19, 1970, mission. “Next day . . . their walk was still inadequate and erect positions were maintained with great efforts.” When cosmonauts returned to physical activity, few days after flight, effects of prolonged weightlessness had proved temporary. Astronaut John W. Young represented U.S. astronaut corps at ceremony to honor 10th anniversary of first space flight by Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. He asked, “What better tribute to the memory of Yuri Gagarin can we offer than the hope that the growing unity of efforts in space—which this cospar meeting so well exemplifies— may one day extend to all the Earth? (nas Release, 4/21/71; AP, W Post, 6/13/71, A7; O’Toole, W Post, 6/21/71, Al; upi, W Post, 6/28/71, A7; NASA Activities, 7/15/71,107) nas and nrc submitted to cospar United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1970. Report included summaries of observations from spacecraft, sounding rockets, high-altitude balloons, and aircraft made or reported during 1970 and discussed flights planned for 1971. (Text)
President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia and Mrs. Tito visited msc during state visit to U.S. They were shown Apollo 9 CM, Mercury and Gemini spacecraft, and lm test article. The Titos visited Mission Control and saw demonstration of spacesuit and Apollo 15 films. Center presented Tito with framed and autographed photo of earth as seen from moon’s vicinity by Apollo 8 astronauts, (msc pao)
usaf in Space” exhibit opened at Smithsonian Institution. Exhibit included two Vela nuclear detection satellites and dod comsat, scale models of wind tunnels and space chambers, no-torque impact wrench to counter effect of weightlessness, astronaut equipment, prototype space tool for tests simulating weightlessness under water, and sextant used on Dec. 4—18, 1965, Gemini 7 mission. Also exhibited were scale models of afcrl solar telescope and Titan boosters and integrating maneuvering life support system—nasa-usaf spacesuit for eva outside orbiting laboratories, (afsc Newsreview, 9/71, 8-9)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar IT. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held news briefing in Washington, D.C. Crew showed film and slides and described mission and preliminary results. To question on future of manned space flight Shepard said: “The relative comparison of the efficiency of the manned versus the unmanned systems, I think we tried over the years to show where we feel that man has his point, has his place in space . . . and with 14, certainly, there were several instances where basic reflexes, basic judgment, and human instincts made it a successful flight where it would not have been successful otherwise. “Obviously, we brought back a lot more rocks than the Lunokhod has brought back. But I don’t think that is the point. I think the point is that we have chosen to exercise part of the expenditures of our money along the areas that we have found to be successful; that is, manned flight. I think we have shown on the 14 . . . that manned space flight can contribute on a scientific basis and contribute efficiently when it comes to assessing the dollar value put on it.” (Transcript)
Prague newspaper Rude Pravo commented on Apollo 15: “The scientists eagerly anticipate the results of the work of the astronauts and instruments which were sent on such a long trip. People of goodwill throughout the world who follow these flights will always wait long into the night for the two words from Houston, Baykonur, and eventually from other places on earth: ‘Mission complete.’ ” (FBis-Czecho-slovakia—71—155, 8/11/71, Dl)
LRL geologists Dr. William C. Phinney and Dr. Paul W. Gast described anorthosite rock from Apollo 15 sample bag No. 196 to press at msc lunar sample briefing. Dr. Phinney, praising crew’s descriptions of samples, said “as in all cases so far where we’ve looked at what the rocks are, it matches exactly what the astronauts said it was. It’s about fist size, 269 grams—%-lb—anorthosite . . . essentially pure plagioclase.” Grain was quite coarse, 1-cm (0.4-in) grains, “about the coarsest grain size of any lunar rocks that we’ve seen so far.” Its milky-white color suggested “that it has probably undergone a fair amount of stress, maybe a shock type of deformation.” Rock, popularly called “Genesis rock,” was significant because it supported hypothesis that moon had been extensively molten with anorthosite crystallizing from liquid, floating to top, and producing anorthositic crust. Although discovery did not prove hypothesis, Dr. Gast explained, it was “a long step in the direction” of determining moon’s origin. “If results on the dating of this anorthosite and some of the chemistry on it . . . turn out that all point to the fact that it is essentially 4.6 or 4.7 billion years old, which is the time that we think the moon formed, ... it gets to be rather difficult to argue with the hypothesis.” (Transcript)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was celebrated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with articles commemorating Sight. At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of American astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover represented start of new era envisioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space stations. Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975 economic plans called for 1‘fundamental development of scientific research, with a significant role foT lunar and solar investigation.”
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
Apollo Day” was celebrated in State of Indiana. Gov. Edgar H. Whitcomb attended ceremonies at Spring Mill State Park honoring Indiana-born astronaut, the late Virgil I. Grissom who was killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, (msfc Hist Off)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received Golf Magazine's All-America Award for making first golf shot on moon during Apollo 14 mission (Jan. 31-Feb. 9). (AIT, 4/21/71, 57)	'
First book taken from earth to moon was not microfilmed Bible carried by Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell on Apollo 14 (launched Jan. 31, 1971) as had been reported by upi, Robert H. Goddard Library publication Goddard Biblio Log said. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., had carried miniature copy of Robert Hutchings Goddard—Father of the Space Age on Apollo 11 (launched July 16, 1969, 45 years after Goddard’s first liquid-fueled rocket flight) but had not been allowed by NASA to leave book on moon. Apollo 11 astronauts had given three-by two-inch book, published by Achille J. St. Onge, to Mrs. Esther Goddard, who had donated it to Goddard Library at Clark Univ. (Goddard Biblio Log, 7/71, 11—2)
Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said at Washington, D.C. press conference, “I hope to see the day when our astronauts go up in Russian spacecraft and the Russian cosmonauts in ours.” He would explore idea with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin before he left for visit to U.S.S.R. in August, “if our own government will permit me to do so.” (upi, W Post, 7/10/71, A3)
President Nixon, at ceremonies marking dedication of Rathbun Dam in Centerville, Iowa, referred to Apollo 15 astronauts: “At this very hour, if you were watching television you could see that fantastic ride in a golf cart on the moon.” Apollo 15 astronauts “look down on earth. What does it look like? Well, we’ve had descriptions from other astronauts and often they have remarked about the fact that from far out there the earth looks like a very peaceful planet.” (PD, 8/9/71, 112-5)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden visited KSC to thank personnel for their support during Apollo 15 mission, ksc Deputy Director Miles Ross told crowd of about 5000 that with all talent assembled in vab “I think this is the real Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.” (Spaceport News, 10/7/71, 1)	........................
Pope Paul VI told crowd assembled at Castel Gondolfo that he had sent confidential message to Apollo 15 astronauts on their July 26-Aug. 7 lunar mission. Astronauts had replied: “Our journey is for all men and we hope that the talents which God has given us will enable us to satisfy those who so kindly support our undertaking.” (AP, W Star, 8/2/71, A2)
Sleep analyzer developed for nasa by Dr. James D. Frost of Baylor Univ. and built by sci Electronics, Inc., Div. of sci Systems, Inc., as Skylab experiment had been made available as research device to U.S. medical institutions, NASA announced. Device would record quality of sleep of Skylab astronaut during 28-day stay in space by combining and evaluating inputs of electro-encephalogram and electro-occulogram. Medical application of device could be to treat insomniacs and other patients experiencing “sleep neuroses.” faa doctors were considering study of sleeping patterns of air controllers and pilots after stressful duty. (NASA Special Release)
President Nixon accepted resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs effective April 11. Collins would become Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. {PD, 3/1/71, 384)
President Nixon issued statement following successful splashdown of Apollo 15 spacecraft: “Apollo 15 has returned safely to Earth. It brings with it new proof of man’s invincible will to master the moment of his own destiny. It brings new tribute to man’s unquenchable thirst for understanding. It brings the seeds of scientific understanding which may open a new chapter in the history of our planet. We salute Astronauts Scott, Irwin and Worden, who have stood poised on behalf of mankind on the brink of man’s new world.” (PD, 8/16/71, 1154)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin demonstrated LRV Rover for press at KSC. Newsmen were permitted to take turns driving vehicle at maximum 16-km-per-hr (10-mph) speed. Scott told press, “We expect this little buggy to work just fine on the moon. It’s really a very straightforward little vehicle, just like driving your own automobile.” On first lrv excursion, Scott and Irwin would drive about one kilometer (six tenths mile) from Apollo 15 landing site at Hadley Rille to west edge of foothill for Hadley Delta at average speed of eight kilometers per hour (five miles per hour). On second excursion next day, they would drive to location as far as eight kilometers (five miles) from landing site and seek place to climb front and survey valley. “We’ll be looking for bedrock or some unique feature that might have sprung up from the moon with the front,” Irwin told press. “If we see it and the trail upward looks traversable, we might climb as high as 600 ft [180 m] to get to it.” Third and last trip on third day on moon would take astronauts to edge of Hadley Rille and north along ravine to sample crater cluster that appeared to scientists to be volcanic in origin. On return, astronauts would park lrv 90 m (300 ft) east of LM with TV camera pointed directly at lm. Irwin told press if all went well worldwide TV audience would get first live picture of spacecraft rocketing off moon on first leg of return journey to earth. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/5/71)
Federal Reserve System had begun supplying banks with 62 million copper and nickel dollars commemorating President Eisenhower and Apollo 11 lunar landing, AP reported. One side of coin carried reproduction of Apollo 11 astronauts’ emblem—eagle against moon’s surface. (B Sun, 11/3/71, A6)
New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo program to fund space station and shuttle while U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 was already in orbit: “In effect, the unique American capability to land men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations for military as well as civilian purposes. This is a prospect that literally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 26) Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you, but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . . I radioed to mission control, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots of eggs spread across the lawn, hut there’s only one golden one, and there it was—The Golden Egg.” Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe moon as barren and desolate dead world, “it can be a beautiful one to anyone who loves the mountains of earth. . . . When I first climbed down the ladder ... I was really taken back by those mountains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight, were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me. . . . you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at home.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from all that is below. . . . one of the most important observations from Apollo 15, as far as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training we studied and discussed volcanoes . . . but I guess I wasn’t really prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 1; 8/14/71, 1)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, named to five-man board chaired by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., to investigate Jan. 23 crash of NASA helicopter piloted by Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan. (msc Release 71-03)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, described future benefit of space program spinoff in Parade article on applications of space technology to social problems. “On the 1973 flights in the Skylab experimental space station, a medical doctor will go into space with the astronauts. He will carry out a comprehensive program of experiments ... to establish how well men live and work in weightless conditions in an enclosed space as big as a three-bedroom house.” With data obtained, space benefits could be achieved in a few years and made available to people everywhere. (Parade, 12/5/71, 8, 12)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1970 to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Other recipients were RAF Squadron Leaders Graham Williams and Leslie Lecky-Thompson, first to cross Atlantic nonstop in vtol aircraft, and Turi Wideroe of Norway, first female airline pilot. (W Post, 5/20/71, A28)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell for promotion to grade of captain in usn. Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had been promoted by usaf to grade of lieutenant colonel. (PD, 2/22/71, 266)
Apollo 15 astronauts were honored by Chicago with parade, special City Council meeting, and civic luncheon. Mayor Richard J. Daley presented them with honorary citizenship medals. (Wolfe, C Trib, 9/16/71)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski testified on FY 1972 budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics authorization hearings. During 1970 otda supported some 50 ongoing scientific, applications, planetary, and lunar experiment missions as well as some 14 new flight projects launched in year by NASA and DOD. During Apollo 13 mission, with safe return after inflight explosion, MSFN “demonstrated that it is, in fact, the astronauts’ life-line to earth.” Valuable clues to origin of explosion were found in analysis of recorded telemetry data, msfn was still supporting experiments left on moon by Apollo 12 and 14 missions. After FY 1972’s Apollo 15 and 16 missions, network would be continuously monitoring 16 alsep experiments. Satellite network provided tracking and data acquisition for average monthly workload of some 40 earth-orbital satellites, including NASA’s scientific and applications satellites and projects of other Government agencies and foreign countries. dsn supported Mariner 6 and 7 probes in extended mission phase and Apollo 13, as well as four ongoing Pioneer missions (6 through 9). Data acquired by Goldstone antenna on effect of solar gravitation on Mariner spacecraft signals had verified Einstein theory of delay of 200 microseconds in return of signals from gravitational field of sun. Construction continued on second 64-m (210-ft) antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and ground was broken for third near Madrid, Spain. (Transcript)
Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at New York Univ. Medical Center had accepted for evaluation and testing motorized wheelchair controlled by sight-switch, NASA announced. Switch, worn on head, enabled user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movements with his eyes. It had been developed under NASA direction to help astronauts in training to operate equipment under extreme flight conditions. Institute’s director, Dr. Howard A. Rusk, had estimated that more than 100 000 quadriplegics—persons with no use of arms or legs—could achieve mobility if chair could be made available, (nasa Release 71-122; A&A 1970)
Apollo 15 completed simulated liftoff at 9:34 am edt in preparation for launch from ksc July 26. Spacecraft was unmanned and fully loaded with propellants. Astronauts would practice countdown in spacecraft without fuel July 14. (SBD, 7/14/71, 56)
House passed and sent to Senate H.R. 11487, bill to permit sale of land at ksc for Chapel of the Astronauts. {CR, 11/15/71, H10998, D1171)
Dedication ceremonies for (Ac historic launch site at Kennedy Space Center marked the 10th anniversary of the first U.S. manned space flight, fiotun on the Freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft. The first American to go into space, Astronaut Alan B, Shepard, }r.—who also was commander of the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission fan. 31—Feb. 9 this year—stood by the plague marking the site at AauncA Complex 5/6 during ceremonies attended by 3000 guests. The site had been restored to its original condition. DOT, and FAA, with assistance from dod, cab, and eight other Federal agencies. Report concluded that aircraft noise abatement deserved highest priority because of widespread concern for environment and because noise abatement program’s success would affect solution to other aviation problems. Study recommended reductions of at least 10 decibels every 10 yrs until aircraft noise was suppressed into community background noise. Continued Federal support at high level of aeronautical K&D was necessary to ensure strong technical base. Continued R&d was essential if current and future problems of civil aviation were to be solved and if civil aviation was to contribute to such future areas as regional development. Study recommended Government evaluate its regulatory role to be certain that policies were not inhibiting innovations by industry and that NASC develop permanent mechanism to review and recommend policies affecting civil aviation that embraced several agencies. Study called for exchange of middle management personnel between aviation-related agencies like NASA, DOT, DOD, and CAB. (NASA Release 71-82; Text; Av Wk, 5/10/71, 20-1)
Skylab astronauts would begin extravehicular training in pressurized suits in msfc Neutral Buoyancy Space Simulator later in year. Mockups of Skylab space laboratory modules had been submerged in water tank 12 m (40 ft) deep and 23 m (75 ft) wide, which simulated weightlessness of space environment, (nasa Release 71—205)
Four extra manned space flight missions to use four Apollo spacecraft and one Saturn V launch vehicle left after 1973 Skylab mission were proposed by msc officials to nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at nasa Hq. Missions would include one lunar flight and three Saturn IB-launched earth-orbital missions. Houston Chronicle later quoted msc Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., who had presented proposal, as saying msc plan called for one mission of up to nine days in lunar orbit. Astronauts could map 60% of lunar surface and place Nimbus weather satellite in lunar orbit to complete photography of entire moon in one year. (Hill, H Chron, 11/29/71)
introduction he said, “This is a time not for routine reading of sophisticated papers about a future that is itself in question, but for addressing ourselves to the basic issue of where we are headed—if anywhere.” Technical display included space shuttle technology exhibits by NASA and major contenders for shuttle contracts and models of Grumman F—14A fighter aircraft, McDonnell Douglas F—15 fighter, and NR B—I bomber aircraft. On Oct. 25, designated by aiaa as “Aerospace Day,” Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott narrated NASA Apollo 15 film. Panel discussions included “Rocketry in the 1950’s” chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; “stol and vtol—Where Do They Fit In?” chaired by arc Director Hans Mark and transmitted by telephone link up to LeRC employees; and “The Aerospace Professional—What Is His Future?” with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as panel member. Von Karman Lecture, “Trends in the Field of Automatic Control in the Last Two Decades,” was given by Dr. Irmgard Flugge-Lotz of Stanford Univ. Automation had been penetrating nearly every field of engineering. Mathematical theory and large computing equipment allowed development and extension beyond handling of linear and weekly nonlinear systems. Investigation of systems with large transport time lags had been advanced. Major aiaa awards presented included John Jeffries Award to Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director of Medical Research and Operations, for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of Manned Space Flight and aerospace medical research through your leadership in the development of life support systems.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given to Ronald L. Berry, Chief of MSC Planetary Missions Analysis Branch, for “many outstanding achievements in the field of manned space flight, particularly in lunar mission analysis and design development.” Spacecraft Design Award was presented to Anthony J. Iorillo, Manager of Special Projects for Hughes Aircraft Co., for “invention of the Gyrostat stabilized spacecraft which formed the basic stabilization and configuration for the successful Tactical Communications Satellite, Intelsat IV, and a series of other satellites now in design and production.” Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award was given to Dr. Hubertus Strughold, Emeritus Professor of Medicine at Brooks afb, Tex. Citation said, “With his prophetic foresight and exceptional talents he established the rational biomedical foundations for manned exploration of space.” DeFlorez Training Award went to Capt. Walter P.	Moran of American Airlines for his “pioneering efforts in the utilization of flight simulation to increase safety and economy of airline flight training and checkout operations. . . .” Aerospace Communications Award was presented posthumously to Siegfried H. Rieger for “his personal contributions over a 10 year period, in analytical work evolving basic concepts, and in the origination and implementation of the Intelsat Program which led to the establishment of the present worldwide communications satellite network.” aiaa History Manuscript Award was presented to Dr. Richard C. Lukas of Tennessee Technological Univ. for “best historical manuscript dealing with the science, technology and impact of aeronautics and astronautics on society.” Award winning manuscript was “Eagles East: The Army Air Force and the Soviet Union.” Among 23 new Fellows honored at Honors Night Banquet Oct. 28 were George H. Hage, Boeing Co. Vice President for Product Development and former NASA Apollo Program Deputy Director; Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Head of 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at LaRC; Eugene S. Love, Chief of Space Systems Div. at LaRC; James W. Plummer, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.; Wilbur L. Pritchard, Comsat Laboratories scientist; and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Douglas Corp. designer. (Program; aiaa Releases; Lewis News, 10/22/71, 1) 1971.	In this connection the sides referred to the important achievements in cooperation in the fields of space exploration, peaceful uses of atomic energy, as well as high energy physics, in particular the installation of a French laser reflector on the moon surface, the commissioning of the French bubble chamber Mirabelle at the Soviet proton accelerator in Serpukhov, the Soviet-French contact on enriching French natural uranium in the Soviet Union.” (fbis-Sov-71-210, 11/1/71, F4)
Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny had sent congratulations to President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 15 mission, Tass reported. Podgorny had asked President Nixon to convey congratulations and good wishes to “courageous” Apollo 15 astronauts. (fbis-Sov—71— 153, 8/9/71, Gl)
Following Apollo 14 splashdown, President Nixon telephoned Apollo 14 astronauts aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans to express personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. He released statement comparing Apollo 14 with May 5, 1961, Freedom 7 mission flown by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr.: “The difference between that first flight and this latest is a measure of how far we have progressed in space in the short span of 10 years. But two things have not changed: the courage and determination of the men who fly these missions, and the skill and dedication of the thousands here on earth who make their flights possible.” (PD, 2/15/71, 205)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 15: “All the evidence suggests that this is the most productive scientific expedition ever carried out in space. Even before the astronauts’ own return, the information they have sent back has already forced reconsideration of some key ideas about the natural history of the moon. In ultimate perspective, however, it may turn out that the dividends from the Falcon’s stay on the moon will be as substantial in the realm of changed human ideas and aspirations as in scientific knowledge. For millions who watched the superb television pictures of the two astronauts working comfortably on the lunar surface, the image that came across was that of a friendly moon, a place where men could walk and ride and work with ease. This is a far cry from the traditional picture of the moon as a hostile, alien environment totally inhospitable to man.” (NYT, 8/3/71)
Scientists at lrl in Houston began opening bags of rocks returned from moon by Apollo 15 crew. Before and after day-long debriefing Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin assisted geologists in identifying samples. Material included football-size piece of black, glass-like rock; brick-size chunk of volcanic rock pitted with small cavities (vesicular basalt) ; and 9%-kg (21-lb) rock, largest single sample ever returned from moon, from rim of Hadley Rille. Scientists were anxiously waiting to examine crystalline rock in sample bag No. 196, scheduled to be opened Aug. 12, that Scott had described as possible chip of moon’s original crust. (W Post, 8/11/71; AP B Sun, 8/10/71, Al)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden thanked usaf personnel at Patrick AFB, Fla., for their support during Apollo 15 mission and presented base with U.S. flag they had carried to moon. Later, astronauts thanked msfc employees during six-hour visit to Center, (msfc Release 71—164; NY News, 10/1/71, 64; msfc pao)
President Nixon telephoned msc Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton and asked him to send President’s congratulations to Apollo 14 astronauts and ground crew. Later President issued statement: “Apollo 14’s successful landing on the moon was a thrilling event for humanity. I congratulate the astronauts and also the thousands of other dedicated people who helped make this awesome achievement possible.” (PD, 2/8/71, 173)
Resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to set foot on moon, was announced by NASA. Armstrong, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, would join Univ. of Cincinnati as its first professor of aerospace engineering Oct. 1. He would continue to serve NASA as consultant. Armstrong had joined NASA in 1955 and had served as aeronautics research pilot for naca and NASA. He had piloted X-15, X-l, F-100, F-101, F-102, F-104, F-5D, and B-47 aircraft and, as B-29 “drop” aircraft pilot, had participated in more than 100 rocket aircraft flights. Armstrong had been selected by NASA as astronaut in September 1962. He had served as backup command pilot for Gemini 5; command pilot for Gemini 8 (launched March 16, 1966), during which he had performed first successful docking of two vehicles in space; backup command pilot for Gemini 11; backup command pilot for Apollo 8; and commander of Apollo II.	(nasa Release 71-159)
Air Force Assn.’s Schilling Trophy was presented to Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin and Alfred M. Worden in recognition of “their unique contribution to manned spaceflight and science.” (NASA Activities, 10/15/71,172; afa pio)
Scientists and engineers at mit described planned Apollo 17 surface electrical properties experiment to probe for water on moon, in telephone interview with New York Times. Experiment consisted of 6.8kg (15-lb) radio transmitter with four 35-m (115-ft) lengths of wire which astronaut was to unreel on lunar surface in X pattern as antenna. Radio signals at varying frequencies would be beamed into lunar surface. Small receiver on LRV would receive signals bounced back from beneath lunar surface and signals would be recorded by tape recorder on lrv. Pattern, timing, and strength of reflected signals were expected to indicate presence of water, if any, and kind of material in lunar subsurface. Times said experiment’s importance had been heightened by Oct. 15 announcement of discovery of water vapor on moon. (Wilford, NYT, 10/19/71, 29)
Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the JohnsonSea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft) vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star, 1/30/71, A9) January 31-February 9: nasa’s Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting CSM—110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM Kitty Hawk. January 31~February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot), was launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at 4:03 pm est Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was 40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72° to 75.6°. Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr. Spacecraft and S—IVB combination entered parking orbit with 188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Midcourse correction (MCC—1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:02 get. Onboard TV was initiated to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encountered. First five docking attempts by cm pilot Roosa were unsuccessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible. Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 get, 1 hr 54 min later than planned. Separated S-IVB/iu impacted lunar surface at 83:18 get (2:41 am est Feb. 4) at 7°49' south latitude and 26° west longitude 174 km (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs. Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was initiated at 10:00 get to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they found no indication that systems would not work normally again. Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. 1]. Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-sec sps burn at 30:36 get, increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver, crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth’s dark side and continued to check out systems, get update was performed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay. MCC—3, scheduled for 60:38 get, was not necessary. Third TV transmission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 get, showed Shepard and Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC—4, at 77:38 get with 0.6-sec sps burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec (3.5 fps). Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before firing rcs thrusters at 104:28 get to separate CSM and lm. Spurious bit in lm guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent January 31-February 9: Propelled into space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the moon on the third .successful United States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5 touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored the Fra Mmtro area for 9 hours 24 minutes in two extravehicular periods before the LM Aniares lifted them off to rejoin Roosa in the orbiting cm Kitty Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch activities were monitored by Dr. George M. Low (at left below), Acting nasa Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at ksc. abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manually. LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 108:54 get (4:17 am est Feb. 5) on 8° slope 9—18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy, undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.” First eva began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent plss communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar surface at 114:30 get (9:53 am est Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the forward footpad landed is extremely soft. . . . it’s in a small depression. The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads, it even folded over the sides to some degree. ... we can see the boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route up to the top of the Cone.” Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb) contingency sample; deployed TV, S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experiment; and photographed lm, lunar surface, and experiments, alsep was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of lm and laser-ranging retrorefiector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of alsep. Mitchell conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibrations 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min extension on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:48 get (3:11 am est Feb. 6)—2 hrs 27 min earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded met with photographic equipment and lunar portable magnetometer (lpm) and proceeded toward Cone Crater, met bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable. Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Everything’s going to be covered with dust before long.” lpm site measurement was made at first stop and lpm traverse measurement was later made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and materials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m (1.5-ft) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected. Alignment adjustment was made to alsep central station’s antenna to improve signal strength being received at msfn ground stations. Crew was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of timeline and minor problems. Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement: “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the February 4-6; Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed, (at top left) leading across the lunar surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-band antenna was positioned by the astronauts to the left of the lm. Lunar dust clung to the legs of Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extravehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to M tons of tht. contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball on lunar surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds). Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing total eva time to 9 hrs 24 min. While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in csm, completed bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic photography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for shortened rendezvous technique. Shepard and Mitchell depressurized lm, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg (94.8 Ihs) of samples at 142:25 get—33 hrs 31 min after landing on moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 get (3:36 pm Feb. 6) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to earth for postflight analysis. Excellent TV during rendezvous and docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET (7:05 pm est Feb. 6) at 3° 35' south latitude and 19° 40' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 alseps. Transearth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 get, injected CSM into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Kitty Hawk separated from sm at 216:12 get. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 get (4.05 pm est Feb. 9). Astronauts, wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston. CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for lrl. Primary Apollo 14 objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro; deploy and activate alsep; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occasional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent. Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSm/lm docking attempts and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first use of met, largest payload—32 500 kg (71 650 lbs)—placed in lunar orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations. Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capability to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), aborted by sm tank explosion, had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; Av Wk, 2/15/71, 19)
Apollo 14 astronauts were presented Distinguished Service Medals at dod ceremonies. Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee presented usn dsm to Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented usaf dsm and Command Pilot Astronaut Badge to Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa. (NASA Activities 4/15/71, 61; dod Release 218-71; msc Hist Off)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden received Order of Leopold from King Leopold of Belgium in Brussels. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
Donald K. Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, sent cable on behalf of U.S. astronauts to Soviet Academy of Sciences: “We share with the world community deep sorrow for the loss of Cosmonauts Georgy Dobrovolsky, Vladislav Volkov and Viktor Patsayev, and we mourn with all the Russian people the deaths of three brave countrymen.” (Reuters, B Sun, 7/1/71, A2; msc pio)
Newspaper editorials commented on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: Chicago Tribune: “Any one of a million things could have gone wrong, because there are a million things that have had to go right for each Soviet and American success in space. It is no discredit to Russian scientists that something went wrong at the last moment. It is testimony to the good fortune and skill and care of the United States space program that something of this kind hasn’t happened yet to us.” (C Trib, 7/1/71) Christian Science Monitor:	. . those men who fly such missions are taking the risk for the aspirations of mankind to break the limitations of earth’s gravitational and atmospheric fields. They depend on the accumulating technological knowledge of mankind to protect them. As a result, the Soyuz 11 event argues the more determinedly that nations—for the moment chiefly the United States and the Soviet Union—should share their space research efforts.” (CSM, 7/1/71) Washington Post: “The special sorrow that must be felt at this event does not proceed from their numbers—three deaths next to, say, thousands among the world’s more recently savaged refugees. Nor does it proceed alone from their conspicuous bravery, their willingness to take the ultimate risk in pursuit of a national mission: daily, men in combat make the same commitment and do so minus the glory and unambiguous sense of purpose that cosmonauts and astronauts share. So it is more than the death of three men on a high risk venture that must move the earthbound to a special sorrow: it is the death of these men in pursuit of the ultimate adventure, exploration of the outer limits of human knowledge and endurance—and beyond.” (W Post, 7/1/71) New York Times: “. . . it should be apparent that the staggering dangers of space can be met most effectively by mobilizing all the knowledge and talent available irrespective of nationality. It is time to abandon the wasteful irrationality of prestige-motivated competition. The real lesson of this tragedy is . . . that space exploration ought to be a cooperative endeavor of all nations.” (NYT, 7/1/71) Baltimore Sun: “The three cosmonauts lived in space for almost 23 days, and by all indications the station’s operation came up to its designers’ hopes. Only in the final brief stage, a stage often successful before, did disaster intervene. It is tragedy, but it is not defeat.” (B Sun, 7/1/71)
Astronaut-geologist Harrison H. Schmitt praised Apollo 15 astronauts in msc briefing for their completion of eva geological activities: “I don’t think there is any question that we had a fantastic exploration mission. There’s just no question in my mind we sent two very competent observational scientists to the moon.” Samples collected, Schmitt said, “sounded very much like . . . crystalline rocks . . . that may well, and I emphasize may . . . represent the early lunar crust. I am not sure until we see the samples that we’re much closer to understanding the origin of the rille than when we started, except that there probably are some origin theories that can be eliminated now. “I think that the net result of the mission was to indicate that our preliminary thinking about the moon . . . still looks like a valid picture, it’s a valid foundation [on] which to attempt to further select sites and to further approach the analysis of rocks and soils that are brought back.” (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 8/4/71, A6)
Twin eight-cent stamps commemorating decade of U.S. achievement in space were issued during ceremonies at ksc, msc, and msfc in conjunction with Apollo 15 mission. Stamps, depicting ApoUo 15 lunar landing and lrv carrying Apollo 15 astronauts, later went on sale throughout U.S. (msfc Release 71-132; NYT, 7/18/71, 24; W Star, 8/1/71, B7; msfc pao)
aec announced it was developing plutonium-fueled water recovery and waste management system for crew on extended space flights. Device converted liquid wastes into sterile drinking water by high-temperature processing and disposed of nonmetallic cabin wastes by incineration. System would meet needs of four astronauts for up to 180 days, (aec Release 0-47)
At Paris Air Show Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa met in Soviet Pavilion with Vostok 4 Cosmonaut Pavel R. Popovich and Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Andrian G. Nikolayev. Astronauts saw models of Baykonur launch complex, Vostok 1, and Soyuz spacecraft; examined display devoted to 10th anniversary of first space flight by Yuri A. Gagarin on April 12, 1961; ascended to Soyuz cm; and admired Lunokhod 1 lunar vehicle and Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft that had returned lunar samples to earth. Later astronauts and cosmonauts went to U.S. Pavilion where cosmonauts were shown Apollo 12 spacecraft and other exhibits. Cosmonauts presented astronauts with model of Soyuz spacecraft; astronauts reciprocated with small Soviet flag they had carried to moon aboard Apollo 14 and NASA astronaut badges. (fbis-Sov-7 1-108, 6/4/71, FI; NYT, 6/3/71, 41)
Cosmic ray tracks found in helmets of Apollo astronauts had indicated that exposure during space mission was sufficient to damage certain nonreplaceable cells on long flights, General Electric R&D Center team reported in Science. On two-year mission, fraction of cells killed could rise to 0.12% in cerebral cortex, 0.05% in retina, and more than 1.5% for giant cells. Proportions might be “highly worrisome, since additional safe shielding would impose important weight considerations on spacecraft design.” (Comstock, Fleischer, et al., Science, 4/9/71, 154r-6)
Return of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to active service with usaf in July 1971 was announced by Gen. John D. Ryan, usaf Chief of Staff. Col. Aldrin would assume command of AFSc’s Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards AFB, Calif. He had joined NASA in January 1964 as astronaut trainee after serving with usaf in Germany and Korea. He held B.S. degree from U.S. Military Academy and Sc.D. degree from mit. (nasa Special Release; dod Release 45-71)
Heart problems encountered by Apollo 15 astronauts necessitated changes in diet and exercise regimen for Apollo 16 astronauts, Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said in speech before annual clinical meeting of American College of Surgeons in Atlantic City, N.J. All three Apollo 15 astronauts had experienced drops in potassium levels during July 26-Aug. 7 mission. Astronaut James B. Irwin had developed cardiac arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat) for one minute after he returned to CM from lunar surface and ventricular contractions (premature heartbeats) for following hour. Astronaut David R. Scott also had developed cardiac contractions during mission. Because of findings, first Apollo 16 eva would be shortened, astronauts would rest full eight hours between moonwalks, and more potassium would be added to Apollo 16 diet. (McGehan, B Sun, 10/19/71, A5)
First flight model lrv had begun six-week acceptance testing by Boeing Co. preliminary to scheduled delivery to NASA on April 1, NASA announced. Model would transport two astronauts on three extravehicular traverses during Apollo 15 mission in July. Second lrv flight model, being built at Boeing, was scheduled for testing in last week of March and for April delivery. Third model was scheduled for May delivery. (nasa Release 71—25)
President Nixon sent individual messages from Caneel Ray, Virgin Islands, wishing success to Apollo 14 astronauts Alan R. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa on eve of launch. Message to Shepard said: “The courage and determination you have displayed in coming back against such great odds to fly again have earned our unanimous admiration at home and abroad. That this important mission should be entrusted to our Nation’s first man in space makes us especially proud and confident in its success.” (PD, 2/8/71, 151)
Ashes of Soyuz 11 Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav N.	Volkov, and Viktor I. Patsayev, killed during reentry from June 6— 30 mission, were buried in Kremlin Wall in Moscow’s Red Square. Military funeral, climaxing national day of mourning, was watched by millions of TV viewers and attended by leading Soviet and foreign officials and thousands of other onlookers. Condolences were sent by world leaders. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford represented President Nixon at funeral. Eulogy at funeral was presented by Andrey P. Kirilenko, head of funeral commission: “On a small island of the motherland traveling at a fantastic speed across the expanses of the universe they were filled with courage and the conviction that the tasks of the party and people would be fulfilled; and they fulfilled these tasks, successfully completing a complex and varied program of scientific research and technical experiments. The results of their observations are invaluable for science, for the future of space technology, for mankind. For 24 days we saw the valorous cosmonauts on the television screens and listened to their voices. With unbated attention we followed their work. Millions of people, as it were, became intimately linked with the heroes of the cosmos. We all impatiently awaited the cosmonauts’ safe return to home territory. Their lives tragically came to an end when the long cosmic journey was close to completion.” Letter from 19 surviving cosmonauts printed in Pravda said: “Today we are paying the last tribute to our talented and courageous comrades. There is not only grief in our hearts, but also pride for what they have done for the homeland in outer space. We know that our road is a difficult and thorny one, but we never doubted the correctness of our choice and were always ready for any difficult flight. We express firm confidence that what happened cannot stop the further development and perfection of space engineering and man’s striving for space, striving for knowledge of the mysteries of the universe.” (fbis-Sov-129-3, 7/6/71, LI; Kingston, Canada, Whig-Standard, 7/2/71,1; AP, W Star, 7/1/71, A2)
At Apollo 15 press briefing in Washington, D.C., Astronaut Alfred M. Worden, CM pilot, described planned activities in lunar orbit, including first “working walk” in space. At 320 000 km (200 000 mi) from earth on return journey from moon, he would move outside cm, hand-walk on 7.6-m (25-ft) tether along rail, and open bay in SM to retrieve two canisters of film used to photograph moon while spacecraft was in lunar orbit. It was necessary to retrieve film before SM was jettisoned 160 km (100 mi) from earth before cm’s reentry. Worden said one hour had been allotted to space walk but underwater practice had indicated retrievals could be completed in 20 min. Two roundtrips from cm to SM were necessary because only one canister could be carried at a time. First canister would weigh 36.3 kg (80 lbs) and hold 2000 m (6700 ft) of film, including more than 1600 exposures of lunar surface taken from 113-km (70-mi) lunar orbit. Photos would be enlarged on earth to compose blowup 15.2 m (50 ft) wide and 160 km (100 mi) long showing details on lunar surface as small as 1.5 m (5 ft) in diameter, nasa hoped these would include photo of UEtv. Second canister would weight 3.6 kg (8 lbs) and hold 1100 m (3600 ft) of film used in mapping camera. While Worden retrieved cannisters, cm’s hatch would be opened. Astronaut James B. Irwin would guide Worden along tether and Astronaut David R. Scott would stow canisters when Worden passed them through hatch. Worden told press, “We’re going to be doing something out there, not just testing out an engineering concept or working out a procedure to do something.” (Transcript)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 15 astronauts to extend good wishes on eve of launch. (PD, 8/2/71,1099)
NASA released 9 color photos, 14 black-and-white photos, and segment of 16-mm film taken during Apollo 14 mission. Pictures showed lm, footprints, tire tracks, Astronauts Shepard and Mitchell during eva, American flag on surface, and large boulders. (AP, W Star, 2/14/71, A3)
nasa announced assignments within msc Flight Crew Operations Directorate: Apollo 10 Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had been named Deputy Director and Apollo 14 Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would resume duties as Chief of Astronaut Office. Stafford also would assist Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, in technical matters related to flight crew activities. Post of Deputy Director had previously been vacant, (nasa Release 71—116)
