A five-week Ames Research Center experiment to determine women’s qualifications for space flight had shown women to be as physically fit for travel in weightlessness as men, NASA announced. The experiment— in which 8 of 12 Air Force flight nurses had two weeks of total bed rest in weightlessness simulation, while 4 acted as ambulatory controls—was one of a series to investigate responses to space flight conditions, looking forward to use of the space shuttle by other than pilot-trained astronauts. NASA emphasized that the test was to determine women’s qualifications for space flight and did not represent a commitment to add women to the astronaut corps. Dr. Harold Sandler, head of the experiment team, said the bedridden nurses were weaker after the experiment and showed a 50% reduction in their tolerance to various stresses. “But the same is true of men astronauts.” (nasa Release 73-218; AP, P Inq, 10/25/73)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council 1969—1973, to be a Commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission for the term expiring June 30, 1978. The nomination was confirmed Aug. 2. Anders would succeed James T. Ramey, whose term had expired. {PD, 7/23/73, 914, 920; CR, 8/2/73, D960)
A New York Times editorial commented on the research recession caused by changing priorities of the Federal Government and insufficient budget appropriations in Federal research programs: “The brilliant record of American scientists . . . testifies to the quality of the national research enterprise. But how long can such top quality survive in the face of the present economic stringency and the threat of even worse times ahead?” (NYT, 1/5/73, 28) January 7:	Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had announced his decision to leave NASA and retire from the Navy effective March 1 to accept a position with private industry, Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Lovell, who had been Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC since May 1971, would become Senior Executive Vice President of Bay Houston Towing Co. Lovell was a veteran of four space flights including Gemini 7 (launched Dec. 4, 1965) ; Gemini 12 (launched Nov. 11, 1966) ; Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968), the first mission to circle the moon; and Apollo 13 (launched April 11, 1970), the mission scheduled to make the second lunar landing but aborted after an onboard explosion. He held the record for total time in space— 715 hrs (30 days), (msc Release 73-01)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt had arrived in Indonesia to present a moon rock to Indonesian President T. N. J. Suharto and lecture at the Indonesian Institute for Outer Space, the Associated Press reported. They were on an 11-country tour of Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and the Pacific. {Birmingham News, 6/25/73)
A Science editorial commented on the energy crisis: “A combination of environmental concerns and energy shortages is fostering wide-spread beggar-your-neighbor attitudes. Everyone wants cheap, unlimited energy, but all are prepared to fight tooth and nail to protect the environment and to prevent the location of energy facilities in their vicinity. It so happens that we are going to have neither cheap energy nor a perfect environment. Moreover, if we do not learn how to think nationally rather than parochially and to balance energy needs against environmental concerns, we are headed for trouble.” (Abelson, Science, 10/16/73, 657) November 17:	Soviet Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov discussed progress and problems of the astp to date in an interview published in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya. Generally, everything was progressing according to plan, but “as yet there is no unified search and docking system either on our or the American spacecraft. Only now are designers creating such a system on Apollo and Soyuz.” Spacecraft design and technical difficulties were being overcome, but there had been many problems. Personal relations between U.S. and Soviet crews and experts were very good: “The American astronauts are knowledgeable and highly skilled specialists. Suffice it to say that my opposite number, Colonel [Thomas P.] Stafford, has flown in space three times. Among ourselves we call the program . . . ‘the meeting on the Elbe’ in space. It was in 1945 that Soviet and American soldiers marked their joint victory over fascism by meeting on the Elbe. Thirty years later we dream of marking a victory over the accursed ‘cold war’ with a unique space ‘meeting on the Elbe.’ ” The language barrier had not yet been surmounted. “We are learning English, the Americans are learning Russian. It is said that Russian is the more difficult. But Stafford is courageously surmounting the barrier. Recently we were visited by Dr. [George M.] Low, deputy director of NASA, Eugene [N.] Cernan and Tom Stafford. Stafford made an entire speech on the space meeting [see Oct. 1-18] in relatively fluent Russian. And I assumed the role of translator.” (fbis-Sov, 12/6/73, B3)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Assistant Secretary of Labor for Labor-Management Willie J. Usery, Jr., to be Federal Mediation and Conciliation Director. Before joining the Dept, of Labor, Usery had been special representative of the International Assn, of Machinists at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Test Facility, iam representative on the President’s Missile Sites Labor Committee at Kennedy Space Center and at Marshall Space Flight Center, and coordinator for union activities at Manned Spacecraft Center. He had helped to form the Cape Kennedy Labor-Management Relations Council in 1967 and had become its first Chairman in 1968. The nomination was confirmed March 29. (PD, 2/19/73, 154, 156; Usery Off) February 16:	Scientists at the State Univ. of New York had concluded the orange soil found on moon by Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Harrison H. Schmitt was billions of years older than first thought, the New York Times reported. The discovery had originally led the scientific community to believe the moon might have been volcanically active into geologically recent times, but Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer, Professor of Earth and Space Sciences at State Univ., had said, “It can now be reasonably stated that volcanism . . . ended about three billion years ago.” The team had tested the orange soil sample by potassium-argon dating. By measuring atomic properties, the soil had been found to be 3.71 billion yrs old. It was not known whether soil was of volcanic origin. (Rensberger, NYT, 2/16/73, 46)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, issued a memorandum stating that private communications with astronaut crew members of the Skylah Orbital Workshop (to be launched May 14) would be permitted for morale, operational, and medical reasons. Private calls to families would be permitted once a week, without monitoring or public announcement. Private operational calls could be requested for “extreme operational emergency” and would be announced; paraphrases would be released to the public as appropriate. Private medical conversations would be scheduled daily and not announced. A daily medical bulletin on crew health would be issued to the public. (NASA Release 73—110, attaching memo)
A New York Times editorial criticized the inclusion in the FY 1974 Federal budget of $5.8 million for further studies of the supersonic transport’s possible effect on the stratosphere: “While there may be no harm in pursuing a scientific study of the question, the Government’s intent clearly goes beyond pure research or the problem raised by foreign and military supersonic planes. A high Administration official has bluntly stated that the study would be ‘prefatory to possible introduction of an SST program at a later date.’ The option ‘is held open.’ With an array of fiscal, political and scientific factors against it, the case for the SST at this late date would seem to rest solely on the advantage to a tiny handful of people crossing the oceans in three or four hours instead of six or seven—scarcely a reason for reviving a discredited project which is still being liquidated at public expense.” (NYT, 4/17/73, 39) April 18:	nasa released a preliminary timeline of the Skylab missions scheduled to begin with the Skylab 1 launch of the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm EDT May 14 from Kennedy Space Center. The Skylab 2 mission, carrying the first three crewmen, would leave the pad at 1:00 pm EDT May 15 and dock with the orbiting laboratory at 8:40 pm edt. At 8:30 am May 16 the tunnel would be pressurized and the astronauts would enter Skylab. On the 28th day, at 8:46 am June 12, the crew would reenter the command module, undock, and return for splashdown at 1:44 pm, 1300 km (800 mi) southwest of San Diego. Skylab was to operate for eight months in earth orbit, occupied at intervals by three-men crews who would make scientific and technical investigations and observations related to such areas as earth resources, physiological effects of long-duration weightlessness, solar phenomena, and metal processing in zero-g conditions. (NASA Release 73—78)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt visited Kennedy Space Center to thank employees for their efforts in making manned exploration of the moon possible. Dr. Schmitt said man would explore Mars in the not too distant future. “The reason it is possible to talk this way and not be accused of talking science fiction is because there’s no longer science fiction. It’s now only science prediction.” (upi, LA Her-Exam, 2/21/73)
The first scientific report on the findings of the Soviet remotely controlled lunar explorer Lunokhod 2 (launched Jan. 8 aboard Luna 21) during its 37-km (23-mi) traverse of the moon’s surface had been published in Pravda, the New York Times reported. Chemical analysis of the soil had shown a decrease in iron content and an increase in aluminum as Lunokhod had traveled from the plains into the foothills of the Taurus Mountains. Samplings taken near the landing site in the Lemonnier Crater at the eastern end of the Sea of Serenity had shown 6% iron and 9% aluminum. The ratio changed to 4% iron and 12% aluminum near the uplands. The change in content of aluminum was a distinctive feature of lunar geology; on the earth the amount of aluminum remained constant in continents and the ocean bottoms. Soviet scientists hoped to compare the lunar soil data with samples returned by the Apollo 17 astronauts (launched Dec. 7, 1972), who explored theTaurus-Littrow Valley 225 km (140 mi) away. (Shabad, NYT, 12/17/73, 66)
NASA held an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project news briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. U.S. Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said the U.S.S.R. had agreed to lower the Soyuz cabin pressure to within 350 newtons per sq cm (5 lbs per sq in) of Apollo pressure during the July 1975 joint docking mission, to eliminate two-hour depressurization for each crew member before transfer to the other spacecraft. The change Would permit time for all three astronauts and two cosmonauts to fly in the others’ spacecraft. Previously, Only two astronauts had been scheduled to make the transfer. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the U.S. crew, said “the mission is going to be one of the most difficult . . . because it involves a different country, different language, different operating techniques. . . . But it can certainly open the doors for future cooperation between the countries, can enhance our capabilities” for progress together. Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who would fly his first mission since he was disqualified from Project Mercury’s Aurora 7 flight (launched May 24, 1962) because of an erratic heart rate, said, “I think I’ve been pretty fortunate. And I don’t believe in looking back at the past too much except in relation to what benefit it will give me in the future.” Astronaut Vance D. Brand, who would make his first space flight, said, “I am really happy to get on this mission. I think as we look back over the years, it’ll be regarded as a very historic thing . . . having the doors open between the Soviet Union and the United States.” (Transcript)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin astronomy experiment to a 171.9-km (106.8-mi) altitude. The second, launched 50 min later, carried a Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment to a 154.5km (96.mi) altitude. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 13:	The decision to launch Skylab 4, the third and final mission to man the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), at 9:01 am EST Nov. 16 was announced at a Kennedy Space Center press briefing by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider. The replacement of eight damaged fins discovered on the Saturn IB launch vehicle Nov. 6 was complete and additional precaution had been taken by retrofitting an aluminum block over two lower brackets on each of the tail fins. Cracks found on the aft interstage structural beams Nov. 12 were left untouched after stress tests showed that the cracks would not worsen even under the most extreme aerodynamic stress. “We know of nothing today that would keep us from going,” Schneider said. Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue arrived at Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., from Houston to participate in the countdown, which was ordered resumed. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Past, 11/14/73, A24)
Twelfth anniversary of the May 5, 1961, launch of Freedom 7 by the Mercury-Redstone 3 launch vehicle, on the suborbital mission which carried Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as the first U.S. man in space. {Marshall Star, 5/2/73, 1) May 6:	Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright received the degree of Doctor of Science honoris causa at the 152nd Annual Commencement of George Washington Univ. in Washington, D.C., and gave the commencement address to the University’s School of Engineering and Applied Science. He said it was perhaps “a blessing in disguise” that the U.S. was running out of fossil fuels. In seeking new energy sources, “you will develop clean energy. And you will develop it within our own resources, thus alleviating the balance of trade problem.” Three sources appeared particularly promising: nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, and solar energy. “In addition, you may even tap the heat of the Earth’s core.” (Newport News, Va., Daily Press, 5/10/73; Langley Researcher, 5/11/73, 1) _
The skeleton crew at aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office at Jackass Flats, Nev., would be disbanded by late June, snso Nevada Operations Chief John P. Jewett was quoted as saying. The facility would be shut down June 30 following termination of the nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program [see Jan. 5]. More than $1.2 billion had been spent on program since its inception in 1959. (upi, Orlando Sentinel, 1/7/73)	! January 8-23:	The U.S.S.R. launched its Luna 21 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 11:55 am local time (1:55 am est). The “automatic station” was separated from the “satellite” in earth orbit and placed on a close to the planned trajectory for the moon. Tass said the purpose of the mission was to “further scientific studies of the moon and near-lunar space.” During the flight to the moon all systems were reported functioning normally. On Jan. 12 Luna 21 entered lunar orbit with 110-km (68.4-mi) apolune, 90-km (55.9-mi) perilune, 1-hr 58-min period, and 60° inclination. Orbital corrections were made Jan. 13 and 14 and on Jan. 14 the spacecraft was placed in an elliptical orbit with a low point of 16 km (10 mi) from the moon’s surface. Luna 21 softlanded on the eastern fringe of the Sea of Serenity Jan. 16 (Jan. 15 est) and released the 840-kg (1850-lb) self-propelled Lunokhod 2 vehicle to make scientific investigations of the moon’s surface. Lunokhod 2 resembled its predecessor, Lunokhod 1 (placed on the moon Nov. 17, 1970, by Luna 17). It carried flags, pennants with Lenin’s has relief, state coat of arms, and the inscription “50th Anniversary of the U.S.S.R.” and was equipped with a control system, radio and TV devices, and scientific instruments including a French-made laser reflector. The reflector was designed to measure the distance between the earth and the moon to within 20-30 cm (10-12 in). Between Jan. 16 and Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2, powered by solar batteries and controlled from the ground by a special crew, photographed the lunar soil, rocks, and panoramic moonscape; determined chemical composition of the surface layer; measured the glow of zodiacal light near sun; and looked for cosmic dust. A highly skilled ground crew maneuvered vehicle over the shortest and safest routes, orienting it to a complex relief map of route. Lunokhod 2 was turned to bypass obstacles without decreasing speed. On Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2 was commanded to terminate operations in preparation for lunar night. Luna 17 was the first unmanned spacecraft to land on the moon and deploy an automatic lunar explorer. The last mission in the series, the unmanned Luna 20 (launched Feb. 14, 1972), had landed on the moon and returned to earth with lunar samples, (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; Tass fbis-Sov, 1/8/73, LI; 1/15-19/73, LI; 1/22-23/73, LI; 1/26/73, 4; SBD, 1/9/73, 38; Shabad, NYT, 1/17/73, C14) January 8:	Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, nasa Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) Program Director, was quoted by Aviation Week & Space Technology as saying U.S.S.R. would use a U.S.-supplied very-high-frequency (vhf) transceiver on Soyuz spacecraft during rendezvous and docking maneuvers with Apollo spacecraft in July 1975 mission. Transceivers had been used in lunar modules for Apollo rendezvous and docking in lunar orbit. The U.S. also would build a receiver for Apollo spacecraft that could operate on Soviet communication frequencies and might lend to the U.S.S.R. equipment for use by cosmonauts and astronauts during joint portions of mission. Dr. Petrone had said NASA engineers, in discussions with Soviet engineers, had noted that necessity of concentrating on interpreter for exchange of technical information had made them more aware of technical problems than they would have been in direct English conversation. March meeting of U.S. and Soviet ASTP planners would consider flammability problems. (Av Wk, 1/8/73,
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—in the 39th day of their mission aboard the Orbital Workshop [see Nov. 16-Feb. 8, 1974]—were participating in new tests developed by nasa scientists and heart specialists at the National Heart and Lung Institute to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on the heart, the New York Times reported. Space program doctors wanted data to help explain the smaller heart size, sudden drops in blood pressure when shifting quickly from a prone to upright position, and the smaller output of blood during exercise experienced by astronauts immediately after space flight. The new technique, called echo-cardiography, used sonarlike sound waves of extremely high frequency to produce internal pictures of the heart. The Skylab 4 crew had been tested using echo-cardiography for a week preceding launch. Repeat studies would be made aboard the recovery ship within hours after splashdown. The astronauts would be studied over the course of weeks and possible months to record the complete readaptation of the heart to gravity. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/24/73, 1)
A technique of predicting probabilities that had been “absolutely mandatory” to the success of NASA’s Apollo program was being used by the Atomic Energy Commission to help determine the risk to the public of nuclear power plants, aec member and Apollo 8 Astronaut William A.	Anders said in testimony before the Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. The complicated technique of forecasting the reliability of mechanical systems and human beings using available data from similar activity components and subsystems was described by Massachusetts Institute of Technology nuclear engineer Dr. Norman C. Rasmussen during the nuclear reactor safety hearing. (Willard, W Post, 9/26/73) September 26:	Newspapers commented on the successful Sept. 25 splashdown of Skylab 3 [see July 28-Sept. 25], New York Times: “The word ‘triumphant’ is entirely appropriate because even at this early point it is evident that their 59-day stay in orbit was not only the longest manned space flight in history but also the most productive.” Skylab results to date had made two conclusions incontrovertible: “First, man can live and work effectively for long periods in space, a point particularly emphasized by the astronauts’ pleas in the last days of their journey to be allowed to remain longer in orbit. Second, stations in space are potentially as productive of scientific and technological benefits as the most optimistic predictions had suggested. There is every reason now to suppose that these benefits will range from the discovery of new mineral deposits on earth and early warnings about the formation and movement of storms to new and more effective methods of predicting the turbulence on the sun that interferes seriously with electronic communications on earth.” It could be taken for granted that “orbiting laboratories will become permanent fixtures in the heavens before too many years have passed. (.NYT, 9/26/73, 38) Chicago Daily News: The Skylab 3 astronauts had “earned their keep—and a place in the history of man’s conquest of the universe.” (C Daily News, 9/26/73)
Apollo 17 geologist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt was among 10 young Government employees named to receive the 25th annual Arthur S.	Flemming Award for outstanding contributions to Federal management and science, the Washington Star and News reported. The Schmitt citation was for “total performance as a scientist and astronaut, including geological training of early Apollo flight crews, and as lunar module pilot for Apollo 17.” Awards would be presented at a Washington, D.C., luncheon sponsored by the Downtown Jaycees Feb. 29. (W Star & News, 2/22/73; NASA Special Notice, 2/26/73)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., was named Executive Director of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics staff, succeeding Charles F. Ducander, who was retiring effective June 30. Committee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), said Swigert’s “broadly based skill and enthusiasm” would “aid in expanding the effort being made by the Committee to assure that our national space program and federal research and development will receive adequate support in the mid-1970s.” (AP, Houston Post, 4/14/73; Com Off)
Capt. John T. Geary (usn) became Director of the Naval Research Laboratory, succeeding Capt. Earle W.„Sapp who was reassigned. Capt. Geary had been Deputy Commander for Planning, Programming and Resources with the Naval Electronics System Command. (Naval Research Reviews, 8/73, 27; nrl pio) July 17:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz testified on the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1-2 mission in a joint hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Conrad said the mission had proved the feasibility of maintaining a large space station for manufacturing in space. “I think the data will show that you can do all the things up there that you can do down here and many of them perhaps better.” Skylab 1-2 earth resources and solar telescope data would show “that eventually space has a very definite role in helping mankind and in solving some of these problems that are in front of us. After all, the Sun is probably the most single efficient nuclear device that we know about. We do have an energy crisis. We need to better understand that. We just scratched the surface with our 30,000 photographs we brought back. I think you will find that the Earth resources data, when coupled with . . . erts [Earth Resources Technology Satellites] and those types of sensors will ... as an overall systems design, tie all of these things we talk about with different satellites into a big picture.” At the mission’s completion the Skylab 1—2 crew could hand over to the Skylab 3 crew a Workshop that could harbor “a 100-percent successful 56-day mission.” Dr. Kerwin said Skylab 1—2 medical experience enabled him to extrapolate a 56-day mission “without difficulty.” He felt the inflight portion would be “a piece of cake.” Postflight, the Skylab 3 astronauts might “feel a bit loggier than we did.” But Skylab 1—2 had demonstrated that this was a “minor illness . . . that you get from being 28 days in space and that you can return very rapidly to normal.” Weitz said Skylab’s earth resources survey equipment permitted a more selective data acquisition than that of unmanned erts. “I think we have shown in the past with unmanned satellites that part of the problem is that you have a continuous data flow, not all of which is usable, but all of which must be processed and reduced and analyzed in some form.” With Skylab equipment “we can track point sites” and “be selective . . . pick out specific sites, fields, or a bend in the river, if you want to study silting.” (Transcript)
Skylab 4 crewmen Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue began a 21-day prelaunch isolation period geared to a possible Nov. 10 launch. The astronauts would crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) in the third and final manned Skylab mission. The isolation would minimize the exposure of the crew to infectious disease, (nasa Release 73—220) October 21:	Not since the 1947 first report of what came to be known as “flying saucers” had there been “such widespread reports of unidentified flying objects, or ufo’s, as in recent days,” the New York Times said. They had ranged from a report of a flying V formation of lights in Rochester. N.Y., to press accounts of “strange creatures with weirdly shaped heads” stopping cars on Route 90 in Gulfport, Miss. Two men in Pascagoula, Miss., had said they had been taken aboard a UFO by creatures with crab-claw hands [see Oct. 12]. The Federal Aviation Administration had said that no reports of special significance had been submitted by airline pilots, and an Air Defense Command spokesman had denied that any UFO had been detected in the last three weeks. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/21/73, 65) October 23:	Two fuel tanks on the Saturn IB launch vehicle scheduled to launch the Skylab 4 astronauts toward a Nov. 10 rendezvous with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) buckled slightly after fueling at Kennedy Space Center. The dome-shaped top sections of the tanks sank after ground crews pumped 163 cu m (43 000 gal) of kerosene fuel into the Saturn IB’s four giant tanks and then drained some off to prevent expansion or overpressurization. A plastic cover protecting the tanks from a rainstorm prevented air from rushing into the aluminum tanks as the fuel was drained. The resulting vacuum buckled the tanks inward. Metallurgy experts were flown to KSC from Marshall Space Flight Center to assess the problem. (W Star-News, 10/24/73, A23; AP, B Sun, 10/24/73)	.
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., announced in Cleveland he would make a third bid for the Democratic nomination to the Senate from Ohio. He had lost the 1970 Democratic senatorial primary; a head injury had forced him to end his 1964 Senate campaign. Glenn, as pilot of Friendship 7 (launched Feb. 20, 1962), was the first American to make an orbital space flight. (CSM, 12/11/73; A&A 1962)
Soviet journalist Victor Louis discussed U.S.S.R. plans for the Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft in a New York Times article. The aircraft was scheduled to go into regular passenger service in 1975, when it was expected to begin carrying 120 million passengers annually. Soviet territory was so sparsely populated that “fewer people will be troubled by noise than in Europe or the United States.” Soviet statistics showed 3500 internal airfields in the U.S.S.R. Soviet aircraft flew to 63 major cities throughout the world—operating between Moscow and Santiago, Chile, and eastward between Moscow and Jakarta. SST watchers had calculated that the U.S.S.R. would not sell more than 20 Tu-144s initially. “Ten are estimated to be sufficient to satisfy [Soviet national airline] Aeroflot’s demands for its internal and international European, African and Asian routes, and perhaps a further ten would be taken up by the Czechs . . . and other countries of Eastern Europe.” Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev—who had taken over Tu-144 planning after the death of his father, Tu-144 designer Andrey N. Tupolev—had predicted 50 times more air passengers by the year 2000 and talked of aircraft that would cruise in the stratosphere and carry 1000 persons at speeds of 10 060 km (6250 mi) per hr. (NYT, 6/2/73, 31) June 3:	The Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft exploded and disintegrated in mid-air over the French village of Goussainville near Le Bourget Airport on the final day of the Paris Air Show, killing 13 persons [see May 24-June 3], (Randal, W Post, 6/4/73, Al) June 4:	NASA was “fighting for its political life,” a Detroit News editorial said as the Skylab 2 astronauts considered ways to release a stuck solar wing on the Skylab 1 Workshop launched May 14: “Its funds have been cut drastically since the moon landings were accomplished. Skylab itself is a vehicle costing $295 million. If it has to be abandoned the people will demand more expenditures be cut. So NASA is trying to prove that man really is boss of the machines he produces, that money is not being thrown away. There is a limit, however, to what NASA can devise and the astronauts accomplish. That limit must not be overstepped.” (D News, 6/4/73)
U.S. Patents Nos. 3 744 480 and 3 744 794 were granted to Marshall Space Flight Center physicist Raymond L. Gause and engineers Raymond A. Spier and Bobby G. Bynum. They had invented the ergometer installed in Skylab 1 (launched May 14) to evaluate the astronauts’ muscular output and heart rate and also the harness that held the astronaut to the ergometer in zero-g or earth environment. (Pat Off Pio; Jones, NYT, 7/14/73, 31)
l/c Eduard Burchard, West German Air Force medical officer, had begun two-year tour of duty with the Flight Medicine Section of Johnson Space Center, jsc announced. Burchard would work with U.S. scientists on Skylab. (jsc Release 73-26) March 14:	Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, cited examples of space technology spinoff in testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1974 authorization hearings: A heat recovery system developed from an improved means for eliminating thermal gradients in spacecraft would soon be available for use as a home unit that would provide adequate warm air and hot water from a single flame source. A fast-scan infrared camera adapted from Marshall Space Flight Center research would project 60 frames per second, giving “the same flicker-free image you receive on your TV set.” An irreversible warm-up indicator adapted from NASA-sponsored low-temperature balloon battery research could warn when frozen food had been exposed to too high a temperature. A low-cost portable drug detector developed under Ames Research Center auspices would detect drugs in urine in microscopic amounts. ARC had cooperated with the NASA-sponsored Biochemical Application Team at Stanford Univ. to develop a consumable pill to telemeter body temperature to a remote display unit. The pill could determine the location of ulcers or tumors within the intestines. The need to monitor astronauts’ sleep had led to the development of a sleep analyzer—a soft electrode cap—that required no scalp preparation for good electrode contact. The NASA-sponsored Biomedical Team at Southwest Research Institute had helped make Temper Foam available for prevention of bedsores and as an impact-absorbing material for artificial limbs. The foam had been developed under arc contract. (Transcript)
Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Johnson Space Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., died in Houston at age 43. He had contracted a fatal illness in 1971. Dr. Gast had been on leave from Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory and, since 1970, had directed the lunar science team studying lunar samples at JSC. He had received the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service in 1970 and the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1972. He had been awarded the first Victor Goldschmidt Award of the Geochemical Society in 1972 and had been named to receive the James Furman Kemp Medal of Columbia Univ. in 1973 for directing the lunar rock study. (NYT, 5/18/73, 34; SF, 10/73, 389) May 18:	Newspapers commented on the Skylab 1 mission as engineers at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center prepared sunshades to cool down the overheated space station: New York Times: The “partial recovery from earlier disaster has set the stage for an unprecedented improvisation in space. Present plans are for the Skylab crew to blast off a week from today and install a sunshade or awning to replace the missing thermal shield. If that can be done, the temperature problem will be solved and the astronauts will be able to begin living in the space station and to carry out at least some of the projected experiments. All these plans transcend past space feats, and if successful, will mark a major advance in the nation’s space capabilities. But the task will not be easy and a happy ending is by no means guaranteed.” (NYT, 5/18/73, 32) Chicago Daily News: “The space station experiments not only look outward toward the sun and stars, but also down at the Earth. From 270 miles [435 kilometers] up, men can learn much about the planet, its resources and its weather that they can’t see on the ground. Much of the knowledge gained from Skylab can be expected to have practical application toward improving the quality of life on Earth.” (C Daily News, 5/18/73)
A People’s Republic of China team of diplomatic and transportation officials arrived in Seattle, Wash., to discuss PRC purchase of 10 Boeing 707-320 transport aircraft. Boeing would train crews in Seattle and would assist with further crew training in Shanghai. (Av Wk, 2/5/73, 29) January 31:	Manned Spacecraft Center had named 10 investigators to receive the first Apollo 17 lunar samples, NASA announced. Five U.S. and five foreign scientists would receive allocations that included tiny rock chips and polished thin sections cut from three large rocks. Rocks 70035 and 75055 were dark gray basalts typical of material underlying the Taurus-Littrow valley; rock 76055—lighter colored recrystallized breccia that Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt had described as “anorthositic gabbro”—might have been part of the mountainside at one time. The first investigators had been recommended by the Lunar Sample Analysis Planning Team (lsapt). Most would attempt to determine sample ages by rubidium-strontium and argon analysis. Other studies would analyze trace elements and mineralogical content. Early allocations were being made with the stipulation that research be conducted so that results could be reported at the 4th Annual Lunar Science Conference scheduled for March 5-8. Additional preliminary allocations would be recommended by lsapt, including samples of orange soil found at Shorty Crater, (nasa Release 73-16)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D—Wash.), introduced S. 2782 to establish a National Energy Information System, to authorize the Dept, of the Interior to undertake an inventory of U.S. energy resources on public lands and elsewhere, and for other purposes. (CR, 12/6/7.3, S22002) December 7:	A major reorganization plan that included two key directorates at Johnson Space Center had been announced by Dr. Christopher C.	Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, the jsc Roundup reported. Effective immediately, the reorganization would not be implemented fully until February 1974. Flight Crew Operations and Flight Operations would be combined into a new Flight Operations Directorate devoted entirely to space flight and aircraft activities. A new Data Systems and Analysis Directorate would provide institutional and programmatic data systems and analysis and the onboard software for the space shuttle. Pilot astronauts in the former Flight Crew Operations Directorate would be assigned to the Astronaut Office in the new Flight Operations Directorate. Scientist-astronauts would be assigned to Astronaut Offices in the Science and Applications and Life Sciences Directorates. Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht and Flight Control Div. Chief Eugene K. Kranz would be Director and Deputy Director of the new Flight Operations Directorate. They also would continue in their present assignments through completion of the Skylab program. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would be Chief of the Flight Control Astronaut Office. Howard W. Tindall, Jr., and Lynwood C. Dunseith had been named Director and Deputy Director of the Data Systems and Analysis Directorate. Astronaut Owen K. Garriott was Deputy to Director Anthony J. Calio of the Science and Applications Directorate; Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt would be Chief of the Science and Applications Astronaut Office. Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin would be Chief of the Life Sciences Astronaut Office, which also would include astronaut physicians F. Story Musgrave and William E. Thornton. In addition to their duties as space shuttle crew candidates, Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Eugene A. Ceman had been assigned duties in project management. Haise would be Technical Assistant to the Space Shuttle Orbiter Project Manager, Duke would be Technical Assistant to the Acting Manager for Space Shuttle Systems Integration, and Cernan would be Special Assistant to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Manager. Of 37 astronauts on active flight status, 26 were pilots. Of these, 16 would participate in space shuttle activities; 10 had been assigned to the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Eight scientist-astronauts would work in the Science and Applications Office, and three in Life Sciences. (Roundup, 12/7/Ti, 1)
NASA launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment to a 197.8-km (122.9-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) April 10:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz completed training at Marshall Space Flight Center for a three-hour extravehicular activity scheduled for the Skylab 1—2 mission, set for May 14 and 15 launches. Although Conrad and Kerwin were to perform the EVA, all three crew members trained so that any combination of two could accomplish the activity. The training—begun in February 1972—took place in msfc’s Neutral Buoyancy Simulator, which held a full-scale mockup of a major portion of the Skylab cluster in a simulated weightless environment, (msfc Release 73-55)
NASA announced it had granted a five-year exclusive patent license for the automated visual sensitivity tester (avst), a device to detect eye abnormalities, to Consultants Unlimited. The device—an 8-mm motion picture projector with an electronic control unit and an automatic response plotter—had been developed by Ames Research Center scientists for astronaut eye examinations during long-duration space missions. (nasa Release 73-226)
Life in weightlessness in the Skylab Workshop, orbited May 14, was described by a Wall Street Journal article as the Skylab 2 crew began its 15th day on board the space station. Commander Charles Conrad, Jr., had reported, after attempting to eat canned tomatoes, that he was “flinging tomatoes all over the place.” He had warned, “You’ve got to eat the whole tomato.” Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had told Mission Control: “I don’t use the salt much. It tends to bounce off the food a lot.” Later he had reported a minor kitchen disaster with a bag of dehydrated corn. “The bag failed at its seam. . . . We’ve got corn powder all over everything.” Kerwin said taking a shower was pleasant, but the water didn’t “fly through the air, it sticks to whatever is there, mostly you and partly the walls. It takes forever to dry both one’s self and the walls . . . even using that inadequate little vacuum cleaner that we’ve got.” The crew recommended allotting an hour for taking a shower on future missions. The astronauts were being awakened by the noise of the suction fan when the toilet was used at night. They found themselves growing hoarse from shouting at each other across the roomy Workshop during the day. Kerwin had found himself unable to whistle in zero g, but Astronaut Paul J. Weitz had assured him he could learn after a few days’ practice. “You’ve got to hold your lips a little farther apart.” (Bishop, WSJ, 6/8/73, 1)
The Skylab 1 Investigation Board appointed to determine the cause of the anomaly that lost the Orbital Workshop’s meteoroid shield and one solar array wing during launch May 14 reported its findings and recommendations to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. The Board, chaired by Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin, said the most probable cause was inadequate venting of the pressure in a tunnel beneath the shield. Differential pressure buildup in the tunnel had forced the shield away from the Workshop shell and into the supersonic air stream. The shield then broke the tiedowns holding the solar array wings onto the spacecraft. About 10 min into the flight one solar array wing was torn away completely when it was struck by the exhaust plume of the 2nd-stage retrorockets. The remaining solar array wing would not deploy until the astronauts cut the strap which had curled around the wing and penetrated the metal fairing housing the array. The Board had found that “the significance of the aerodynamic loads on the meteoroid shield during launch was not revealed by the extensive review process” and recommended that complex, multidisciplinary systems like the shield “should have a designated project engineer who is responsible for all aspects of analysis, design, fabrication, test and assembly.” There was no evidence that the shield’s design deficiencies had resulted from or been masked by the Skylab management system. “On the contrary, the rigor, detail, and thoroughness of the system are doubtless necessary for a program of this magnitude.” (nasa Release 73-135; Lundin testimony before Sen Com on Aero and Space Sci, 7/30/73) July 14:	Sweden had handed the 25-nation Geneva disarmament conference a list of 925 nuclear weapon tests carried out from World War II through April 25, 425 of them after the August 1963 signing of the treaty banning all experimental nuclear blasts above ground, Reuters reported. The majority of the 425 had been underground tests, but China and France, which did not sign the treaty, had continued atmospheric nuclear testing. (NYT, 7/15/73, 7) July 15:	The countdown for the July 28 launch of Skylab 3 began at Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn IB launch vehicle would boost the Apollo spacecraft and its three-man crew into earth orbit to rendezvous and dock with the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), where astronauts would live and work 56 days in space. The countdown was the first for a manned Saturn launch in which the flight crew would not participate with the ICSC launch team in a dress rehearsal. The rehearsal had been eliminated because of the performance record of the Saturn IB and V. The countdown would include a simulated T-zero, ignition, and liftoff with a fully fueled launch vehicle on Complex 39, Pad B. (ksc Release 163-73)
President Nixon and visiting Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev signed, during White House ceremonies, Basic Principles of Negotiations on the Further Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and an agreement for scientific and technical cooperation in peaceful uses of atomic energy. The arms limitation document specified agreement on continued active negotiations to work out a permanent agreement to be signed in 1974, new agreements to be guided by recognition of each side’s equal security interests, application of weapon limitations to quantity as well as quality, subjection of arms limitations to verification by national technical means, modernization and replacement of weapons under conditions to be formulated, formulation of agreements on separate measures to supplement the existing Interim Agreement of May 26, 1972, and to continue measures to prevent accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons. The atomic energy agreement would establish a U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. At an evening Soviet Embassy dinner honoring President Nixon, General Secretary Brezhnev said: “The cause of developing Soviet-American relations is, indeed, moving forward. In 2 years, Soviet and American astronauts will fly into outer space to carry out the first major joint experiment in man’s history. Now they know that from up there in space, our planet looks even more beautiful, though small. It is big enough for us to live in peace, but too small to be subjected to the threat of nuclear war.” Brezhnev proposed a toast to President and Mrs. Nixon’s health and “to the further success of the great cause which we have succeeded in advancing during our present meeting, to the docking, on earth as well as in outer space, of man’s efforts and talents for the good of the peoples, to peace, friendship, and cooperation. . . .” (PD, 6/25/73, 810-21)
Man’s ability to survive in space was discussed in New York Times and Washington Post articles. Of 33 astronauts who had made Apollo flights, 11 had suffered from motion sickness for the first few days in space. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), the aborted moon landing mission, had indicated that men in danger would have a tough time surviving in space. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had lost 6 kg (14 lbs) during the six-day mission. John L. Swigert, Jr., had been so overcome by fatigue near the end of the flight that he made several errors in checking reentry procedures. Fatigue might also have contributed to the deaths of the Soviet Soyuz 11 (June 6-30, 1971) cosmonauts. Calcium loss in weightlessness, the most serious of potential medical problems, could lead to thinning of the bones and subsequent bone breaks after long periods in space. Other health problems included increased heart rates, weight loss, decreased oxygen consumption, reduced blood pressure, and the reduced flow of blood to the brain and kidneys. Psychological effects, as well as these problems, would be studied on Skylab missions. Were windows necessary? Should doors be doorshaped or would circular holes be sufficient? Would the crew tolerate sleeping upright in sleeping bags attached to the walls? (Schmeck, NYT, 5/14/73, 24; O’Toole, W Post, 5/14/73, A12)
Reaction of writers Norman Mailer and Katherine Anne Porter to space flight and to nighttime launch of Apollo 17 were reported in the Christian Science Monitor. Authors had witnessed the Dec. 6, 1972, launch and participated in a space seminar during the “Voyage beyond Apollo” cruise of the S.S. Statendam, which left New York Dec. 4 for Cape Kennedy and the Caribbean. Mailer had said: “Moon colonies offer the possibility that we’ll be able to discover definitively and for the first time what we are doing wrong. Whether we thrive on the moon or fail we’re going to learn something that we’re not going to learn by staying here on earth. . . .” Part of “the fundamental impasse of 20th-century man and woman is that they cannot find communities which express their philosophical ideas, their social ideas, and their private ideas. In other words, the one thing that we can’t do any longer is verify what we think. We can have ideas. But we spend our lives just talking about them. “There are very few people who have a profound sense of commitment. One of the reasons that the astronauts have been so revered . . . is that they have this huge sense of commitment. . . . they are absolutely devoted to a living a life that they believe in utterly and are willing to go through great hardship for it. I think that until our society reaches the point where many more people live lives of such commitment it’s going to remain essentially unhealthy. . . . “The decision to go to the moon is such a declaration of intent. If nothing else, one has to risk dying on it. One has to recognize that one is taking a major step, and the idea of taking a major step brings out in, people at least for a short period . . . the best in them. Then, if there’s something really alive in the venture, they’re likely to keep changing their habits and go on to make more of themselves.” Miss Porter had said that, in almost anything men undertook together here on the earth, “in no time at all there’s a pull and haul for power. They’re betraying and tricking each other, getting in one another’s way. And yet when it comes to something they consider big enough and grand enough they do it in a grand way and they do it well, like the astronauts. . . . We’ve always built and saved a little more than we’ve been able to destroy, don’t you think?” (CSM, 1/3/73)
The Senate confirmed Skylab 2 astronaut Cdr. Paul J. Weitz, Jr. (usn), for permanent promotion to the grade of captain. (CR, 7/20/73, S14273)
An era of global scarcity had begun, a Science editorial noted. “The advanced countries are vulnerable in one or more respects.” Japan had been enjoying a boom but needed to import raw materials, fossil fuels, and food. In Mexico people lived under conditions like those of 100 yrs ago, “with a disregard for sanitation,” but with “Coca Cola signs and transistor radios everywhere.” Much of the world was aware of U.S. living standard and gadgets. “They yearn for both, while the population explosion continues. We are soon going to witness dramatic and miserable confrontations of aspirations, expectations, and limitations.” (Abelson, Science, 7/27/73, 303) July 28-September 25:	The Skylab 3 Apollo spacecraft carrying a threeman crew was launched into near-earth orbit, rendezvoused with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), and docked with the space laboratory for the second manned mission in the Skylab program. A series of problems threatened to disrupt the mission, but corrective actions and workarounds permitted it to proceed successfully, setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Sept. 25. The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee at 10 min 2 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the csm separated from the stage as planned. The galactic x-ray mapping experiment mounted in the instrument unit (iu) was deployed. At 5 hrs 19 min 53 sec after launch the S—IVB/iu deorbit maneuver was commanded, and the stage impacted the predicted Pacific Ocean area after planned maneuvers. During CSM maneuvers to rendezvous with the Workshop, a leak was detected in the CSM reaction control system (rcs) quad B thruster, one of four assemblies of rockets used to stabilize the spacecraft or to change its velocity and also used as a backup for bringing the CSM back from orbit. Analysis indicated the oxidizer valve was stuck open or partially open. Quad B was isolated; analysis showed that all deorbit mission rules could be satisfied. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 3:38 pm edt on the fifth orbit. Rendezvous, fly-around, and docking were covered by 23 min of TV. The crew entered the multiple docking adapter (mda) at 4:00 pm edt and began Workshop activation, but activation was curtailed because the crew quickly began to feel motion sickness. Lousma was experiencing nausea and Bean and Garriott were uncomfortable. Bean said he and Garriott tended “to be fairly careful of how we move. And since we are moving rather slowly, then it’s taking a little bit longer than we’d planned.” Motion sickness continued the second day, July 29, and the astronauts were taking scopolamine-dexedrine tablets. Bean communicated, “We feel okay, except in the stomach. . . . And our thinking is that we’re not going to be able to work much faster than we are right now. . . . There’s a desire to maybe take a break for an hour or two and get in the bunk and stay still for a while.” Flight Director Neil B. Hutchinson told the press at JSC that extravehicular activity (eva) to install a new sun shield and retrieve and install Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) film probably would be delayed from July 31 to Aug. 1 at the earliest. Four to five hours of work were carried over from July 28 and 29. Still suffering from motion sickness, the astronauts continued Workshop activation July 30 (Mission Day 3). The first EVA was delayed to Aug. 2 and later rescheduled to Aug. 4 to ensure the astronauts’ complete recovery. Activation was completed July 31 (MD-4) and research began as the crew improved slightly. Bean told ground control: “We’re getting better; it’s just taking a little longer than we thought. . . . Everybody feels pretty good between meals. Then mealtime comes, and we’re caught ... in the squeeze. We’re trying to decide whether we ought to eat all we have to ... to keep our strength up, or eat about what we want to, which isn’t very much.” A TV broadcast from the space station July 31 showed minnows for a biomedical experiment swimming in their plastic aquarium in tight spirals and sometimes apparently trying to swim toward the surface, but with their heads pointed straight down. Garriott said, “Apparently they can’t make up their minds which way is up and down, either.” He also turned a spider named Arabella loose in a plastic cage to observe her web-spinning abilities in zero-g conditions. Later in the mission Garriott reported baby minnows hatched in space performed in water “as if they’d already adapted while they were still in the egg.” They “felt right accustomed to zero-g.” August 1-September 24:	Bean told ground controllers after breakfast Aug. 1 (MD—5) : “This is the first morning we’ve been up here . . . that after a meal everybody felt good. Everybody feels real good right now. Best since we’ve been here.” During live TV the astronauts ate a hearty lunch to music. Bean demonstrated his proficiency in eating while hanging upside down. A medical briefing below at Johnson Space Center suggested that moving quickly from the confined cm to the large Workshop might have contributed to the motion sickness. The milder nausea experienced on the May 25—June 22 Skylab 2 mission could have been caused by a more gradual transition into the Workshop. “I think that it is merely a matter of room in which you can exercise your vestibular mechanisms, and that the workshop simply presents more of that space. . . . perhaps it was too much too soon.” On Aug. 2 a master alarm buzzer awakened the astronauts at 6:45 am EDT. Pressure and temperature were falling rapidly in the CSM reaction control system quad D because of an oxidizer leak. Because of quad B’s July 28 leak, only A and C of the four quads remained fully operational. The quad D leak lasted two hours, losing an estimated 5 kg (12 lbs) of nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer. Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney said at a morning press briefing that the spacecraft was flyable with the loss of the two quads but “it would be flown in a mode which is not entirely standard.” The main concern was “that we have had two problems which are related, at least they seem to be related.” A flaw common to the whole RCS could necessitate the crew’s immediate return to the earth or accelerated preparation of the Skylab 4 spacecraft to make it available as a rescue vehicle should the CSM become unusable. Full activation of Skylab-rescue-vehicle preparation was authorized. Launch and checkout crews began working a 24-hr-day, 7-day-week schedule, preparing two additional couches and other equipment for installation. Earliest possible date for a rescue mission was established as Sept. 5. The EVA rescheduled for Aug. 4 was again postponed, for 24 to 48 hours to free the crew for system checks, to free ground controllers to troubleshoot the problem, and to give time to work out EVA procedures for the new spacecraft configuration. While reentry procedures were being rewritten for the new configuration, the astronauts continued scientific experiments. By the afternoon of Aug. 2 Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, was able to tell the astronauts that troubleshooting the RCS had indicated no apparent generic problem, but two unique quad failures, and there was now confidence that the two remaining quads would ensure attitude control should immediate reentry become necessary. “We’re proceeding ... as if we’re going to have a normal mission.” Astronaut Bean replied: “Fine. You just said the right words. . . . we’re pretty happy with the way things are going, at the moment . . . and we agree 100 percent with what you just announced. . . . everybody’s happy up here.” On Aug. 3 Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said at a JSC press briefing that continuing investigation indicated the two quad failures were unrelated and reexamination of reentry capabilities showed three ways of returning to the earth: using the primary service propulsion system, using the RCS with the two operational quads, and using the hybrid RCS in the cm. “We’re feeling considerably better than . . . yesterday morning.” A slowdown was ordered in the emergency rescue preparations. The Apollo cm would be outfitted in a Skylab 4 configuration, with three astronaut couches rather than the five needed for a rescue mission. The slowdown would delay rescue readiness until Sept. 10. Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma conducted their first full day of experiments and prepared for an earth resources experiment package pass. Garriott held the TV camera at the window to telecast a good view of the U.S. from North Dakota to North Carolina. Later the first of 26 erep passes was made, to gather data for oil exploration, ocean temperatures, mapping, land use surveys, crop inventories, and pollution studies. A master alarm sounded in the CSM Aug. 4, later attributed to a short-circuit in Skylab’s solar telescope system. The short knocked out one of the two TV systems in the atm but did not afFect Skylab’s main power system. Ground crews investigated problems in the primary and secondary coolant systems Aug. 5. One had been slowly leaking since the Skylab 1 launch May 14 and was expected to become inoperative in 16 to 20 days. The secondary loop was thought to have a small leak, begun during the Skylab 2 mission and giving the loop a predicted 60-day lifetime. Possibly additional coolant would have to be carried up by the next manned mission, Skylab 4, but Program Director Schneider said there was “no immediate danger to the crew.” By Aug. 6 evaluations showed that only the primary loop was leaking; the second was sound and could operate for the rest of Skylab 3 as well as for Skylab 4. Flight surgeon Paul Buchanan’s nightly bulletin said Aug. 5 that the crew “continues to report good health and optimistic outlook” and had asked about an increase in their menus “to match their growing appetites.” Fluid intake and output was “optimal.” The first EVA was performed Aug. 6. Garriott and Lousma stepped outside the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm edt to install the 3.6- by 7.3-m (12- by 24-ft), paper-thin, aluminized Mylar awning over the Workshop to reflect the sun’s rays away from the spacecraft skin, damaged when the meteoroid shield was torn ofF during the May launch. Garriott, standing in the Skylab’s open hatch, pieced together the two 16.8-m (55-ft) poles from metal sections and handed them to Lousma. Lousma attached them to a bracket to form a “V” over the Workshop. The sunshade was slowly pulled up by a system of pulleys. One rope kept twisting around the poles and the sunshade folds did not straighten immediately, but after four hours—twice the time expected—the sunshade was successfully deployed. Workshop temperatures were lowered before the EVA ended. Astronaut Bean said Garriott and Lousma worked “at a slow and steady pace” and were not tired. Lousma retrieved and replaced film in four ATM experiments, installed two new cameras, removed a door latch from an atm experiment, and fixed the particle-collection experiment to the rim of the atm. Lousma also inspected the two leaking quads in the CSM RCS and looked for coolant leaks. He noted some evidence of micrometeorite pitting but no clues to causes of the malfunctions. The astronauts completed the eva at 8:01 pm edt, after 6 hrs 31 min, surpassing the 3-hr 30-min record set June 7 by Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin. Garriott, first solar physicist in space, focused the atm cameras on the sun Aug. 7 for the first time during the mission. TV audiences watched him work at the ATM panel. By Aug. 8 Dr. Lawrence F. Dietlein, jsc Deputy Director for Life Sciences, reported the astronauts were “in excellent spirits and have no health problems.” They had completely recovered from motion sickness. Their weights had stabilized after a loss of 1.8 to 2.3 kg (4 to 5 lbs) each. Data obtained on the rotating chair indicated their sensitivity to motion had lifted. Since deployment of the sunshade, temperatures in the Workshop had dropped to 296 K (74°F). The crew photographed a coronal transient with the ATM camera two hours Aug. 10. It was the first time a transient—protons and free electrons expelled violently from the sun’s limb at a speed of about 312 km (194 mi) per sec, a phenomenon that occurred two or three times a year—had been observed at that range and time resolution. Program Director Schneider announced Aug. 14 that Skylab 3 would continue its full 59-day mission. From analyses of the CSM and Workshop, he had “concluded that there is no imminent need for rescue, and ... we have made the decision to proceed with a normal test flow on an accelerated basis at Cape Kennedy.” Skylab 4 was being prepared for a normal mission but would be available for a rescue mission if necessary. The earliest launch date could be Sept. 25. Schneider said, “We’re reasonably confident that [csm] 117 is a good vehicle.” “Looks like they got a renewed burst of confidence down there,” Bean said when told of the decision. “We feel that way up here.” JSC announced Aug. 21 that the astronauts would install a new “six-pack” of gyroscopes during an Aug. 24 EVA, to replace faulty ones. The six-pack had been carried up on the Skylab 3 cm. Meanwhile the crew continued with experiments, requesting more work Aug. 14 because all had spare time and “you just can’t sleep 8 hours up here.” They photographed tropical storm Brenda Aug. 19 as it moved across theYucatan Peninsula toward the Gulf of Mexico. On Aug. 21 Astronaut Bean discovered and photographed through ATM telescopes what Skylab principal investigator Dr. Robert MacQueen called “certainly one of the biggest solar events” seen on the Skylab missions. Bean said the complex series of events on the solar limb looked “like a big bubble” sitting on the edge of the disc. He observed it with the white light coronagraph and x-ray instruments and reported it to be three fourths the size of the sun. NASA scientists alerted other facilities to make observations from ground instruments and other satellites. Dr. MacQueen said the event might have been caused by an explosion on the back side of the sun. “It was a beautiful event.” The crew “did a fine job.” Schneider announced Aug. 23 (MD—27) that the Skylab 3 crew had been given permission to continue the mission for another seven days. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, told the press that he saw nothing in the medical data thus far “that would indicate that we could not press on with the mission, and ... we feel we can go the full 59 days as planned.” EVA—2 began at 12:24 pm edt Aug. 24 with am depressurization by Lousma and Garriott. Lousma completed installation of the six redesigned gyros mounted inside the spacecraft by connecting cables to a computer system outside, and the new gyro system was put into operation. The astronauts installed a sail sample on a hand rail to test durability, replaced ATM film, retrieved and stored cassettes from one experiment, and removed the aperture door ramp latch from two ATM experiments, concluding EVA-2 at 4:31 pm EDT, after 4 hrs 30 min. At 8:01 am edt Aug. 25 (MD—29) the Skylab 3 astronauts surpassed the single-mission endurance mark of 28 days 50 min set in June by Skylab 2. They had completed 404 earth orbits and had traveled 18.5 million km (11.5 million mi). And at 6:11 am edt Sept. 5 (MD-40) Astronaut Bean surpassed the space flight record for one man of 49 days 3 hrs 38 min 36 sec, set in June by Charles Conrad, Jr., on Skylab 2. EVA-3 began at 7:18 am edt Sept. 22. Bean and Garriott moved through space to retrieve and replace atm film and retrieve experiments and parasol samples. EVA operations ended at 9:59 am edt, after 2 hrs 41 min. During the mission, spiders Arabella and Anita first spun webs in corners of their cage, without the normal circular pattern. Each day, however, each improved web formation, adding more radials, adjusting to weightlessness. Garriott said of Arabella Aug. 9 that “she learned very rapidly in zero-g without the benefit of any previous experience.” She “figured out a very nice solution to the problems of zero gravity.” Later ground controllers told Garriott to share his filet mignon with the spiders to keep them alive for the entire mission. Anita, however, was found dead Sept. 16, possibly from inadequate diet. The astronauts righted the cm and remained inside until the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans maneuvered alongside and a crane lifted the cm aboard. Immediate medical examinations found the crew in excellent spirits and surprisingly good condition. Blood pressures and heart rates were within normal range. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for physical checks and would fly to Houston Sept. 26. They would be quarantined for one week. The Skylab 3 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing unmanned Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. Despite mission problems, 150% of scheduled atm observing time was accomplished and erep sensors were operated on 39 Z-axis local vertical data runs and 5 solar inertial data runs, completing 218 of the 386 earth resources task sites. All medical experiments were successfully carried out. All but one of the corollary experiments achieved or exceeded objectives. Of 13 student experiments, 9 were completed. Added unscheduled tests and experiments had significantly increased the data yield above premission planning and Skylab was left in an excellent position to complete the final SL-4 mission. Skylab 3 was officially adjudged a success Oct. 11. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 59 days 11 hrs 9 min; the longest cumulative time in space for one man, 69 days for Bean (who had spent 10 days on the Nov. 14-24, 1969, Apollo 12 mission) ; the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 41 000 000 km (25 500 000 mi) ; the longest EVA, 6 hrs 31 min on Aug. 6; and the longest cumulative orbital EVA time, for one astronaut, 13 hrs 40 min for Garriott. In the first mission to man the Orbital Workshop May 15-June 22, Skylab 2 astronauts had conducted medical, solar, and earth resources experiments for 28 days, as well as repairing the Workshop to salvage the mission. The Workshop would be operated unmanned until the November Skylab 4 launch for a third and final mission. (NASA prog off; jsc pao press briefing transcripts, 7/28/73-9/25/73; NYT, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Post, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Star-News, 7/28/73-9/27/73; B Sun, 8/16/73, A5; 8/20/73, A3) July 28:	NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment to a 120.2-km (74.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed successfully but the experiment data were saturated and not useful, (gsfc proj off) July 29:	Fifteenth anniversary of the signing of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The act provided for the establishment of NASA, which officially came into being Oct. 1, 1958. (nasa Release 73-134) July 30:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, praised NASA’s successful efforts to save the Skylab 1—2 mission during testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Science hearing to review the Skylab Investigation Report [see July 13]: “We were able to save Skylab because of the tremendous depth and breadth of the NASA team and the dedication and skills of thousands of people on that team. There certainly isn’t another country that could have reacted as we did. I doubt whether there is another team within this country that could have reacted in this manner. Our team could do it because of years of training, working hard on highly exacting projects, and working as a team to drive toward a technical objective. The performance of the team on the ground, and of course the magnificent performance, skill and courage of the astronauts, saved Skylab. I would hope that this is remembered as the real story of Skylab, not the failure which caused it to happen.” NASA was “taking all the steps we know how to prevent a future failure due to similar causes in other programs.” Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center testified that, throughout six years of reviews and certifications, “the principal attention devoted to the meteoroid shield was that of achieving a satisfactory deployment. Never did the matter of aerodynamic loads on the shield or aeroelastic interactions between the shield and its external pressure environment during launch receive the attention and understanding during the design and review process which in retrospect it deserved.” The omission had not been surprising. “From the beginning, a basic design concept and requirement was that the shield be tight to the tank.” The question of whether the shield would remain tight against the tank under the dynamics of flight through the atmosphere “was simply not considered in any coordinated manner.” Possibly contributing to the oversight “was the basic view of the meteoroid shield as a piece of structure.” No full-time subsystem engineer had been assigned to the shield. “While it is recognized that one cannot have a full-time engineer on every piece of equipment, it is . . . possible that the complex interactions and integration of aerodynamics, structure, rigging procedures, ordnance, deployment mechanisms, and thermal requirements of the meteoroid shield would have been enhanced by such an arrangement,” (Testimony)
Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold replied to former astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary’s June 5 New York Times article in a letter published by the Times: “nasa believes that it is only with the public interest in manned flight that it can continue to collect the funds needed to feed its organization. Is it not time to evaluate the national priorities and to inform NASA of the result? The space successes of the next decade or more will be in the fields of greatly expanded communication systems, better weather prediction and earth surveys and in the deeper understanding of the earth and the solar system that space science can bring. It is true that this looks like hard work and not much glamour, but it is a program the country could stand behind, even in the face of occasional failures.” NASA could and would carry out such a program if public support was evident, “and many persons inside NASA would be much happier if the facade and the make-believe of the present era could be abandoned.” (NYT, 6/19/73, 36)
A New York Times editorial commented on the cost-benefit ratio of the U.S. Skylab missions. “Is the advantage gained by putting men into space worth the high price that must be paid?” Although bold, imaginative, and potentially useful, Skylab came at a time when Americans were “oppressively aware of the limits of the nation’s resources and of the consequent restraints and constraints on national policy.” Skylab would be most important “in providing practical evidence in determining the relative value of manned activity in utilizing earth’s immediate neighborhood to meet man’s needs on this planet.” (NYT, 5/13/73, 4:14) May 14-Ju.ne 22: The Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and—11 days later— the Skylab 2 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew were launched into near-earth orbit to establish the first U.S. manned orbital laboratory, in the four-mission Skylab program. Skylab i’s meteoroid shield was torn off and the solar array system damaged during launch, cutting power and raising temperature to threaten the mission, although the spacecraft achieved satisfactory orbit. Skylab 2, scheduled for May 15 launch, was delayed while damage was assessed and the flight plan modified. On May 25, Skylab 2 carried three astronauts to rendezvous and dock with the earth-orbiting Workshop. The crew boarded the Workshop, repaired spacecraft damage, and conducted medical experiments and studies in solar astronomy and earth resources for a record 28 days before undocking for a safe return to earth June 22. May 14-24:	Skylab 1 (SL-1) was launched on time at 1:30 pm edt from Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39, Pad A, by a two-stage Saturn V launch vehicle after a nominal countdown. Liftoff was witnessed by U.S. and foreign TV viewers and by an estimated 500 000 persons at ICSC, including U.S. and foreign dignitaries and 26 former prisoners of war invited by NASA. The Skylab 2 crew—Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Paul J. Weitz (pilot), and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot)—watched the launch from quarantine. Skylab’s Saturn Workshop (sws) cluster launched toward earth orbit included the Orbital Workshop (ows) with its Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), multiple docking adapter (mda), and instrument unit (iu). At 63 sec into the mission, indication was received that the meteoroid shield had deployed prematurely. The Workshop was placed in nominal, circular orbit with 438.2-km (272.2-mi) altitude, 93-min period, 50° inclination, and 7649.4-m-per-sec (25 096.6-fps) orbital velocity. The payload shroud was j ettisoned on time at 15 min and 25 sec after launch and the atm deployed at 21 min 34 sec with normal deployment of the ATM solar arrays at 26 min 38 sec, but ground controllers received no indication that the Workshop solar array system (sas), which was to have been released by an onboard computer, had been deployed. At 41 min, a ground command was sent to deploy the two SAS wings. They did not respond. The command was sent again 30 min later and a third time near the end of the first orbit, without result. During the first postlaunch press briefing, Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that if the arrays did not deploy “the mission will be seriously degraded.” The crew was not set up to perform a fix-it-yourself extravehicular activity (eva) and there were no controls for deployment inside the Workshop. Anxious officials and flight controllers began analyzing radioed launch data. Analysis and later inspection revealed that the meteoroid shield had been torn off by vibration of the vehicle just after passing through mach 1 speed, near the time of highest dynamic pressure. Some early measurements indicated that the shield separation straps were still satisfactory, but later measurements indicated failure. The failure had released the securing mechanism on SAS Wing 2 and the wing ripped off. A piece of shield had wrapped around SAS Wing 1 and kept it from deploying. Loss of the wings, which were to provide power to the Workshop, reduced power to 50% of its average 8000-w output; the remaining 50% would he supplied by the four atm solar panels. At 11:00 pm edt Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced the Skylab 2 launch had been rescheduled to May 20 to allow assessment of damage and development of a new flight plan to maximize scientific return from Skylab’s experiments with limited power. Fuel cells of the Skylab 2 command and service module (csm) would be used to produce electricity, after joining the Workshop, but the CSM oxygen and hydrogen for the cells would last only 16 to 21 days. It was too early to assess the effect on Skylab 3 and 4 missions, planned for 56 days each. On May 15 Skylab faced a new threat as temperatures inside the Workshop reached above 311 K (100°F). The lost meteoroid shield had also been designed to reflect sunlight and help cool the Workshop. “We think we can live with the electrical power shortage,” Schneider said, “but if we can’t solve this thermal problem we have a serious situation,” Schneider feared foods and film might be spoiled, plastic parts might begin to leak poisonous gases, and the laboratory might become uninhabitable. The entire Skylab team was mobilized—at Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Martin Marietta Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., trw Inc., and Garrett AiResearch Co.—in an all-out attempt to overcome the loss of the shield and solar arrays. Schneider said NASA was studying the possibility of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ putting “some kind of a thermal blanket around the spacecraft,” but that would require a delay of the Skylab 2 launch beyond May 20. Astronauts would also inspect the solar wings, but whether they could make repairs was uncertain. The Skylab 2 crew returned to JSC May 15 to help flight planners salvage the mission. Special attitude maneuvers were run to obtain temperature data on the Skylab cluster and to limit Workshop temperatures, as internal temperature soared as high as 325 K (125°F). Temperature was reduced by pitching the Workshop with the longitudinal axis pointed at the sun for one orbit and, on May 16, the Workshop was tilted 55° away from the sun, with sufficient sunlight on the working solar panels to charge the batteries but moving the space station out of the sun’s full glare. Teams continued to compute options to overcome the loss of the shield: astronauts could spray-paint Skylab Vs side to alter radiation properties of the gold foil coating the Workshop shell, could wallpaper the critical area, or could deploy a solar sunshade. Choice of the third option was announced May 16. The astronauts were trained in three possible methods of deploying the sunshade and in procedures to deploy the jammed solar panel. If they failed with the panel, a near-normal 16- to 21-day mission could still be realized by using the CSM power and curtailing some experiments. After that experiments would have to be severely cut back to reserve power for the CSm’s trip home. On May 17 NASA announced postponement of the Skylab 2 launch until May 25 to allow the astronauts to practice techniques for deploying the sunshade and mission engineers to design, fabricate, and test hardware. Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz flew to msfc to practice installing the sun shield in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator. On May 20 the Workshop was purged of any gases from the overheated insulation material and turned slightly to allow the sun to warm the airlock module and prevent water stored there from freezing and causing breakage. Components of the astronauts’ repair kit were shipped to MSFC for final testing before being installed in Skylab 2’s Apollo csm. On May 22 the Skylab 2 astronaut crew flew to KSC to prepare for the May 25 launch. Three thermal shields were decided on at a May 23 review: a parasol deployable from the Workshop through the solar scientific airlock, a backup twin-pole shield deployable by the crew during EVA, and a standup-EVA (seva) sail deployable by the crew from the CSM if both other methods failed. The Skylab 2 countdown resumed at 5:30 am edt May 23 at ksc. It had been halted eight hours after Skylab 1 liftoff May 14. On May 24 the three emergency sunshades and necessary tools were stored in the CM. Significant experiments—S015, effects of zero g on single human cells; S020, x-ray/solar photography; T025, coronagraph contamination measurements; M555, gallium arsenide crystal growth; equipment for S063, ultraviolet (uv) airglow horizon photography; and spare equipment for TV coverage of the ATM EVA—were removed to accommodate the additional 180 kg (400 lbs) of equipment. The crew would also carry an extra medical kit to replace medicines spoiled by high temperatures in Skylab 1. Lightning struck the Skylab 2 mobile service structure at 5:24 pm EDT May 24, but retests of the vehicle indicated no damage. At a May 24 press conference Program Director Schneider said there would be limited activity by the crew to deploy the partially opened solar panel. “We’re not too optimistic that we’ll be able to do too much, although we will give Capt. Conrad the option to try it if it looks like a reasonable job.” NASA was “very confident that ... we will be able to deploy a [thermal] shield, we will get the spacecraft temperatures back under control, and we will have a good 28-day mission.” May 25:	Skylab 2 (SL-2) was launched from ICSC Launch Complex 39, Pad B, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle into heavy dark clouds on time at 9:00 am edt. As Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz headed toward the Skylab 1 Workshop they were to attempt to repair in orbit and man for 28 days, Commander Conrad told Mission Control, “We fix anything.” The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee 9 min 56 sec after launch. Six minutes later the csm separated. The S—IVB stage deorbit maneuver was performed at 2:23 pm edt and the stage splashed into the Pacific Ocean. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 4:30 pm EDT over the Guam tracking station on the fifth orbit. During 15 min of TV coverage the CSM flew around the Workshop, within 1.5 m (5 ft) of it. The astronauts confirmed that the SAS Wing 2 was missing and that the SAS Wing 1, deployed only 15°, was restrained by a piece of the micrometeoroid shield wrapped around the SAS beam fairing. Portions of the gold foil laminated to the Workshop skin for thermal protection had been torn and heat and uv radiation from the sun had scorched the skin. The astronauts soft-docked the CSM with the Workshop, using only three capture latches; ate dinner; and undocked to attempt to deploy the jammed solar panel. Weitz stood in the open hatch of the CSM with Kerwin holding his knees to keep him from drifting into space. He tried to free the solar panel with a shepherd’s crook and a pole with pruning shears attached without success. Conrad told Mission Control that the panel appeared to be “hooked in there like it’s nailed on.” The repair attempt was ended at 8:12 pm edt. The crew made four unsuccessful attempts to redock with the Workshop. Working in bulky spacesuits and gloves, the astronauts evacuated the air from the Apollo cabin and hooked up an electric cable to override a suspected short in the docking probe. “Yea. We got a hard dock out of it [a docking using all 12 sealing latches to seal the two spacecraft together],” Conrad said at 11:50 pm edt. The crew found one of the capture latches had stuck in the retracted position, but troubleshooting procedures recommended by Mission Control restored the latch. May 26-June 21:	The Skylab 2 crew entered the multiple docking adapter on the Skylab Workshop at 12:45 pm edt May 26 and performed activation and Workshop preentry tasks. A chemical detection device inserted into the passage indicated no lethal gas was present. At 2:30 pm edt Astronaut Weitz entered the Workshop wearing a gas mask, gloves, and soft shoes to protect him from the heat. Weitz told ground control, “The ows appears to be in good shape. It feels a little bit warm as you might expect, like 90 to 100 degrees [F; 305 to 310 K] in the desert. I felt heat radiating from everywhere but I never felt uncomfortable. And nothing I touched felt hot to me. It’s a dry heat.” Kerwin and Conrad followed Weitz. After a quick inspection, the crew closed the hatch. At 4:30 pm edt the crew began to deploy the solar parasol—a mylar shade folded against a telescopic pole—through the solar airlock. As they readied the parasol, the astronauts looked out of the windows and identified landmarks across the U.S. Weitz recognized Seattle, Wash., and Conrad spotted both launch pads used for the Skylab launches at Conrad and Weitz popped open the shiny aluminum and orange canopy at 8:30 pm edt May 26 (Mission Day 2) while Kerwin took TV photos from the attached Apollo cm. Significant external temperature decreases were noted almost immediately after deployment. Internal temperatures decreased more slowly. The Workshop was headed back to solar inertial attitude. By May 27 the Workshop temperature had dropped to 309 K (97°F). The crew activated systems and experiments while their back-and-forth excursions through the Workshop were televised to the earth. The Washington Post later said they resembled “skin divers snorkeling through a cave in the Caribbean” or a scene from the film “2001” with astronauts “in orange flight suits and white T-shirts swimming like fish through the big workshop, floating backwards and tumbling like gymnasts.” On May 28 the astronauts began the first medical tests, taking and processing blood samples and checking the conditions of their circulatory and metabolic systems. Checkout and preparation of the (atm) was begun. During a seven-minute televised space-to-ground news conference beginning at 1:09 pm edt, Conrad said the crew had adapted rapidly. “None of us has had any motion sickness. ... It seems to be like the simulator except with the absence of gravity.” Kerwin concluded that the brain and eyes must override the body’s vestibule system in the inner ear. “You say to your brain, ‘Brain, I want that way to be up.’ And your brain says, ‘OK, then that way is up.’ . . . Your brain will follow you.” Conrad agreed, “We’re in good shape for 28 days.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said later in the mission that it was “rather amazing” that the crew had shown no signs of the expected motion sickness. Data received were preliminary, but prelaunch exercises in a whirling chair might have helped avoid nausea. Temperatures continued to drop slowly, reaching 304 K (88°F). At 8:50 pm edt a 69-sec trim burn put the Workshop into a repeating ground track about 96 km (60 mi) west of normal, to acquire earth resources data. On May 29 checkout of the ATM was completed and four passes were made. Kerwin trained an array of telescopes to observe x-ray emissions and examine the structure of the sun’s atmosphere. He photographed three regions of the sun considered active by solar physicists and made detailed observations of the full solar disk and the corona. Conrad and Weitz prepared the earth-oriented cameras for earth resources experiment package (erep) passes. Two biomedical runs were made. During a private conversation with jsc, Conrad reported that the internal temperature had stabilized near 304 K (88°F) and that, while this would be tolerable for the rest of the mission, he did not think the crew could carry out the full protocol on the bicycle ergometer (exercise device). On May 30 the solar telescopes were aimed at the active regions of the sun while scientists on the earth received excellent TV photos of the solar corona and the solar disk in the uv spectrum. The first erep photo pass was made over a 3200-km (2000-mi) strip from Oregon to the Gulf of Mexico. Good pictures were obtained of the Great Salt Lake, gypsum beds in New Mexico, and the soil salinity of the Rio Grande Valley, as well as microwave measurements of the Gulf of Mexico. After the erep pass, the batteries—at a reduced level of 45% to 50% capacity—tripped off line and ceased to produce electricity. They had been designed to trip off at 20% capacity. One battery also lost the regulator that allowed the solar panel to recharge it, decreasing the total Workshop power by 6%, or 250 w, leaving 4200 w. The Workshop required 3600 w for maintenance, leaving only 600 w for experiments. The second erep pass was canceled for a power evaluation. Sixteen batteries were brought back on line but two remained off line and were useless. Heat, fans, and lights were powered down. Workshop power continued reduced May 31 and erep experiments were canceled. The crew continued medical experiments, each taking a turn in a rotating chair to provide data on motion sickness and maintaining balance in zero g. Weitz repaired the mirror system on the uv stellar photography experiment. Temperatures had dropped to 301 K (82°F). The Skylab astronauts took their first day off June 1 (Mission Day 8) and their first shower in space. On a 15-min color telecast they performed housekeeping chores and—to the music from the film “2001”— did handstands, somersaults, and cartwheels in the zero-g atmosphere. Conrad led the crew in a run around the watertanks. Centrifugal force overcame weightlessness, so the men could keep their feet on the track. On the ground Skylab officials announced the decision to make a second attempt to free the jammed solar panel, while engineers and the backup astronauts, led by Russell L. Schweickart, tested EVA procedures. On June 2, Conrad and Weitz made a 10-min erep photo pass from California to Central Mexico to gather data on earthquakes, volcanoes, pollution sources, mineral resources, and land-use patterns. On the ground Schweickart successfully tested three ways of freeing the jammed solar panel using a bolt cutter, a prying rod, and a surgeon’s bone saw. The astronauts completed the third erep pass over North America and the fifth ATM pass on June 3. The nuclear emulsion experiment, the transuranic cosmic ray detector, and the neutron analysis detector were deployed. Astronaut Conrad set a new world record for time in space at 1:17 am EDT, surpassing the 715-hr 5-min mark set by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. The first ball game in space was held in the Workshop. Conrad said a ball thrown in weightlessness “goes straight as an arrow.” The fourth erep pass was made June 4, as well as five hours of atm solar viewing. Dr. John Zeiglschmid, Skylab Flight Surgeon, told a JSC press briefing that the physical condition of the Skylab crew was excellent. They were consuming the proper amount of food and getting adequate rest. Conrad and Kerwin had lost only 0.5 kg (1 lb) ; Weitz had lost 1.8 kg (4 lbs). Top Skylab officials at msfc agreed that solar wing deployment techniques developed by Astronaut Schweickart were feasible, without unusual safety hazards. On June 6 preparations were made for the next day’s EVA. Conrad said, “I guess we have a fifty-fifty chance of pulling it off.” The 16 Workshop batteries were producing 4200 w—only 600 w more than the minimum necessary for the astronauts’ survival. One battery was down to half charge and others were believed to have been damaged by the heat. The astronauts photographed hurricane Ava during an erep pass, made an atm pass, and photographed uv spectra of stars. Conrad and Kerwin opened the am eva hatch at 11:23 am edt June 7 and extended their umbilicals and a rigged-up 7.6-m (25-ft) pole fitted with cutters for releasing the jammed solar wing, as Weitz took TV photos from the Skylab and the csm. Outsid Kerwin had difficulty keeping a firm footing, with only makeshift andholds and foot restraints, as he secured the end of the pole to antenna mount. His heart rate rose to 150 beats per minute and he \s burning energy at 2000 to 2500 BTUs an hour. Finally he extended the pole to the beam holding the wing and—with Conrad repeatedly telling him to “take it easy” and “cool it”—managed after several tries to fit the cutters around the small bolt that restrained the wing. Conrad moved hand over hand along the pole to the wing. Tangling of the 10.6- and 18.3-m (35- and 60-ft) flexible umbilicals linking the astronauts to spacecraft life support systems complicated their movements. Kerwin pulled a lanyard to snap the cutters and sever the bolt and then extended the wing using a rope attached to the upper surface. Conrad pulled a rope to break a frozen actuator. Two of the sections making up the wing were 40% deployed and the other about 30%. The two astronauts also changed a film magazine in a telescope camera and latched open a balky door on an x-ray telescope before reentering the Workshop and closing the am eva hatch at 2:53 pm edt, concluding 3 hrs 30 min successful eva. The Workshop was pitched up to expose the panels to more direct sunlight and unfreeze the hydraulic system that deployed them. After a few hours one section was 90% deployed, another 40%, and the third 29%. By the next day the sections were fully deployed. Additional electric power of 3000 w was obtained and all eight batteries supplied by the solar panels were charged and in good working order—paving the way for a full Skylab mission. From Mission Control Schweickart said, “Everybody’s shaking hands down here and we just wish we could reach up and shake yours.” President Nixon sent a message: “On behalf of the American people I congratulate and commend you and your crew on your successful effort to repair the world’s first true space station. In the two weeks since you left earth, you have more than fulfilled the prophecy of your parting words, ‘We can fix anything.’ All of us now have new courage that man can work in space to control his environment, improve his circumstances and exert his will even as he does on earth.” On June 12 the ninth erep pass was made. Weitz said he could see pollution flowing into Lake Erie and he couldn’t find Washington, D.C., because of haze. Conrad melted an aluminum alloy to study the behavior of molten metal in weightlessness and used an electron beam for welding inside a small vacuum chamber. On June 13 Dr. Hawkins told a JSC medical review that Kerwin and Weitz were no longer able to perform at preflight levels on the bicycle ergometer, indicating their cardiovascular systems had been weakened by weightlessness. The condition was not at dangerous levels and was not interfering with their normal day-to-day performance. Weitz photographed a massive explosion on the sun with the atm solar telescopes June 15. The flare had erupted from the center of the sun’s side facing the earth and covered an area 40 200 km (25 000 mi) wide. Conrad checked out the Apollo CSM for the return trip to earth, while Kerwin initiated the growth of bacteria in a culture medium and photographed its behavior in the space environment. On June 17 a trim burn corrected a cross-track error and positioned the vehicle for the start of the Skylab 3 mission. President Nixon telephoned the astronauts from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “I guess the way I could summarize this project is that it proves that man still matters. With all the technical machines . . . that you had to work with, it proved that when there were difficulties the ingenuity of men in space was what really mattered, and you have made us all very proud with the way you handled some difficult problems in this project.” The President invited the three Skylab astronauts to visit him at San Clemente, Calif., after splashdown. At 3:22 am edt June 18 (MD—25) astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz surpassed the previous space endurance record held by the Soyuz 11 cosmonauts (launched June 6, 1971). Conrad asked that a message be relayed to Soviet cosmonauts giving “our respects at this point in our flight to them and their comrades. Wish them good luck from us in the future.” EVA-2 began at 6:53 am edt June 19. Conrad and Weitz moved through space to retrieve and replace the atm film cassettes while Kerwin photographed the eva for TV from inside the Workshop. Conrad also freed a stuck relay by striking it with a hammer. One of two dead batteries began charging immediately. From the ground Schweickart said, “It worked. Thank you very much, gentlemen. You’ve done it again.” The cameras for the white light coronagraph and x-ray spectroheliographic experiments were replaced by the astronauts to permit photography during the unmanned period between Skylab 2 and 3. eva operations ended at 8:29 am edt, after 1 hr 36 min. During a June 20 press conference from space Kerwin said the astronauts’ physical condition was “a pleasant big surprise. I’m tremendously encouraged about the future of long-duration flight.” June 22:	The astronauts undocked the csm from the Skylab Workshop at 4:55 am edt on Mission Day 29. As the csm pulled away and circled the Workshop, TV and photographic coverage were obtained by the crew, cm separation from the sm at 5:40 am edt was followed by initial service propulsion system firing at 6:05 am edt and a final deorbit maneuver at 9:11 am edt. The cm splashed down at 9:50 am edt 1340 km (830 mi) southwest of San Diego. A recovery helicopter dropped swimmers who installed a flotation collar and a sea anchor. The recovery ship Ticonderoga was maneuvered beside the CM and a crane lifted it aboard with the astronauts inside. Medical examinations on board the recovery ship found some dizziness and ill effects from weightlessness. The crew would travel by ship to San Diego and by air to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., June 24. The Skylab 1-2 mission achieved its primary objectives of establishing the Skylab Orbital Assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data on the crew for use in extending the duration of manned space flight, and performing inflight experiments. It contributed significantly toward program objectives of determining man’s ability to live and work in space for extended periods, extending the science of solar astronomy beyond the limits of earth-based observations, and developing improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space. Despite mission anomalies, 80% of the solar data planned was obtained; 12 of the 15 earth resources data runs were accomplished; all 16 medical experiments were conducted as required and a time history of man’s adaptations to zero-g environment was obtained for the first time; and data were taken on all 43 experiments scheduled for Skylab 2 except those precluded by the use of the solar parasol and weight and power limitations. The performance of the flight crew was good and the mission was judged officially on July 14 to be a success. Major records set to date included the longest-duration manned flight, 28 days 50 min; the longest total time in space for one man, 49 days for Conrad (veteran of Gemini 5 and 11 and Apollo 12 missions) ; the longest inflight EVA, 3 hrs 30 min by Conrad and Kerwin June 7; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned flight, 18 531 559 km (11514 967 mi). Skylab 1-2 was the first U.S. manned orbital workshop. Skylab 3 was scheduled to be launched in August and Skylab 4 in November. The Workshop would be operated unmanned between manned missions. The Skylab program was directed by NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, msfc developed and integrated the major program components including the ows, AM, MDA, atm, payload shroud, and most experiments and was responsible for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. KSc managed launch operations. JSC was responsible for flight operations, recovery, crew selection and training, and development of the modified CSM and the spacecraft launch adapter. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the overall direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA prog off; NASA pao press briefing transcripts, 5/14/73-6/20/73; NASA Mission Rpt MR-3; PD, 6/25/73, 787, 827; NYT, 5/17/73-6/22/73; W Post, 5/16/73-6/22/73; W Star & News, 5/23/73-6/22/73; B Sun, 5/15/73-6/12/73; M Her, 5/14/73, 19A; H Post, 6/7/73) May 14:	Unsolicited cash contributions to NASA from persons in the U.S. and foreign countries since 1959 would be used to finance the 19 student scientific experiments on Skylab [see Jan. 26], NASA announced. The $5548 fund included individual gifts ranging from $1500 to the $0.35 contribution of an eight-year-old boy sent in 1970 because he had heard that NASA “didn’t have enough money.” A retired Navy chief petty officer had sent one day’s pay after each manned flight in memory of his son who had been killed in the Korean war. A naturalized citizen from Eastern Europe had sent $100 in 1964 because he wished to be a part of the space program that would mean the survival of a free U.S. (nasa Release 73—98)
NASA Public Information Director Richard T. Mittauer died of Hodgkin’s disease in Alexandria, Va., at age 46. He had joined NASA in 1959 and had received a NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work on the 1971 Mariner Mars mission. (W Star & News, 7/2/73, B5) July 2:	The Skylab 3 mission to carry the second crew to work and live aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop (launched May 14) would be launched no earlier than 7:08 am EDT July 28, NASA announced. Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean (commander), Dr. Owen K. Garriott (science pilot), and Jack R...Lousma (pilot) would conduct scientific and technical experiments for 56 days. Splashdown was scheduled for 8:38 pm edt Sept. 22 in the Pacific, (nasa Release 73-125)
An Aviation Week & Space Technology cover photo showed orange and black particles brought back from the moon’s Shorty Crater by Apollo 17 astronauts during the Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. Particles were • described by the magazine as 20 to 45 ,/rm in size—“about the size of terrestrial silt.” They were “glass, but in a process of devitrification, that is transition from non-crystalline form to crystalline minerals.” The orange soil was “rich in titanium—8%—and iron oxide—22%—but is also high in zinc.” (Av Wk, 2/12/73, cover, 20)
An Atlanta Journal editorial commented on space program spinoff as the Skylab 2 astronauts began routine business after having freed the stuck solar array wing on Skylab 1 (launched May 14) : “The ambitious and expensive Skylab program is in trouble and daring measures are being taken to stabilize the planned programs it was to introduce. Before the screams of those who would dissolve the space program reach the astronauts aboard Skylab, it might be well to consider some spinoffs from the space program that preserve and lengthen the lives of those who cry for its cessation.” Spinoffs included noise abatement, smog detection, medical devices, and fabric fireproofing. “The value of the space program is not up in the air; an awful lot of it is down to earth.” (Atlanta JC, 6/8/73)
“The public has grown increasingly sanguine about NASA’s manned missions, almost considering them routine, because of the agency’s perfect safety record on manned missions.” The Aug. 2 oxidizer leak had shown “that the missions are anything but free of hazard, and the mental stress imposed upon the three astronauts must be intense. We hope, of course, that the mission will continue for the full 59 days and that the astronauts will then make it home safely. But if there is any serious question about the condition of the Apollo ship, then NASA certainly should exercise its option of sending a rescue ship up to Skylab and ending the mission in advance of schedule.” (B Sun, 8/5/73) August 6:	A Chicago Sun-Times editorial commented on space rescue capability as the Skylab 3 astronauts, manning the Orbital Workshop since July 28, conducted their first extravehicular activity: “There is a certain amount of calculated risk involved at this period of space experimentation. In a real emergency Russia might be able to help out with one of its spacecraft. When the shuttle program becomes effective, a reusable winged spaceship could be made ready for launching in two hours.” Meantime, “all we can do is trust that the good luck, astronauts’ skill and inventiveness of the space program people that have provided magnificent results to date continue during the current series of missions.” (C Sun-Times, 8/6/73)
The countdown for the twice-delayed launch of the Skylab 4 mission [see Nov. 6, 12, and 13] proceeded smoothly toward Nov. 16 launch. The Apollo spacecraft’s electrical system was activated and the 1st stage of the Saturn IB launch vehicle was loaded with 157 cu m (41 500 gal) of fuel. Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue inspected the spacecraft and received final briefings on the Apollo systems and the solar telescopes in the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14). (icsc press briefing transcript, 11/14/73; Wilford, NYT, 11/15/73, 6)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
Skylab’s contribution to better understanding of solar processes, leading to possible generation and control of solar energy for earth use, was described by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers in a speech before the Poor Richard Club in Philadelphia: The sun was the “original model of nuclear energy,” understanding of which could lead to fusion control and its efficient use for power generation. “The Skylab investigators are concerned with this and also with explaining how solar events affect the Earth, particularly solar flares that trigger auroras and disrupt radio transmission. Because sunspot activity correlates with temperature and density variations in the Earth’s upper atmosphere, it is conceivable that the injection of energy into the atmosphere by solar particles may trigger world-wide weather phenomena. Our astronauts saw flares shooting up 100 000 miles [160 000 kilometers] above the surface and they watched giant snakelike clouds erupting in the corona that disturbed radio transmissions here on Earth. Two massive flares exploded on the Sun, producing auroral lights on Earth; . . . each one could supply the world’s energy needs for the next 500 years.” (Text)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
Several U.S. correspondents had been permitted by the U.S.S.R. to visit the Soviet cosmonaut training center at Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City) near Moscow, Time magazine reported. Time reporters included in the tour had quoted Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, as saying that similarities rather than differences predominated in the U.S. and U.S.S.R. approach to manned space flight. The similarities included a preference for jet pilots as spacecraft commanders; “training is shaped by requirements, just as the shape of the aircraft is decided by its speed.” Shatalov had recalled Watching Skylab astronauts practicing in a simulator. “It was the same as we simulate here, not more, not less. We are treading the same paths.” [Time, 7/9/73)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Support to Universities, Colleges, and Selected Nonprofit Institutions, Fiscal Year 1971 (nsf 73—300). Total Federal obligations (exclusive of loans) to institutions of higher learning increased in current and constant dollars. Current-dollar volume rose $253 million, or 8%, to a record $3480 million. Constant-dollar increase was 2%, the first increase since 1967. The first 100 universities and colleges in Federal support accounted for more than $2.4 billion during 1971, or 69% of Federal funds to all academic institutions. Private universities and colleges receiving Federal funds outnumbered public institutions receiving Federal funds 1242 to 1126, but public institutions accounted for 61% of total Federal obligations, 65% of degrees awarded, and 75% of students enrolled. In 1971 life sciences research and development funding was $741 million, or 48% of all Federal r&d obligations. Obligations for general support of NSF and National Institutes of Health science programs was $100 million, the same level as in 1970. The Atomic Energy Commission continued as the principal Federal agency funding academically associated r&d centers, with 64% of the $984 million Federal total. NASA and the Dept, of Defense awarded $312 million, or 32% of the total. (Text) During April:	Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt concluded the largest and most successful schedule of postflight public appearances undertaken by an astronaut crew. The tour, begun Jan. 12 in Los Angeles, included 57 stops in 25 states and the District of Columbia in 11 weeks. The astronauts met with 12 state governors and addressed state legislatures in Kansas, New Mexico, Georgia, Arkansas, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Colorado, and Washington. Activities Bureau Chief Eugene A. Marianetti of NASA’s Public Events Directorate said later that the astronauts had met no evidence of antispace sentiment, “only a lack of adequate information ... on the actual amount spent on the space program.” (NASA Activities, 5/15/73, 89)
The People’s Republic of China was preparing to deploy the first group of 10 nuclear missiles capable of reaching U.S.S.R. targets, Joseph Alsop reported in Washington Post. U.S. intelligence agencies had observed missile sites carved into mountain sides and believed the new intermediate range missile had already been successfully tested. (W Post, 1/17/73, January 17—19:	A Skylab simulation at Manned Spacecraft Center picked up the Skylab flight plan in the 10th day of the mission scheduled for April 30 launch. Flight controllers worked in shifts to tally the day’s activities, prepare a summary flight plan for the day following, and complete a detailed flight plan for use the next day. Activities included all elements of flight between 8 am and 5 pm each day but were oriented toward experiments rather than flight operations. Skylab astronauts manned crew simulators, principal investigators manned support stations, and the Marshall Space Flight Center Operations Support Center for Skylab provided support for the Orbital Workshop. Prime contractors North American Rockwell Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. supported the simulation, msc controllers inserted simulated malfunctions to exercise procedures and mission rules for the flight and to observe the reaction of control teams, (msc Roundup, 1/19/73, 2) January 18:	The European Space Research Organization Council met in Paris and unanimously authorized establishment of a project to develop the sortie laboratory to fly with nasa’s space shuttle in the 1980s. Participating states would provide funding and would use esro facilities and assistance. The Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Belgium, and Spain would participate initially, with other esro member countries expected to join later. After definition studies of the research and applications module (ram), the sortie lab final design would be agreed on by NASA and ESRO. esro would proceed to development phase, with delivery of the sortie lab to NASA scheduled for 1979. The laboratory would consist of a pressurized manned module to house equipment, experiments, data-processing equipment, electrical power and environmental control systems, and a six-scientist crew. An external, unpressurized instrument platform would house experiments and large instruments controlled remotely from the laboratory. Project cost was estimated at $250 million to $300 million. Negotiations at agency and governmental levels would begin shortly, (esro Release, 1/19/73; NASA Release 73-12)
August 19:	Former Presidential Staff Assistant Guy W. Simpler assumed the newly established NASA position of Special Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Institutional Management (for Executive Recruiting). The position had been established to provide for key personnel recruitment at top level. Simpler had been responsible for search assignments for subcabinet-level positions at the White House. (NASA Hq WB, 8/31/73) August 20:	Twentieth anniversary of the first successful Redstone missile launch Aug. 20, 1953, from an improvised pad at Cape Canaveral (now Cape Kennedy), Fla. The Redstone, developed for the Army by Dr. Wernher von Braun and his rocket team, was the first truly ballistic missile in the U.S. The Mercury-Redstone vehicle launched NASA’s Freedom 7 May 5, 1961, on the mission carrying Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as the first American in space, (msfc Release 73-112)
nasa held two Skylab 2 press briefings at Johnson Space Center as the astronaut crew, orbiting the earth in the Orbital Workshop launched May 14, carried out experiments and solar photography. At an Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) briefing Dr. Robert Noyes of Harvard College Observatory said the experiment to look into the outer solar atmosphere “exceeds our wildest expectations. Every object that we’ve tried to look at, we’ve done successfully and we have seen . . . entirelynew and different phenomena.” For the first time there had been enough spatial resolution to see the fine structure. Data received by viewing the sun at different heights in the corona had established the existence of two fundamental structures—points of emission 12 900 km (8000 mi) in diameter and a cloud of relatively cool material emersed in the very hot corona. The structures should provide information on heat sources and physical properties of the corona. Dr. Robert Mac-Queen, High Altitude Observatory astronomer, said that a high point of the ATM experiments had been detailed examination of the corona for 45 consecutive hours, identifying the material making up the solar wind passing into the corona. At a solar-flare activity briefing Dr. Guiseppe Vaiana, American Science and Engineering, Inc., scientist and a principal investigator on Skylab, described the TV coverage of the solar flare photographed by Astronaut Paul J. Weitz: “What you are seeing is the great event of the day.” The flare had a double structure in the active region. A portion of it outlined the magnetic field of one polarity on one side and the other polarity on the other side, with a center neutral line. Two bright spots were seen on both sides of the neutral line. The flare extended 100 000 km (62 000 mi) up from the solar surface and covered 21/2 trillion sq km (1 trillion sq mi). It had peaked in intensity 3 min after it had been discovered by Weitz and decayed during the following 30 min. (Transcript)
A New York Times editorial commented on the manned Skylab 2 launch: “The possibility of repairing a damaged spaceship, now brought to the fore by the last two weeks’ developments, points up one of the advantages of man’s presence in space. If something goes awry with an unmanned spaceship, and there are no arrangements for bringing repair men to it, it is more probable than not that little can be done to save the mission. Now the world is faced with a major effort to overcome unexpected difficulties by assigning additional duties to the astronauts originally involved. The success or failure of these repair efforts in the period immediately ahead will provide important evidence for the future debates between the advocates of manned and unmanned efforts to explore space.” (NYT, 5/25/73, 32)
The Skylab 3 astronauts rested aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans following their splashdown [see July 28—Sept. 25], Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, told the press at Johnson Space Center that their 59-day mission had proved man’s usefulness in earth orbit as the Apollo missions had proved his use of the moon. “In the 15 years since its founding, nasa has successfully placed more than 250 payloads in earth orbit. Of all these, the mission that we completed today will perhaps prove to be the most fruitful of all.” Skylab 3 had proved “how great an advantage it is to have the human mind on the scene to make judgments, to observe, to respond to unexpected developments, and to effect corrective measures. All these were demonstrated on Skylab.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said the Skylab 3 astronauts had surpassed their scientific objectives by 150%. “The mission can only be described in superlatives.” (O’Toole, W Post, 9/26/73, 1A; AP, B Sun, 9/26/75)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, Atomic Energy Commission Chairman, to be U.S. Representative to the Sept. 18-24 International Atomic Energy Agency General Conference in Vienna. Among five alternate representatives nominated was Apollo 8 Astronaut and former National Space Council Chairman William A. Anders. {PD, 9/17/73, 1128, 1132)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, would retire from NASA to become President of the Univ. of Texas Health Science Center April 1, 1974, nasa announced. The new position had been created to bring all the health-oriented schools and services of the University under one administrator. Dr. Berry, an Air Force flight surgeon since 1951, had been Chief of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the School of Aerospace Medicine and Chief of Flight Medicine in the Surgeon General’s Office before coming to NASA on loan in July 1962. He accepted appointment as Chief of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Medical Operations Office in August 1963. Dr. Berry had participated in the early medical evaluations leading to selection of the original seven Mercury astronauts in 1958 and had continued to work with NASA throughout the project. He was appointed Director for Life Sciences at nasa Hq. in September 1971. His honors included the NASA Exceptional Service Medal and the nasa Distinguished Service Medal. Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said Dr. Berry’s “work in determining the ability of man to function and work in space for long periods ... is an important contribution to the future of the space program. The University of Texas is to be congratulated in obtaining the services of an outstanding medical researcher and administrator.” (nasa Release 73-284; nasa pao)
The Air Force announced award of a $2 056 889 cost contract to Utah State Univ. to study disturbed and undisturbed infrared atmosphere. Rocketborne instruments .would measure optical and infrared emissions, both natural and those stimulated by atmospheric dosing from a rocket-borne electron source, (dod Release 113-73) March 5—8:	nasa’s Fourth Annual Lunar Science Conference, at Johnson Space Center, was attended by more than 750 scientists from the U.S. and 12 foreign countries. Visitors included scientists from the U.S.S.R. who presented papers on Apollo lunar samples received from the U.S. At the opening session Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator said, “I can see at least a decade of fruitful analysis, synthesis, and integration of the information locked up in the material brought back and still coming back from the scientific stations left on the moon” in the Apollo program. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, California Institute of Technology scientist, described “lunar cataclysm.” Lunar dust brought back by Apollo astronauts had been estimated to be as old as 4.5 billion yrs. But most lunar rocks were less than 4 billion yrs old and none were younger than 3 billion yrs. The best explanation was that 3.9 billion yrs ago the moon was battered and bombarded on an unprecedented scale, creating so much heat that old rocks were destroyed and a new generation of rocks was created. Since then the moon might have experienced minor volcanic eruptions but nothing like that period of cataclysm. Some scientists believed the moon had cooled and gone into a period of hibernation. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of the State Univ. of New York said even the orange soil found by Apollo 17 astronauts had turned out to be 3.71 billion yrs old, an age disappointing to scientists who had believed the moon had been formed by more recent volcanic activity. Dr. Keith A. Howard, U.S. Geological Survey geologist, compared the lunar landslide found near the Apollo 17 landing site to a large, high-velocity avalanche on earth. Dr. Howard suggested that gas within the lunar soil had been released during the slide. Apollo 17 samples would be searched for evidence of fluids. One Apollo 17 instrument placed on the lunar surface had made an atom-by-atom search for evidence of lunar atmosphere. Although the moon had no atmosphere, traces of argon, neon, and helium had been found. Dr. John H. Hoffman, associate professor of physics at the Univ. of Texas, said only argon appeared to have been generated from the moon’s interior. Neon and helium apparently had been deposited by the solar wind. Conference attendees unanimously voted to congratulate NASA on completion of the Apollo program by sending a letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: The conception, design, and implementation of lunar exploration represented “an extraordinary human and technological achievement.” To explore another planet, it had been necessary for man “to achieve many successive levels of technological capability and to surpass formidable barriers. This was accomplished brilliantly by the dedicated engineers and astronauts of NASA in conjunction with skilled management. On this technical base a new branch of science has been built.” (Transcript; Goddard News, 3/73, 2; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; NASA Activities, 4/15/73, 67) March 5-9:	More than 1000 administrators, congressmen, and government, industry, and university scientists attended the Erts 1 Earth Resources and Technology Satellite Symposium sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center in New Carrollton, Md. Two hundred papers presented results from Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) experiments in agriculture and forestry, mineral resources and geology, environmental surveys, land-use mapping, and marine surveys. Dr. Marian Baumgardner, scientist at the Purdue Univ. Laboratory for the Applications of Remote Sensing, said results from Erts 1 study of semi-arid regions suggested that the satellite could identify and map vegetative, species, and management differences in range lands; gross soil patterns and differences related to agricultural and land-use-management problems and practices; areas of surface water and changes related to ground water recharge; crop damage by hail and windstorms; and areas of bare soil and related problems of erosion and conservation. Dr. William A. Fischer, U.S. Geological Survey scientist, said data from an Erts 1 study of Alaska had reinforced recent plate tectonic theories of a continuing mobility in the earth’s crust. The satellite had mapped fractures previously unknown or not put together as continuous structures in the earth’s crust. The fractures indicated “there has been a fundamental movement, extending deep down into the crust.” Dr. John Miller of the Univ. of Alaska said seismic data and Erts 1 identification of previously unknown fractures “has been an important input to the design of a bridge structure across the Yukon River . . . and possibly the pipeline.” (Transcript)
Newspaper editorials commented on the success of the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission. New York Times: “This first group of astronauts did much more . . . than demonstrate man’s biological capability to live and work in space for four weeks. They proved that men in space can do what machines cannot do, they can repair their vehicle.” It was conceivable that “when all the Skylab data are available, the field of solar astronomy may be advanced as radically as lunar astronomy has been in recent years.” At Skylab’s completion “a strong economic and scientific case will doubtless have been made for creating one or more permanent manned stations in space. Any such orbiting laboratories should surely be United Nations ventures in international cooperation, not new instruments for senseless and expensive national rivalries.” (NYT, 6/24/73) The Philadelphia Inquirer: It had been shown that “enterprising spacemen can do more than routine work for long periods of time. They can deal with the unexpected, correct serious malfunctions and adjust routine to changed circumstances. In space, as on earth, things do not always go well. There, as here, adversity is the true test of men. The Skylab pioneers have met that test with distinction.” (P Inq, 6/24/73)
A St. Louis Post Dispatch editorial commented on the repair of the Skylab 1 Workshop [see May 14-June 22] as its Skylab 2 astronaut crew surveyed the U.S. heartland from space: “Now that Skylab is operating under something approaching full power, scientists will be able to judge how well man can exist for prolonged periods of weightlessness and whether experiments they carry out cannot be duplicated or outperformed by machines. The Skylab astronauts have managed to establish conditions under which the mission may receive a fair test and that is of paramount importance, for had they failed, the manned space program, for budgetary reasons, might have come to a halt.” (St. Louis P-D, 6/10/73) June 11:	Skylab 3’s Saturn IB launch vehicle and Apollo command module were moved from the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, for the July 27 launch of the second Skylab crew—Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. The astronauts would join the Skylab Workshop (orbited May 14) for 56 days of experiments and observations, (ksc Release 124-73; W Post, 6/12/73, A13)
U.S.S.R. scientists had named a newly discovered mineral “armstrongite” after the U.S. astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to set foot on the moon, the Associated Press reported. The mineral, belonging to the zirconium-silicate compounds, had been found by a joint SovietMongolian expedition in the Gobi Desert. A sample of the mineral had been sent to Armstrong. (AP, NYT, 4/29/73, 53) April 29:	Los Angeles International Airport banned all landings and takeoffs over populated areas between 11 pm and 6 am and became the first U.S. airport with regular two-way traffic in the same airspace. The measures had been taken in response to community protests over aircraft noise. Federal Aviation Administration air controllers would regulate the two-way traffic, called nose-to-nose operations, and had said there would be no safety problem. (Lindsey, NYT, 4/29/73, 58) April 29-May 2:	The First International Conference on Offshore Airport Technology was sponsored by the New York Section of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Federal Aviation Administration in Bethesda, Md. Director W. D. Brinckloe of the Univ. of Pittsburgh’s Graduate Center for Public Works spoke on the multipurpose use potential of offshore airports: “Experience suggests that what should be planned is a terminal, mating all possible transportation modes, and complete with all the facilities and services needed to make the Terminal City thrive.” Multiple use of the island airport “should be given equal attention with more conventional aspects of airport design and ocean construction. In the end, it may be the element that makes the project economically feasible.” (aiaa Release, 3/1/73; Text)
The Senate confirmed the nomination of Col. Michael Collins (usaf, R.) to be a brigadier general. Gen. Collins, Apollo 11 command module pilot, was Director of the National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 4/6/73, S6858; NASA Astronauts)
Newspapers commented on the Skylab missions as Skylab 2 astronauts activated the Apollo Telescope Mount aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop, following repairs to the damaged spacecraft they had joined May 25 [see May 14-June 23]. Miami News editorial: “To us, the conquest of the moon, and now the building of a space station, demonstrated that this nation can accomplish just about anything it sets its mind on. The secret lies in the magic word, commitment. With the kind of commitment we pledged to the space program, we could indeed surmount the housing crisis, the crime crisis, the energy crisis, or any other crisis.” (M News, 5/29/73) Wall Street Journal article: Skylab Vs successful in-orbit repair had wide implications for the U.S. space program’s future. “When the three Skylab astronauts erected a heat shield over their damaged space station, they both saved their mission and paved the way for future launching of two other missions in the $2.5 billion space-station program.” They also had provided NASA with “a powerful argument for new manned-flight projects.” NASA could contend that “the value of man in orbit has been proven in practice as well as in theory.” While budget shortages would preclude any attempt to capitalize on Skylab’s success before the space shuttle evolved, it had armed NASA against congressional critics of manned space flight. (Spivak, WSJ, 5/29/73) New York Times columnist Russell Baker: “The space program until now has seemed less malevolent than most new ventures in technology, but to people watching those incessant countdowns at Cape Kennedy it has also seemed pointless.” Lunar exploration had been “wonderful” but “it didn’t really open any horizons for most of us, and it was certainly hard to see how it was going to improve man’s lot.” Skylab, by contrast, was wonderful. “There they are way up there—270 miles [435 kilometers] in the sky. They are attached to 100 tons [90 700 kilograms] of machinery which stretches out through space a distance of 118 feet [36 meters], about the length of an exciting pass play in the National Football League. And what are they doing? Repair work. They are fixing some of the machinery which doesn’t work right.” This was space with a purpose. “We ought to be asking why NASA didn’t make this approach from the beginning instead of going after moon dust. The repair industry in this country could very well be rejuvenated by this trip, and not be a moment too soon, either.” (NYT, 5/29/73, 31)
m/g John B. Hudson (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems of Air Force Systems Command, became a lieutenant general and afsc Vice Commander. He succeeded l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who became Vice Commander, AF Logistics Command, (afsc Newsreview 10/73, 1) October 1—6:	National Space Week was observed by 32 states to honor Nasa’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1]. The governors of the states had responded to a request by members of the Federation of Americans Supporting Science and Technology (fasst). Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker said: “The declared policy of the United States, that ‘activities of space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind,’ has established our country as the scientific and technological leader in space. NASA has coordinated the efforts of scientists and engineers in every field, the aerospace industry and educational institutions.” (fasst Release, 10/30/73) October 1—18:	A 47-member NASA delegation led by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney met with Soviet counterparts in Moscow for two weeks of discussions of technical problems of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission scheduled for July 1975. Discussions culminated in an Oct. 18 midterm review of the project by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of the Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. Low had arrived in Moscow Oct. 14; his stay included visits to the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of Space Research, the Cosmonaut Training Center, and the Space Flight Control Center. In an Oct. 18 communique Dr. Low and Academician Petrov confirmed their satisfaction with the astp project status. All major milestones were being met on schedule and, Dr. Low said, progress made indicated that the scheduled launch date could be met. Soyuz orbital and Apollo docking module drawings had been exchanged and agreement had been reached that U.S. specialists would participate in preflight final checkout of flight equipment at the Soviet launch site. Specialists would be exchanged to fit-check compatible equipment at U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. Academician Petrov told the press that U.S. specialists would be permitted at the Soviet launch site “up to the very minute of launching.” During the visit U.S. officials learned the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 June 30, 1971, were caused by accidental triggering open of an exhaust valve rather than by a hatch leak. The valve tripped open just after the reentry capsule separated from the larger orbiting module in a maneuver including firing of 12 explosive bolts. At least two crew members tried to close the valve but were unable to move fast enough. Unconsciousness from rapid decompression came in less than 10 sec; ground tests showed it would take 27 sec to close the valve by hand. U.S. officials said they were satisfied that subsequent modifications to the valve and crank mechanisms—tested on two unmanned flights, Cosmos 496 and 573, and on the manned Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission —were sufficient to prevent reoccurrence of the accident. (NASA Releases 73-199, 73-224; Smith, NYT, 10/19/73; jsc, astp Briefing transcript, 11/19/73; O’Toole, W Post, 10/29/73, Al; Av Wk, 11/5/73, 20-21) October 2:	NASA held three Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center. At a postflight crew press briefing, Skylab 3 Astronaut Alan L. Bean —who had splashed down Sept. 25, after a 59-day mission working in the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) with crew members Dr. Owen K. Garriott and Jack R. Lousma—said that the crew’s health had been “good the whole time.” Sufficient exercise, meals on time, and plenty of sleep had accounted f or their happiness and well-being. Having a scientist-astronaut aboard had created a “greater variety of interchange around the dinner table,” making “a better mission for everybody.” The mission would have been “50% less productive if Owen had not been there. He added a great amount to it . . . because his point of view is, just different.” Garriott said that a longer mission would necessitate “a somewhat less strenuous program,” but he could have spent eight hours a day at the wardroom window with a camera in each hand and a good supply of film “and never have any tendency to become bored.” Lousma said he still felt “a little less energetic” than before the mission, but within two weeks “I’ll be back to the same condition.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the crew was “in very good shape” but still had dizziness with specific head movements. Strength of the flexor and extensor muscles had decreased 20%. The astronauts’ weights were steadily climbing toward their preflight weights. Early blood tests had shown the red cell mass was down an average of 12% for all three crew members. The blood plasma was also down 15% to 20%. In an overview of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that the spacecraft (Command and Service Module 118) and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue were being readied for Nov. 11 launch. Final decision on the launch date would be made after further evaluation of the mission. In preparation, 140 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment had been deleted from stowage. It had been replaced with another 150 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment, 60 kg (130 lbs) for Skylab experiments, and 70 kg (150 lbs) of special equipment for Comet Kohoutek observations. After Oct. 8—10 flight readiness tests, only servicing, stowage, pyrotechnic installations, countdown demonstrations, and launch would remain. CSM—119, the rescue vehicle, was being prepared and would be available for a Jan. 6 launch if needed. Alfred A. Bishop, Manager of the jsc Missions Office, said that, after the first two weeks of acclimation, the Skylab 4 crew would perform 28 man-hours of experiments each day, an increase from the 19 to 221/j man-hours on Skylab 3. The increase would provide an additional 200 experiment man-hours. The crew would observe Comet Kohoutek, perform 12 experiments using the Apollo Telescope Mount, observe Mercury crossing the sun Nov. 10, observe a solar eclipse, and perform 10 to 14 new earth resources experiment package passes. (Transcripts)
Rep. J. Herbert Rurke (R-FIa.) introduced three resolutions: H.J.R. 358 to provide for a portion of the moon to be displayed in the Capitol; H.J.R. 359 to establish an Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct a memorial at Kennedy Space Center in honor of U.S. astronauts; and H.J.R. 362 to redesignate Cape Kennedy Cape Canaveral. (CR, 2/21/73, H1061) February 22:	Presidential Reorganization Plan No. 1, abolishing the Office of Science and Technology and the National Aeronautics and Space Council [see Jan. 26 and July 1], was reviewed by the Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Executive Reorganization and Government Research. Chairman Abraham A. Ribicoff (D-Conn.) said, “Historically, Congress has allowed the President wide latitude in organizing his own office and so far no opposition has developed to this plan,” but added that questions had arisen as to whether the plan downgraded the voice of the scientific community within the Executive branch. Frederick V. Malek, Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget, said it was “no longer necessary to have a single office within the Executive Office specifically directed to science and technology.” National Science Foundation Director H. Guyford Stever, newly designated Science Adviser to the President, said that nsf had “many inputs to the scientific community and they have many inputs to nsf” and that he expected the routes for advice to remain open. (CR, 2/22/73, D128; Sci & Govt Rpt, 3/1/73, 7)
A New York Times editorial commented on the successful Sept. 27—29 Soyuz 12 manned mission: “The purpose . . . was not primarily to set new records. Its main goal was to test the latest improved version of the Soyuz spacecraft. . . . Americans as well as Soviet citizens have reason to rejoice. ... In 1975 present plans call for the historic docking of a Soviet Soyuz craft with a United States Apollo vehicle. Thus Soviet and American astronauts must want each other’s space ships to be as safe as possible. And beyond the docking experiment in 1975 lies the prospect of a future fully integrated Soviet-American joint space program.” (.NYT, 9/30/73, 12) During September:	Soviet plans for a reusable space shuttle had been revealed by Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov and Soviet Academician Andrey Shikarin, according to a Vienna correspondent quoted by Interavia. The Soviet shuttle would consist of two vehicles coupled pick-a-back, each in delta configuration and designed for hypersonic operating speeds. One would be the booster, the other the orbiter. The spacecraft was designed for horizontal takeoff from a runway. The manned booster would carry the orbiter until it attained a 22-km-per-sec (4900 mph) speed corresponding to a 2- to 3-g acceleration. The stages would separate at about a 30-km (19-mi) altitude and the booster would descend in a controlled glide to land on the runway. The orbiter would accelerate to a more than 100-km (60-mi) altitude, complete its mission, and glide back to the earth. Construction was expected to begin during the 1970s. {Interavia, 9/1973, 945)
NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had approved results of the Feb. 26-March 3 Moscow meeting of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine, NASA announced. The Group had agreed on common medical procedures to permit comparison of pre- and postflight data on astronaut and cosmonaut body functions. (NASA Release 73-79)
A Chicago Tribune editorial hailed the Skylab 2 astronauts (launched May 25 to man the crippled Workshop orbited May 14) as “tinkerers.” The men who overcame the senseless stubbornness of inanimate objects had been “superlatively trained and admirably persistent and are the products of a highly scientific preparation. But the achievement also reflects the fine American heritage of tinkering. This was the quality that enabled the Pilgrim fathers to make do with strange, native materials when they landed on our alien shores.” It was also “the practical genius that has enabled four generations of young Americans to compel model Ts to live and snort again when it was obvious that they were clinically dead. Its magic has guided these astronauts and their ground advisers to a thrilling kind of space achievement that is typically American.” (C Trib, 6/1/73)
Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), former Commander of the Air Force Strategic Air Command, joined nasa as a consultant to the Administrator. (nasa Ann, 9/10/73) August 14:	An Apollo command module atop its Saturn IB launch vehicle was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center. Vehicle readiness had been ordered by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider for a possible rescue mission of Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28) when two of the four quadrants of the service module’s reaction control system, used for maneuvering the command and service module, failed and raised doubts about the ability of the CM to return safely to earth. If a rescue system were not ordered, the vehicle would carry Skylab 4 astronauts—Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—to a Nov. 9 rendezvous with the Skylab Orbital Workshop. (Marshall Star, 8/15/73, 1; Thomas, Today, 8/14/73)
The Nippon Electric Co. of Tokyo had won a contract to design and install the antenna and communications equipment for the first Swiss communications satellite station, the New York Times reported. The station was being built above the Rhone Valley in the Valais canton. (Lusinchi, NYT, 10/6/73) October 7—13:	The International Astronautical Federation (iaf) held its 24th Congress in Baku, U.S.S.R. In a message of greeting, the Soviet Council of Ministers said: “Nowadays, when important positive changes take place in international situations, ever more favourable opportunities for development of scientific communication, exchange of experience and uses of scientific achievements for practical needs of mankind open to scientists.” Academician Sergey Vernov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences said Soviet artificial satellites, placed simultaneously in different orbits, had facilitated studies of many regions of earth’s radiation belts, including those where no space station had been before. He hypothesized the existence of an “unstable radiation zone” beyond the outer radiation belt where Soviet Electron satellites had recorded a flux of electrons with energies over 150 000 ev. He believed the zone to be a necessary link in the formation of the earth’s radiation belts. Honorary guests Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander, and Soviet Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy, Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, and Vladimir A. Shatalov participated in an open discussion. Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. could be good and equal partners in conquering space. Stafford said cooperation in astp had already solved colossal technical problems. “And if we can solve problems in space we can, consequently, solve considerable problems on earth.” Soviet scientists reported on a man-plant interaction experiment in which four researchers spent six months in a closed biological environment simulating the earth’s biosphere. The Siberian test project, sponsored by the Krasnoyarsk Institute of Physics, had demonstrated that man could live in an artificial atmosphere created by green algae, fastgrowing wheat, and a variety of vegetables. The plants had been irrigated with sewage waste and with condensed moisture from the atmosphere. The researchers had breathed oxygen released by the plants, eaten the vegetables, and baked bread from the wheat during a simulated space trip in an underground chamber. A paper by Soviet specialists reported that an electric field might divert a flux of charged particles from a spacecraft. The spacecraft’s exterior surface might act as one of the field’s electrodes while the vacuum of outer space acted as an insulating medium, providing an effective radiation shield. Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Marshall Space Flight Center Associate Director for Science, cochaired two sessions on scientific spacecraft systems. The 7th International History of Astronautics Symposium included the papers “From Back Fire to Explorer I” by Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, Kennedy Space Center; “R. H. Goddard: Accomplishments of the Roswell Years (1930-1941)” by Frederick C. Durant III, Assistant Director for Astronautics, National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution; “High Energy Propulsion at naca Lewis Engine Research Laboratory” by John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; and “Early Photography from Rockets” by Frank H. Winter of the Air and Space Museum. Dr. Maxime A. Faget, Johnson Space Center Director of Engineering and Development, received the 1973 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for “playing a major role in developing the basic ideas and original design concepts that have been incorporated into all the manned spacecraft flown by the United States. . . . An expert on vehicles suitable for reentering the Earth’s atmosphere, he is particularly noted for his contributions to the basic configuration of the command module and to the development of the pressure-fed hypergolic engines used on the Apollo modules.” The meeting, attended by 1500 scientists from 29 countries, elected Dr. Charles Stark Draper, Director of the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, iaf President. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/8/73; msfc Release 73-137; nasa Release 73-200; nasa Hist Off; Agence France-Presse, W Post, 10/12/73, A30) October 8:	Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists began to measure stratospheric constituents up to 24 km (80 000 ft) using a Fourier interferometer aboard the British prototype of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft. Eight scheduled flights from Fairford, England, sponsored by the U.S. Dept, of Transportation, were to obtain information on the potential pollution effect of supersonic transports on the atmosphere. In earlier flights the interferometer had detected nitric oxide between 12 and 24 km (39 000 and 80 000 ft) at less than one part per billion. Nitric oxide was believed to be vital in maintaining ozone balance in the stratosphere, (jpl Release 670; JPL pio)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, scheduled for Nov. 11 launch to crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), completed training in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator at Marshall Space Flight Center. The astronauts had spent 80 hrs since April 1972 performing 24 different exercises in the simulated weightless environment to prepare them for the three extravehicular activities scheduled for their mission. The backup crew —Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind—would complete their training at MSFC Oct. 12. (msfc Release 73-145)
An Atlanta Constitution editorial commented on Skylab as the Sky lab 2 astronauts planned a spacewalk to repair the power unit on Skylab 1 (launched May 14) : “The Skylab is a significant step in the developing technology of space exploration. Three men are there now, brave men. Their sheer competence makes it all seem routine, but they are risking their lives daily in doing things that literally no men have ever done before.” (Atlanta JC, 6/5/73)
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 276.8-km (172-mi) altitude. The objective was to test the performance of the rocket configuration that would be used for a series of calibration rocket (calroc) launches during the manned Skylab mission scheduled for May. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The calroc launches would provide a reference for the calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), calroc launches were also scheduled during the Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 missions, to acquire solar flux data on specific regions of the sun in conjunction with Skylab astronaut observations of the same regions with ATM experiments. Instrumentation on calroc would be similar to but smaller than that on the ATM. Black Brant VC would be used for all launches. Taking part in the program, managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, were Ames Research Center, Naval Research Laboratory, Harvard College Observatory, and the White Sands Naval Ordnance Missile Test Facility, (gsfc proj off; msfc Release 73-42)
Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr.—Apollo 13 lunar module pilot, Apollo 8 and 11 backup pilot, and Apollo 16 backup commander—had been named Technical Assistant to the Manager, Orbiter Projects Office, at Johnson Space Center, jsc announced. Haise, who had logged 142 hrs 54 min in space, would be responsible for assisting Manager Aaron Cohen in the overall management of the space shuttle orbiter development, (jsc Release 73-41)
Skyiab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Jack R. Lousma, and Dr. Owen K. Garriott concluded training for the second manned mission to the Skyiab Orbital Workshop, launched May 14. They practiced key flight maneuvers in a spacecraft simulator at Johnson Space Center and the complex countdown procedures to be used during the final two and one half hours before launch July 28. In an interview with the New York Times, Skyiab Program Director William C. Schneider said, “Everything seems to be going great.” (Wilford, NYT, 7/26/73; AP, B Sun, 7/26/73, A10)
A Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial commented on the first anniversary of the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite: “For Ohio alone, erts is telling truer tales about strip mining and pollution. For others it is doing such diverse things as charting safe routes for ocean shipping and forecasting water requirements of inland areas. The list of what already has been done and is yet to be done is almost endless.” (Cl PD, 8/14/73)	_ August 15:	NASA held an earth resources experiment package briefing at Johnson Space Center. Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, erep project scientist at jsc, said that Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma, launched July 28 to crew the Orbital Workshop, had completed 10 erep passes and had exceeded four hours of data collection. They had photographed 125 test sites over the U.S., South America, Thailand, East Malaysia, and Australia under the conditions required by the individual primary investigators. Wilmarth said the equipment was “working great” with “essentially no problem at all with any of the camera systems.” (Transcript)
In its program of international cooperation, NASA launched Anik 2 domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada and Intelsat-IV F—7 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. A significant milestone was the Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation on Spacelab, signed by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. To be funded and developed by nine members of the European Space Research Organization, the Spacelab would be carried into orbit by NASA’s space shuttle orbiter and would accommodate experiments and personnel on missions of 7 to 30 days. Notable progress was made in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, with the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission on schedule for July 1975 launch. Working groups met in both countries and a November Moscow meeting familiarized eight U.S. astronauts with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. Docking system designs were essentially completed and all hardware construction was on schedule. Joint dynamic testing of test units began at Johnson Space Center. Flight crews were selected in both countries. Eighty-three nations entered into Definitive Agreements for intelsat, permanently establishing the global communications satellite system envisioned in the U.S. Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Scientists from other nations cooperated in nasa studies ranging from investigations of the solar system to practical applications of space technology. Erts 1 and Skylab environment and resources data were used throughout the world. Scientists from 37 countries and the United Nations participated in Erts 1 experiments and Brazil and Canada established their own erts data-acquisition facilities. Four foreign experiments were carried on Skylab missions and foreign scientists participated in the Apollo solar telescope program and in correlated astronomy sounding rocket programs. Scientists in 19 countries and the U.N. participated in 40 Skylab data-analysis investigations. German and Australian scientists were coinvestigators for Pioneer 11 experiments and French and U.K. scientists for Mariner 10. Investigators from 40 nations and esro were selected to participate in the Apollo 17 lunar sample program. A joint working group of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and nasa held the third and fourth meetings on space biology and medicine, exchanging information on manned space flight. Parallel communications channels using Intelsat and Molniya comsat systems were planned for 1974 to support the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Direct Communications Link, with construction of earth stations in both countries for access to each other’s satellites. Work went forward for future cooperative satellite projects. Agreement was reached with Italy to fly San Marco C-2 in 1974. Negotiations were underway with West Germany for 1974 launch of the aeros-b aeronomy satellite and work continued on the experimental cts comsat to be launched with Canada, the helios solar probe with Germany, the intasat ionospheric beacon with Spain, the UK—5 stellar x-ray satellite, Canada’s Anik C, and U.K.’s X4 technology spacecraft. Negotiations were also underway on nasa launch services for the French-German Symphonic comsat in 1974 and two ESRO test comsats in 1976 and 1977. The U.S. and esro were about to enter agreement for an air traffic control and navigation satellite system. During the year nasa launched 30 sounding rockets from ranges in other countries, including rockets carrying foreign payloads or cooperative experiments. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, Brazil, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. (Pres Rpt 1974; nasa Release 73-281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74, 2-3) • A burgeoning worldwide energy shortage led President Nixon to propose in June the establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept, of Natural Resources, an Energy Research and Development Administration, and a Nuclear Energy Commission. The shortage reached crisis proportion with the embargo by Arab nations on oil shipments to the U.S. in retaliation for U.S. support to Israel during the October Arab-Israeli war. In a November speech President Nixon noted the U.S. was on the verge of “the most acute shortage of energy since World War II.” He called for reduced use of heat, electricity, and gasoline; announced Federal Government steps to lower energy consumption; asked the Atomic Energy Commission to accelerate licensing and constructing nuclear power plants; and asked for an emergency energy act. Nine energy bills, passed in rapid succession by the first session of the 93rd Congress, included authorizations for mandatory fuel allocation programs, construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, a return to year-round daylight saving time, a speed limit on interstate highways, and the National Emergency Act. Soaring prices of all kinds of fuel, long lines of cars and banned Sunday sales at gas stations, and airline fare increases and schedule cutbacks marked closing months of the year. Economists forecast a possible depression as energy shortages aggravated an already recessed economy. Scientists sought additional sources of fossil fuels and, for the future, new sources of energy to make the U.S. energy-autonomous. The focus turned to NASA and its pioneering expertise in the technologies of solar energy and development of hydrogen as a substitute for gasoline in automobiles and aircraft. At the year’s end pending legislation endorsed NASA cooperation with other appropriate agencies in solving the worldwide energy shortage and in providing the U.S. with future sources of non-fossil-fuel energy. (A&A 1973; Library of Congress, Congr Research Service, Major Legislation of the 93rd Congress; Newsweek, 12/3/73)
The first of six student volunteers in a Univ. of California at Davis experiment to determine if astronauts could survive social isolation was released after 105 days’ isolation in two small rooms. Dr. Don A. Rockwell, project manager, said the experiment had shown that astronauts should he able to adjust psychologically to long periods in space. (upi, W Post, 5/30/73, A4)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt arrived in Pakistan to discuss the U.S. space program with Pakistani President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and present a Pakistani flag they had taken to the moon during their Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. (upi, W Post, 6/20/73, A18)
The training version of Apollo 17 lunar roving vehicle (lrv), participating in President Nixon’s inaugural parade, required replacement of two batteries to negotiate the distance from the Capitol to the White House, because batteries had only 30-min life. Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt watched the battery change from an automobile following the lrv in the procession. [.Av Wk, 1/29/73, 13) January 21:	NASA established the Office of Management Planning and Review with James R. Elliott as Director, under Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. The Office of Management Development was abolished and its personnel and responsibilities transferred to the new office. Elliott had joined NASA in February 1962 and had been a senior management consultant in Office of Management Development. (nasa Ann)
Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Jack R. Lousma, and Dr. Owen K. Garriott arrived in San Diego, Calif., aboard the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans and were flown to Houston, Tex., on an Air Force C-141 troop carrier aircraft. Blood samples from all three astronauts were flown to Johnson Space Center for analysis. The astronauts were under limited quarantine for one week to protect them from infection. (W Post, 9/28/73; AP, B Sun, 9/28/73)
A Baltimore Sun editorial commented on the plight of Skylab 3 as the astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Natal, Brazil, carrying a Univ. of California barium cloud experiment. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 18-Dec. 1: U.S. flight crews for the July 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission visited the U.S.S.k. for familiarization with the Soyuz spacecraft and discussions with Soviet counterparts on the flight plan. The discussions, held mostly at the Yuri A. Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training near Moscow, included joint crew activities and onboard documentation. Astronauts participating were Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. astp commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; and Donald K. Slayton, docking module pilot; backup crew Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma; support crew Robert F. Overmyer and Karol J. Bobko; and Eugene A. Cernan, Special Assistant to the U.S. astp Technical Director. At a press conference following the Nov. 29 concluding meeting, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said the U.S.S.R. planned further manned space flights—individual Soyuz missions and linkups of Soyuz with .the Salyut orbital platform—before the joint U.S — U.S.S.R. mission. Stafford told newsmen he was completely satisfied that the Soyuz would be “a great ship to fly.” He said there would be two joint training sessions in 1974, in Moscow in July and at Johnson Space Center in September, (nasa Release 73-250; Smith, NYT, 11/30/73, 9)
Exclusive astronaut writing contracts with Life magazine and other media had harmed the press, the public interest, the space program, and the astronauts themselves, Robert Sherrod said in a Columbia Journalism Review article released in advance of its May/June publication date. The contracts had brought relatively little money to all but a few astronauts and had distorted their individuality and diversity into a “deodorized, plasticized, and homogenized” image. Under the contract system, NASA could censor whatever the astronauts signed. “Even though this censorship was rarely invoked, it was inhibiting; so was the necessity of Life's making the astronauts look good, and vice versa." President Kennedy had originally opposed the contracts, but had been persuaded in their favor by Project Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. Former President Johnson had supported the contracts in a letter Sherrod received a few months before Johnson’s Jan. 22 death. Sherrod said the contract system had had no adverse affects on the flow of space news. “Due in large part to the exclusion policy, many members of the working press deeply resented NASA.” (Text)
A Chicago Tribune editorial commented on “the brave men of Skylab” as the Skylab 2 astronauts (launched May 25 as the first crew to man the Skylab 1 Workshop launched May 14) continued to conduct experiments in space: In repairing the Workshop’s protective shield they had “behaved with such matter-of-fact competence, tinged with homely humor and flashes of exasperation when things refused to go right, that one almost overlooked the fact that this was an act of incredible sustained bravery.” (C Trib, 6/11/73)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate Richard J. O’Melia to be a member of the Civil Aeronautics Board succeeding Secor D. Browne, who had resigned effective March 1. The nomination was submitted to the Senate Sept. 7 and confirmed Nov. 20. {PD, 9/10/73, 1056, 1070; cab pio) September 7; NASA held a Skylab solar activity briefing at Johnson Space Center, while Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma completed their 42nd day working aboard the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientist Joseph Airman said that a flare photographed by the Skylab 3 crew was about 17 times the cross-sectional area of the earth and “optically the biggest flare we’ve had during ATM and perhaps the biggest for this entire year.” Within 30 min after the event “high energy protons made it from the Sun to the earth as a consequence of this flare.” Confirmation had also been given by x-ray satellites and by short-wave fade-out and other ionospheric disturbances on the ground of a very intense x-ray event. Within two days, with the arrival of subsequent particles, an aurora would be visible at the latitude of Chicago and enough geomagnetic activity would occur to disrupt power lines in high latitudes. Hirman said that the flare had created enough energy to “run everything in the United States and the rest of the world combined for 500 years.” (Transcript)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released a statement on private communications of crews of the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), after meeting with the Deputy Administrator, Dr. George M. Low; Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers; and Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. A May 3 memorandum had authorized private communications for morale purposes (weekly calls from Skylab astronauts to their families), for “extreme” operational emergencies, and for medical reasons (to permit private doctor-patient relations). Following objections from some newsmen to the May 29 Charles Conrad, Jr., private conversation on operational matters, Dr. Fletcher had decided to instruct Mission Control’s Capsule Communicator to query the seriousness of a situation before permitting a private conversation from Skylab. Dr. Fletcher said in his new statement that he would rescind this instruction because “we believe it would be imprudent to discourage requests by the crew for private operational communications.” Paraphrases of the communications would he released to the press. “We will continue to leave it entirely up to the flight crew as to when to call for such a conversation, and will send no new instructions or clarification of instructions. This decision was reached so that we would in no conceivable way inhibit them from calling for a private conversation when they believe a need exists, and so that we will not jeopardize the safety of the mission.” (NASA Release 73—110)
Newspaper editorials commented on the repair of the Skylab Workshop by Skylab 2 astronauts as the mission, begun May 14, continued to pursue its objectives of photographing and studying the solar atmosphere. The Philadelphia Inquirer found “vast excitement in the Skylab adventure beyond potential dividends and the high drama of the suspense itself.” The astronauts’ repair of the Workshop “tells us, all jokes aside, that Americans have managed an accomplishment of delicacy, complexity and force that would have been beyond the imagination of all but a few visionaries a decade ago. That tells us, all doubts aside, that America can do wonders when it sets its mind to it.” (P Inq, 5/30/73) New York News: “We hope the lesson learned will not be lost on those who decry the ‘expense’ of manned space exploration. If we had relied on push-button robots instead of human ingenuity, it’s a good bet Skylab would have ended up a complete washout.” {NY News, 5/30/73) Christian Science Monitor: “Much of the technology spurred by space has applications nearer home. For example, modest solar-energy devices have already arrived on the market for home and commercial use after solar-energy pioneering in space. But even without such applications the Skylab venture would represent a remarkable manifestation of the problem-solving talent especially needed now that Americans are waking up to problems they hardly knew they had.” (CSM, 5/30/73) San Francisco Chronicle: “Who could feel anything short of total admiration for the undeniable courage of the astronauts for venturing into an oven of 125 degrees Fahrenheit [325 kelvins] to carry out their endangered mission? The coolness and confidence of men who reckon the limits of what they can do and then run the risks of approaching those limits while their defective vehicle is speeding in space at 17,500 [28 200 kilometers] an hour are something to celebrate.” (SF Chron, 5/30/73)
A NASA investigation board had found an electrical malfunction to be the major factor in the May 10, 1972, accident over Bergstrom Air Force Base, Tex., in which Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., had ejected safely from a T—38 jet trainer aircraft, Johnson Space Center announced. The malfunction had caused loss of instruments in severe weather and the aircraft had been destroyed, (jsc Release 73-91)
Newspaper editorials commented on the successful conclusion of Skylab 2 the day after splashdown. Baltimore Sun: “The Skylab experience, it is said, shows once again the value of man over computer, or rather of man-plus-computer over computer alone, in the exploration of space; and that may be one of its lessons. The larger lesson is that human curiosity and human intelligence are still operating in regions of concern beyond the day-by-day, and will keep on so operating.” (B Sun, 6/23/73) New York Daily News: “The venture proved . . . that man is needed in space to repair and regulate equipment when something goes wrong. But for the skill, coolness and courage of astronauts Conrad, Kerwin and Weitz, the entire Skylab project would have wound up as an expensive washout.” (NY News, 6/23/73)
The Apollo Honor Awards Ceremony at NASA Hq. celebrated the success of the Dec. 7—19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission and honored 47 persons for contributions to the success of the entire program. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a foreword to the ceremony that Apollo’s richest achievement might be the spiritual unity it provided “by enabling all Americans, and all the world watching our astronauts’ progress moonward, to discover the uniqueness of our beautiful yet fragile Earth as viewed from the perspective of the Moon. Unique in the solar system, it is the only home of the Family of Man; and seen from the perspective of the Moon, the common humanity that we all share becomes more evident than the temporal differences that keep us apart.” Dr. Fletcher and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Associate Administrator, presented awards, while Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt congratulated recipients. The NASA Distinguished Service Award was presented to Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences, and Director Chester M. Lee of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Program, who had been Mission Director for Apollo 12 through 17. Exceptional Service Medals were presented to 21 employees; the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 14 scientists from Government, industry, and universities; and the Group Achievement Awards to 10 teams from industry and Government. The Distinguished Public Service Medal, NASA’s highest award to nonGovernment personnel, went to: Dr. B. Paul Blasingame, Delco Electronics Div., General Motors Corp.; Joseph F. Clayton, Aerospace Systems Div., Bendix Corp.; Clinton H. Grace, International Business Machines Corp.; Robert E. Greer, George W. Jeffs, and Joseph P. McNamara, Rockwell International Corp.; Thomas J. Kelly, Grumman Aerospace Corp.; H. Douglas Lowrey, Chrysler Corp. Space Div.; Richard H. Nelson, Boeing Co. Space Div. Aerospace Group; and Theodore D. Smith, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. (Program; nasa Release 73-60; RI pro)
The last Apollo splashdown party given by National Space Club in Washington, D.C., had the theme “Salute to Apollo: Man’s Promise for the Future.” The program included remarks and messages from President Nixon; Vice President Spiro T. Agnew; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President and President-Aerospace Group William B. Bergen; and Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr. Former President Lyndon B. Johnson who had died during day, had sent a message commending space pioneers who had “made the Apollo miracle a living reality. It has been more . . . than an amazing adventure into the unexplored and the unknown. The Apollo program has been and will endure as a monument to many things—to the personal courage of some of the finest men our nation has produced—to the technological and managerial capability, which is the genius of our system—and to a successful cooperation among nations which has proved to all of us what can be done when we work together with our eyes on a glorious goal.” Master of Ceremonies Peter S. Hackes of National Broadcasting Co. eulogized President Johnson as “the policy father of the space program.” A message from Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), former Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Apollo program had been an “outstanding example of government, industry, and university cooperation and has really shown brilliance of management and technological competence.” An Apollo film was narrated by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director. Dr. Petrone said the Apollo program had taken 12 yrs “and I don’t look upon this as curtains at the end of a play. It’s like the curtain at the end of the first act. It’s just beginning.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said President Johnson had been instrumental in achieving congressional support for the space program. Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders recalled President Johnson as “a very large man, very down to earth” who had the spirit of an astronaut, but was “a little too big” to be one. (Program; Texts; Smyth, W Post, 1/23/73, B2; ri pio)
Dr. Carl E. Sagan, Cornell Univ. astronomer and NASA consultant, arrived in Paris to receive an International Galabert Prize for space research. Other recipients would be Soviet Academician M. Y. Marov and French astronomer Adouin Dollfus. (fbis-Sov, 6/21/73, G15) June 19:	Soviet cosmonauts had telegraphed congratulations for new achievements in the conquest of space to the Skylab 2 crew orbiting the earth in the Skylab 1 Workshop, the Moscow Domestic Service reported. The astronauts, launched May 25, had surpassed the world mannedspace-flight endurance record June 18 after repairing the Workshop. Maj. Gen. Vladimir N. Shatalov, director of cosmonaut training, wired on the cosmonauts’ behalf, wishing the astronauts a successful conclusion to their program and a safe return to the earth. (fbis-Sov, 6/20/73, G4)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford—speaking in Beverly Hills, Calif.—congratulated Soviet Cosmonauts Vasily G. Lazarev and Oleg G. Makarov on the successful completion of their Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission. Stafford, U.S. crew commander for the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s planned 1975 space flight, spoke highly of the Soyuz flight and said he was happy that it had ended with success. He noted that many of the new systems that would be used on the 1975 joint flight were tested by Soyuz 12. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/1/73, B8)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt attended an awards ceremony at Kennedy Space Center honoring icsc personnel and contractor employees for their contributions to the Apollo 17 mission (launched Dec. 7, 1972). (icsc Release 54-73)
Skylab 2 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was retiring from nasa and the Navy effective Feb. 1, Johnson Space Center announced. He would become Vice President, Operations, and Chief Operating Officer, of the American Television and Communications Corp., a Denver-based cable TV firm, (jsc Release 73-158)
Mikhail D. Millionshchikov, Vice President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and a principal spokesman in Soviet scientific contacts with the West, died in Moscow at age 60. He had contributed significantly to the studies of the turbulent flow of liquids and gases, nuclear energy, and new techniques for direct energy conversion. On April 28, 1970, Academician Millionshchikov—as head of a 10-man Soviet delegation to a conference sponsored in Washington, D.C., by the Fund for Peace— had suggested U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space exploration. This proposal had been “the first public suggestion by a Soviet spokesman of this hope,” the New York Times reported later. Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, also a conference participant, had proposed the next day that the two countries agree to exchange space engineers as a first step toward joint space cooperation. {NYT, 5/29/73, 32) May 28:	A New York Times editorial commented on the repair of Skylab 1, damaged on launch May 14: “Many people deserve credit for this remarkable turn of events. First there were the Houston ground controllers who maneuvered the crippled Skylab into an optimal position. ... A small but varied army of technicians hurriedly contrived not one but three possible ways of creating a parasol in space so as to replace the missing heat shield that had created the most trouble. Finally, the Sky-lab astronauts mastered their new tasks in an incredibily short time, reached orbit in the neighborhood of Skylab, surveyed the damage, and made the most essential ‘fix,’ the sunshade, which yesterday brought the station’s temperature down to tolerable levels.” It had been a grueling test for all concerned. “But for the moment, at least, the Skylab project has been truly resurrected from near-death.” (NYT, 5/28/73, 14)
The Skylab Saturn IB/Apollo rescue vehicle, readied for rescue of Skylab 4 astronauts (launched Nov. 16), was rolled out from Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B. By Dec. 19 the vehicle would complete flight readiness tests, the two-day final overall test of spacecraft systems and ground support equipment, and a simulated launch. On Dec. 21 the rescue vehicle would he within nine days of launch readiness and would hold at that point Until needed in an emergency or returned to the vab at the end of the mission. The rescue command module was equipped with two additional crew couches and additional life support and communications connections to permit it to return the three Skylab 4 crewmen and the two rescue crew members, Vance D. Brand and Dr. Don L. Lind, (ksc Release 283—73)
Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield presented honorary faa Airframe and Powerplant Mechanic’s Certificates with an especially established “spacecraft rating” to Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Butterfield said: “The in-flight repair job you performed on the Skylab orbital workshop was one of the most spectacular achievements of the entire space program. It transformed a potentially disastrous mission into an outstanding success and demonstrated once again man’s ingenuity in the face of adversity. I’m sure every aviation mechanic in the country is proud to have you as honorary members of their select and highly skilled fraternity.” The awards were sponsored by the Aviation Maintenance Foundation in cooperation with faa and the aviation industry, (faa Release 73-173)
Appointment of Roald Sagdeyev as Director of the Soviet Space Research Institute was announced in Vestnik, monthly publication of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Sagdeyev replaced Georgy I. Petrov, who went into voluntary retirement. Sagdeyev, a nuclear physicist, had been made a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences in 1964 and had become a full member in 1968. Before his appointment as Director, Sagdeyev had specialized in plasma physics at the Nuclear Physics Institute in Novosibirsk. (AP, W Post, 9/23/7$, Al; 9/24/73, A21) September 2—7:	The 66th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) was held in Dublin, Ireland. U.S. participants included Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan and Apollo 16 commander John W. Young. The 1972 fai Gold Space Medal was presented to Cernan in recognition of the Dec. 7-19, 1972, final Apollo mission which had “accomplished all of its goals and magnificently concluded the extraordinary and highly successful Apollo program.” Cernan also received t'he 1972 De la Vaulx Medal for his absolute world record of 21 hrs 32 min 44 sec for “Duration of Stay Outside his Lunar Module ‘Challenger’ Spacecraft,” set during Apollo 17. Young received the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for “remarkable leadership, skill, daring and dedication” as commander of the April 16-27, 1972, Apollo 16 mission and the V. M. Komarov Diploma, on behalf of himself and Apollo 16 Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II and Charles M. Duke, Jr., for successful completion of all but one of the mission’s 33 major experiments. The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Aeronautics was awarded to the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration “in recognition of its outstanding contribution to air traffic efficiency and safety by the development of the now fully operational Automated Radar Terminal System” (arts). The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Astronautics went to Boeing Co. Aerospace Group for design and production of the lunar roving vehicle (lrv) used during the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions. The Paul Tis-sandier Diploma was presented to Kay A. Brick for “her outstanding contributions to women’s aviation over the past 23 years” as a member and Chairman of the Board of the All-Women’s Transcontinental Air Race “Powder Puff Derby.” (naa News, 9/73, 1—2; faa Release 73— 155; A&A 1972) September 3:	The U.S. had “discreetly blocked” Soviet attempts to purchase 10 ilc Industries’ Apollo lunar-configured spacesuits, Aviation Week & Space Technology'said. The U.S.S.R. had been told that U.S. export of such technology could not be approved. (Av Wk, 9/3/73, 11) September 4:	World atlases were inaccurate in delineating outer boundaries of polar icecaps according to imagery returned by Nimbus 5 (weather satellite launched by NASA Dec. 10, 1972), NASA announced. A Goddard Space Flight Center study had shown that synoptic photos from Nimbus 5 clearly indicated polar regions underwent large-scale changes in a short time. Boundaries between the multiyear icepack around the North Pole and the large areas of first-year ice varied significantly within one freezing season. Even greater changes occurred around Antarctica. Nimbus 5 also was measuring daily rainfall distribution over the earth’s oceans to indicate to meteorologists how much energy was being released into the global atmosphere. An electrically scanning microwave radiometer aboard the spacecraft was measuring rainfall rate and heat thus released to enable forecasters to understand a tropical storm or hurricane and predict its 24- to 48-hr intensity, (nasa Releases 73-176, 73-175)
It was “puzzling,” a Washington Star and Daily News editorial said, “that Soviet leaders remain so secretive about their space problems, when the general nature of a mishap cannot be hidden from modem tracking equipment and more openness could lead to a sharing of corrective knowledge. The Russian announcement that the last Salyut had merely completed its mission . . . fooled no one. Greater frankness, certainly, will be needed in the joint mission [U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project] requiring the confidence of each country’s experts in the other’s equipment and ability.” (W Star & News, 5/9/73, A23) May 10:	Skylab 1, scheduled for launch May 14, would carry 950 kg (2100 lbs) of food, including lobster newburg, prime ribs of beef, filet mignon, asparagus, strawberries, and after dinner mints, the Washington Post quoted Dr. Malcolm C. Smith, Chief of Food and Nutrition at Johnson Space Center, as saying. Each Skylab mission would carry more than 70 different foods prepared by an automatic meal-reconstitution module. Semisolid food could be eaten out of the can with a fork and spoon and prevented from flying around in the weightless environment by a polyethylene membrane. Beverages could be consumed one swallow at a time from a multichambered bellowslike canister. Previously, astronauts had to drink the entire beverage at one time once the valve was opened. Fruit juices were fortified with potassium gluconate to replace the potassium lost in weightlessness. The use of alcoholic beverages had been rejected because of medical drawbacks and public opinion. The astronauts arranged their own meals with the correct combinations of nutrients and calories. Frozen foods would be used the first time in the U.S. space program. The cost of the Skylab food was $26.35 per man per day. Twenty percent more food than required would be carried. There would also be a rescue food supply of 16 days for three men. (Ross, W Post, 5/10/73, El)
Appointment of David R. Scott, former astronaut, as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center was announced by frc. Scott had flown on Gemini 8 (March 16—17, 1966) and Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) missions and was commander of Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, he had served as Technical Assistant to the Apollo Program Manager and as Special Assistant for Mission Operations and Government Furnished Equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Office at Manned Spacecraft Center (which became Johnson Space Center Feb. 17). He held two nasa Distinguished Service Medals, the nasa Exceptional Service Medal, two Air Force Distinguished Service Medals, the Air Force Distinguished Flying Cross, the David C. Schilling Trophy of the Air Force, and the Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1971. (frc Release 21—73)
France had begun work to hold future nuclear tests underground at two uninhabited atolls in the Pacific, French Adm. Christian Claverie said in Papeete, Tahiti. French nuclear tests previously had been conducted above the French-governed Tahitian atoll Mururoa, against international protests, (upi, NYT, 11/4/73, 77) November 5:	Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed ground practice of docking maneuvers at Johnson Space Center. The astronauts were scheduled for Nov. 10 launch on the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14). (upi, NYT, 11/6/73, 25)
Objectives of Skylab’s scientific and engineering experiments were outlined in a Kennedy Space Center press briefing. The 57 major experiment components aboard the space station scheduled for May 14 launch would provide data for 270 investigations in earth resources, solar astronomy, and materials science by 702 investigators and associates— 200 of them foreign. Dr. Edward J. McLaughlin, NASA Director for Space Medicine, said 20 life sciences experiments would provide “a comprehensive picture of the interactions of man with his environment and of various body systems that are influenced ... by the space environment.” They would deal primarily with the metabolic and cardiovascular systems, exercise capacity, and nutrition. Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, NASA Chief of Solar Physics, said the objective of Skylab astronomy was “the study of the stars, including the sun, and other objects in space such as planets,| comets, objects and libration points near the moon, and x-ray objects in the sky.” Emphasis would be placed on the study of solar activity known to influence general weather patterns and on solar flares, responsible for radio communication blackouts and interference. Skylab was unique in that it would be manned. The astronaut would be able to align the instruments and select targets of interest, taking advantage of phenomena as it occurred. Dr. Robert A. Parker, astronaut and Skylab program scientist, said that corollary experiments would study gas and particles surrounding the Skylab and their effect on sensitive instruments, collect micrometeoroids, study man-made disturbances in Skylab and their effect on instrument alignment, and study flammable materials and manufacturing techniques in the zero-g environment. (Transcript)
After a 35-yr local dispute, the “Great White Sands Missile Range Lost Gold Treasure Affair” had “blossomed into a national mystery,” the New York Times reported. Attorney F. Lee Bailey recently had been engaged by 50 unidentified claimants who sought prospecting rights to gold bars and treasure said to be buried on the missile range and to be worth up to $1.5 billion. In 1963 the Army, insisting there was no treasure, had banned prospectors from the range because of danger from exploding target-practice shells. Rep. Harold L. Runnels (D-N. Mex.) had proposed a joint Federal-state search for the treasure, said to have originated in various ways. (Sterba, NYT, 10/13/73, 37) October 14:	Doctors in Galveston, Tex., had pronounced the condition of Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., “good and stable” following skin grafts for bums he received in an Aug. 22 aircraft accident, United Press International reported. Haise had been burned over 55% of his body and had suffered a lung ailment following the crash of a World War II training aircraft he had been piloting for an air show group, (upi, M Her, 10/14/73)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced it had adopted fuel-saving regulations permitting airlines to use flight simulators more in pilot training and flight checking. The new rules could save 200 000 cu m (50 million gal) of fuel annually and reduce flights by 9300. (faa Release 73-215) December 23:	Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper, astronomer and space pioneer, died of a heart attack at the age of 68, while visiting Mexico City. During his early career, Dutch-born Kuiper had discovered groups of dwarf stars, satellites of Uranus and Neptune, and an atmosphere surrounding Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. In the 1950s he became the first astronomer to measure Pluto’s diameter accurately and charted the equator and position of the poles of Venus. In the 1960s Dr. Kuiper became one of the foremost authorities on the moon, working in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor projects and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. (McFadden, NYT, 12/25/73, 24) December 24:	Fifth anniversary of the Christmas Eve reading of Genesis by the moon-orbiting crew of Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968) to TV and radio audiences that included one of every four persons on earth. The crew of Skylab 4 (launched Nov. 16 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14), second crew to spend Christmas in space, devoted Christmas Eve to searching for and opening gifts hidden for them in the Apollo command module before launch by colleagues in Mission Control. The packages included a 91-cm (36-in) green cloth Christmas tree beneath the gear they would need for their scheduled Christmas Day space walk and a surprise package stored in the CM locker. Mission Control also planned to transmit over a teleprint circuit a Christmas card depicting the sun, Skylab, gifts, and Santa’s sled. (A&A 1968; UPi, W Star-News, 12/24/73, Al)
Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz completed their last medical checkups at Johnson Space Center and were declared ready for the Skylab launch, as countdown proceeded for May 15. Data were also gathered for inflight comparison of the astronauts’ physical conditions. (Wilford, NYT, 5/12/73, 58)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, compared the nasa FY 1974 budget program with FY 1973 plans in testimony before the opening session of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization: “Last year Congress approved $3.4 billion, the full amount of the President’s recommendations. In presenting the budget last year, I was able to state to the Congress that the planning associated with the $3.4 billion budget request was configured so as not to require an increase in future NASA budgets above the $3.4 billion level, . . . except as necessary to meet the effects of inflation, or unless new decisions were made to expand the program.” NASA then had had “a balanced and productive program which did not include any ‘built-in’ commitments that would require a higher total level of NASA funding in future years.” nasa’s FY 1974 budget represented a change in this plan. “To meet the necessary constraints on total Government spending in FY 1973 and FY 1974 we have had to reduce our budget plans below the $3.4 billion level by a total of almost $400 million for the 2-year period.” But program objectives were generally the same, “even though some of them will necessarily be achieved at later dates. For this reason, NASA budgets in future years will have to increase. . . . This need is recognized in the preliminary projections for FY 1975.” NASA was “handling the reductions in our FY 1973 and FY 1974 budget plans in a way that will not increase the levels of future funding required above those projected last year.” Dr. Fletcher believed this to be minimum level for space and aeronautics program U.S. should support. The program’s major elements—space shuttle, unmanned planetary and scientific missions, space applications and aeronautics program components, and others—“are ones that have been presented and approved in previous years.” nasa had “squeezed and stretched the program about as far as we can. In some of the reductions we have made in FY 1973 and FY 1974 we may have gone too far. Any further significant reductions would mean a real loss in a key element of the program.” NASA was requesting FY 1974 funds for an advanced supersonic technology program to provide technology for future military supersonic aircraft, data to assess environmental and economic impacts on the U.S. of present and future foreign supersonic aircraft, and a “sound technical basis for any future consideration that may be given by the United States to the development of an environmentally acceptable and economically viable commercial supersonic transport.” The request did not include funds for initiating SST development and did not commit the U.S. to development. Dr. Fletcher was accompanied by Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Charles Conrad, Jr., as well as other NASA officials. (Transcript)
NASA held two Skylab 1—2 postmission briefings at Johnson Space Center. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told a NASA press conferC ■ 3 ence that, “as near as we can tell, essentially all of the objectives that were anticipated for this mission have been completed. And needless to say none of us really dreamed that this could be done at the time that the meteoroid shield failed to deploy. So it exceeded our wildest expectations at that time.” Skylab 1-2 could be symbolized by a hammer, and the Skylab 2 astronauts could be characterized as “the master tinkerers of space.” The mission’s anomalies had made no major impact on NASA’s budget. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said at a crew medical status briefing that the astronauts had “looked rather wobbly and unsteady when they got out of the spacecraft.” The crew—aware of the increased pull of gravity—had said they felt as if they were “very heavy . . . like about a two-G load.” All three men had experienced dizziness, lightheadedness, and some nausea. Astronaut Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin felt more of these effects than Charles Conrad, Jr., and Paul J. Weitz. His blood pressure had dropped to a critical level 25 min after splashdown and he had to inflate his spacesuit to force the blood back up from his legs to his brain. During medical tests aboard the recovery ship Ticonderoga, Conrad had performed at his premission level. Weitz had experienced a sudden drop in blood pressure and pulse rate while on the bicycle ergometer but had recovered within a five-minute rest period. Kerwin had demonstrated more of the vestibular disturbance and was unable to complete any of the tests. (Transcripts)
Demonstration electromechanical devices developed for emergency aid to astronauts in space had been adapted, tested, and installed in a Huntsville (Ala.) Hospital room by Marshall Space Flight Center, nasa announced. The devices permitted remote control by severely handicapped or paralyzed patients of communications systems and appliances for comfort and recreation, (nasa Release 73-169) August 25:	A New York Times editorial praised Skylab 3 (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14) as the mission passed the 28-day mark set by Skylab 1—2 (May 14-June 22), to become the longest manned space mission to date: The Skylab 3 astronauts “already have much more than mere longevity in space to their credit. Their two long walks in space have permitted them to do more useful work in orbit outside their vehicle than human beings ever have done before. Their scientific observations and experiments—particularly the study of the sun—have added much to human knowledge.” With its midpoint near, Skylab 3 had already “proved itself one of the most productive manned space missions since the first sputnik went into orbit almost a generation ago.” (NYT, 8/25/73, 22) August 26:	Albion, Mich., police had reported the recovery of a spacesuit worn by Astronaut Alan L. Bean during the Apollo 12 mission (Nov. 14-24, 1969), the Associated Press reported. The suit, valued at $6000, had been on loan from the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum when it was taken from the Kingman Museum in Battle Creek, Mich., a week earlier. (W Post, 8/27/73, A22) August 27:	nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center was officially rededicated as Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in ceremonies at jsc, attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator; Texas Gov. Dolph Briscoe; and Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson. A bust of the late President Johnson by sculptress Jimilu Mason, donated by the Houston Chamber of Commerce and the Albert Thomas Space Hall of Fame, was unveiled. A Johnson Room opened in the jsc Visitor Center displayed the original U.S. copy of the Treaty for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, signed in 1967 during President Johnson’s Administration. At the dedication Dr. Fletcher said that President Johnson had needed “great political courage” 1965-1967 to fight for funds for NASA programs of the 1970s such as Skylab and Viking. “The decision to continue with a strong space program after Apollo may . . . prove to be the most important of all the decisive actions Lyndon Johnson undertook on behalf of space progress.” Earlier in the day Astronaut Alan L. Bean, commander of the Skylab 3 crew orbiting the earth after July 28 launch to join the Orbital Workshop for 59 days, had radioed: “We think the work in which we are engaged right now would not have been possible except for [Johnson’s] strong support and leadership in the Senate and the Presidency.” President Johnson himself had said—on a March 1, 1968, visit to msc—referring to the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958: “The one legislative enactment that I suppose I am proudest of is the bill that I wrote and introduced that made possible NASA, that brought into existence this great facility and others in the program throughout the nation.” President Nixon had signed the law making the name change Feb. 17. Mr. Johnson had died Jan. 22. (Transcript; jsc Roundup, 8/17/73; 8/31/73; McElheny, NYT, 8/28/73, 24)
The dizziness and nausea of Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz on their return to the earth June 22 were probably due to problems of the inner ear, the Wall Street Journal quoted Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Johnson Space Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, as saying. The symptoms had occurred particularly when the men moved their heads from side to side. Dr. Hawkins had theorized that the fluid in the semicircular canal, whose movement transmitted impulses via tiny hairs in the ear to the brain, was out of action because of the long period of weightlessness. When the astronauts had come under the sudden influence of gravity, the inner-ear mechanism became unusually sensitive to almost any head movement. Ordinary movements could produce the symptoms of motion sickness. The inner-ear balancing mechanism could adapt to gravity quickly. Dr. Kerwin, the most affected, had returned to normal after 12 hrs. (Bishop, WSJ, 6/25/73)
Unusual pulsed-noise signals detected by Soviet scientists at Gorky Univ. [see Oct. 16] might be from experimental U.S. Air Force communications satellites in highly elliptical Molniya-like orbits, Aviation Week & Space Technology said. Possible sources were satellites orbited March 21, 1971, and Aug. 21, 1973—thought to be test vehicles for the Air Force’s planned Satellite Data System. (Av Wk, 11/5/73, 47) The primary objectives were to place the spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with a local equator crossing time of 8:30 am to permit the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, make an in-orbit evaluation, and check out the spacecraft before turning operational control over to noaa’s National Environmental Satellite Service (ness) . Operational responsibility for the spacecraft was transferred to noaa Nov. 29. Excellent data were being returned. The orbit would permit regular, dependable daytime and nighttime meteorological observations in both direct-readout and stored modes of operation in support of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). Noaa 3 was the second operational spacecraft to provide temperature soundings of the earth’s atmosphere as well as direct-readout and globally recorded cloud-cover data. The three-axis-stabilized satellite carried redundant very-high-resolution radiometers, vertical-temperature-profile radiometers, and scanning radiometers. Noaa 3 was the fourth in the Improved tiros Operational Satellite series of second-generation meteorological satellites. The prototype had been Itos 1 (launched Jan. 23, 1970), and the first NOAA-funded spacecraft, Noaa 1, had been launched Dec. 11, 1970. Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) continued to provide meteorological data. The first series of spacecraft had included nine satellites—Essa 1 through Essa 9 (launched 1966-1969). The tos program was a joint NASA and Dept, of Commerce effort under a Jan. 30, 1964, agreement. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for the design and development of the spacecraft and ground systems, launch checkout and evaluation, tracking and data acquisition, and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle, ness was responsible for operating the spacecraft and processing the data, (nasa prog off; GSFC proj off) November 6:	Fourteen hairline cracks were found in the eight stabilizing fins of Skylab 4’s Saturn IB launch vehicle during a routine inspection at Kennedy Space Center. The cracks were discovered just after the Saturn rocket had been loaded with 157 cu m (41 500 gal) of fuel. Six of the fins had two cracks each, the two others one crack each, all at the juncture of the 5-m (16-ft) aluminum fins and the body of the launch vehicle. During rocket inspection, Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue practiced launch abort procedures in a simulator at Johnson Space Center. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/8/73, A3; AP, W Star-News, 11/7/73, B8)
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)
Apollo 17 geologist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt testified on the legacy of the Apollo program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight in hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization: As man emerged “from the scientific revolution brought about by Apollo on the Moon with the simultaneous revolution brought about by new insight into the origins of ocean basins and continents on the Earth, we may begin to understand the great stresses and strains within our crust as ocean floors grow and continents move. These stresses and strains profoundly affect the everyday lives of people living within belts of present earthquakes and volcanic activity. Within future understanding of the frozen ocean of basalt of [Oceanus] Procellarum and the vast ridge and volcanic system that splits it, may lie the simplification of thought about past events that leads to the expansion of thoughts about present events. I will be the first to admit that these last comments give free run to the imagination. However, knowledge never becomes a resource until it is married to imagination. It is thus . . . that the scientific legacy of Apollo will be realized.” Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Marshall Space Flight Center Director and former Apollo Program Director, reported the status of the five scientific stations deployed on the moon during the Apollo program: The first station deployed by Apollo 12, in November 1969, “is still functioning over 3 years after its initial deployment in the very demanding environment of the Moon. . . . The fact that this equipment can stand these rigors of temperature and vacuum . . . and still function . . . demonstrates one facet of the technology we have developed.” All five stations were still functioning, though some of the experiments had been lost. The first total station, on Apollo 12, had been designed for a one-year life. “And yet we have had it over 3 years . . . and the seismometers worked beautifully all 3 years.” The superthermal ion detector was “working beautifully and had for 3 years, night and day.” NASA had “five seismic units just giving us beautiful information on the seismic tremors of the Moon and meteorite impacts, so now we can locate them fairly accurately.” Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences in OMSF, reported: “We are vastly wiser in many medical and technical areas for our ‘decade in space.’ Much has been learned about the effects of the space flight environment upon man. We have found that some body systems respond to space flight factors . . . with changes . . . observable in the period immediately following space flight. Occasionally changes have been noticeable during the inflight period of the mission. None of these changes has been of such a severity as to cause any real concern for man’s safety in space, but all changes are . . . being watched closely lest they have implications for long duration flight.” Cardiovascular responses which showed the greatest changes also appeared most amenable to regulation by inflight countermeasures, such as lower body negative pressure. Medication had not proved of value in treating either the cardiovascular deconditioning or the loss of exercise capacity. Countermeasures were also being investigated for the small bone density losses noted. A decrease in heart size had been noted in both U.S. and Soviet space crewmen and some Soviet crewmen had experienced postflight muscular difficulties. “Both astronauts and cosmonauts have also reported sensations resembling sea sickness during spaceflight. On the whole, however, U.S. astronauts do not appear to be excessively plagued by motion sickness symptoms. The growth of opportunistic microorganisms appears to be favored in the space environment.” (Transcript)
nasa published The Quiet Sun (nasa SP-303) by Skylab 4 Astronaut Edward G. Gibson. In the foreword Dr. Leo Goldberg, Kitt Peak National Observatory Director, said the up-to-date textbook of solar physics was “written from the point of view of a physicist seeking to understand and interpret solar observations in the framework of theoretical physics. This orientation as well as the primary purpose of the book combine to make it a unique and valuable contribution to the literature of solar physics, and a superb textbook for college-level and graduate students.” (Text)
President Nixon issued Executive Order 11726 from San Clemente, Calif., establishing a Federal Office of Energy Policy. He announced the appointment of Colorado Gov. John A. Love as its Director and released a statement outlining a $ 10-billion, five-year program for energy research and development. The President established a goal for the next 12 mos for energy consumption reduction of 5% nationwide, and 7% within the Federal Government. {PD, 6/7/73, 867—75) June 30:	A seven-minute, four-second, total solar eclipse, one of three seven-minute-plus total solar eclipses in the 20th century, began at sunrise in Brazil and crossed Guyana, Surinam, the Atlantic Ocean, the Cape Verde Islands, Mauretania, Mali, Algeria, Niger, Chad, the Central African Republic, Sudan, Uganda, Kenya, and the Somali Republic. It ended at sunset in the Indian Ocean between India and Madagascar. A partial eclipse was visible for 3200 km (2000 mi) on both sides of the totality track. Previous total solar eclipses had been June 8, 1937, for seven minutes four seconds, and June 20, 1955, for seven minutes eight seconds. The next solar eclipse in the current “saros,” or 18-yr period, would be July 11, 1991, for 6 minutes 54 seconds, but the June 30 eclipse’s duration would not be exceeded for 177 years, British astronomer Peter MacDonald said later in a New Scientist article. The African eclipse was witnessed by an estimated 5000 amateur astronomers and tourists and by 2500 international scientists on land, on sea, and aboard research aircraft. Concorde 001, the specially instrumented Anglo-French supersonic transport aircraft, carried seven U.S., U.K., and French scientists across North Africa in lunar shadow at altitudes to 17 000 m (56 000 ft) during a two-hour six-minute flight. They observed total eclipse conditions for 74 min. The Skylab 1 Workshop, unmanned since Skylab 2’s June 22 splashdown, saw only about 10% of the eclipse because its orbital position and telescope mechanisms were not suited for maximum effectiveness. Its cameras operated from 7 am edt until midnight, and eclipse films taken would be retrieved by Skylab 3 astronauts scheduled for July 27 launch. Other scientific observations of the eclipse by at least 28 nations included an instrumented U.S. Air Force aircraft and rockets fired from the Soviet research ship Professor Vize near the Cape Verde Islands [see May 29]. Univ. of Texas observations by telescopes in the Sahara desert tested Einstein’s theory of relativity by measuring the bend of the sun’s gravity. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/73, 6; 6/30/73, 32; 7/1/73, 1; New Scientist, IJYl/ll, 90-91; SF, 8/15/73, 321)
Newspaper editorials commented on the Sept. 25 successful splashdown of Skylab 3 [see July 28—Sept. 25]. The Washington Star-News: The astronauts couldn’t have selected a worse evening to return to the earth “in the whole 20th Century.” Their reentry had been “upstaged, unfortunately,” by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s vain attempts to clear himself of allegations of bribery and income tax evasion, “and, of course, the Watergate hearings persisted as a distraction. But these latest Skylab voyagers still must receive the recognition they deserve for the longest and most voluminously rewarding space flight in history.” Skylab was “the proper program in space for the years just ahead, because it promises many more revelations about the earth and seas—the condition and potentials of our planet.” (W Star-News, 9/28/73, A18) The Wall Street Journal noted that the Skylab 3 crew could anticipate a small pleasure that eluded most returning travelers. “Unlike the rest of us, they have numbers of people who are absolutely hungering to see the photographs they brought back, despite the fact that they’ve returned with no fewer than 77,600 shots of the sun and 16,800 of the earth.” (WSJ, 9/28/73)
A series of calibration rocket (calroc) launches at White Sands Missile Range during the manned Skylab 2 mission scheduled for May would provide a reference for the calibration of equipment used in two experiments on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), Marshall Space Flight Center announced, calroc launches were also scheduled during the Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 missions. The rockets would acquire solar flux data on specific regions of the sun in conjunction with. Skylab astronaut observations of the same regions with ATM experiments. Instrumentation on calroc would be similar to but smaller than that aboard the atm. Black Brant VCs would be used for all the launches. Taking part in the program, managed by MSFC, were Goddard Space Flight Center, Ames Research Center, the Naval Research Laboratory, Harvard College Observatory, and White Sands Naval Ordnance Missile Test Facility, (msfc Release 73-42)
Winners of an Army competition to develop the new advanced attack helicopter were announced by Secretary of the Army Howard H. Callaway. Bell Helicopter Co. and Hughes Helicopters & Hughes Aircraft Co. would compete in a flyoff with two prototypes per contractor. The flyoff winner would install and test the required subsystems for night vision, fire control, navigation, and communications. Values of the initial development contracts were $44.7 million to Bell and $70.3 to Hughes. (dod Release 316-73) June 22—July 28:	During unmanned operations of the Orbital Workshop, launched May 14, the Apollo Telescope Mount observed the sun’s chromospheric network, prominences, coronal transients, solar limbs, lunar libration clouds, and solar eclipses. Active atm operations were discontinued July 16 because the experiment pointing and control system’s primary pitch-rate gyroscope failed. An astrophysics particle collection experiment exposed outside the Workshop would be retrieved by the Skylab 3 crew, scheduled for July 28 launch. Sample panels of thermal coatings exposed on the airlock module also would be returned. Neutron analysis detectors, a student experiment, were monitored, (nasa prog off) June 23:	NASA held a Skylab 2 crew medical status briefing at Johnson Space Center. Dr. William R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the condition of Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz had improved over their June 22 splashdown condition. Conrad was in excellent shape, Weitz had no residual effects from the vestibular disturbances of the previous day, and Kerwin was “a thousand percent better” from the cardiovascular standpoint but still had some residual vestibular effects. (Transcript)
The Senate confirmed Skylab 3 Astronaut Jack R. Lousma to be a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps. He had held the rank of major. {CR, 10/20/73, S20947)
French hydrogen bomb testing in the Pacific was “a moral outrage and a diplomatic embarrassment,” a Washington Post editorial said, “but it is also a political fact, and one likely to become more rather than less important as the 1970s unfold.” As a strategic weapon the French nuclear striking force was relatively elementary, lacking warheads to fit into long-range missiles, multiple warheads, long-range missiles, and missile-carrying submarines. “As a political force, however, the force de frappe is quite real. As [the late President Charles] de Gaulle intended, it is virtually certain to give France a larger voice in the evolution of European affairs than it otherwise would have.” (W Post, 3/5/73, 26) May 3-4:	European Space Research Organization (esro) representatives met with U.S. space officials in Washington, D.C., to negotiate a draft Intergovernmental Agreement and draft a nasa-esro Memorandum of Understanding. Both agreements would cover U.S.-European cooperation in sharing costs of space shuttle development. The European countries, through ESRO, would fund and develop the $300- to $400-million Spacelab, a supporting system important to realization of the space shuttle’s full potential. The Spacelab would facilitate joint-use programs with U.S. and foreign astronauts, (nasa Release 73—191) May 4:	Major countdown demonstration testing of the first two Skylab launch vehicles and their spacecraft on Kennedy Space Center Pads 39A and B, with crew participation, had been completed, NASA announced. Both launches remained on schedule for May 14 and 15. The three astronauts earlier in the week had been pronounced physically fit for the 28-day mission, after completing medical examinations at Johnson Space Center, (nasa Release 73-92)
Newspaper editorials commented on the safe Sept. 25 return of Skylab 3. Baltimore Sun: The mission had been “an immense scientific success which produced unprecedented and extremely valuable data especially on solar activity.” It would be “mere superstition to believe nature is co-operating with man by producing solar flares and comets just when we would most like to have them. But the Skylab missions so far have had a lot of good luck.” (B Sun, 9/27/73, A14) Miami Herald: “All told, the Skylab missions appear to promise rewards even greater than the enlargement of knowledge created by the Apollo moon voyages. The outreach of the human mind is inexorable.” (M Her, 9/27/73) Chicago Sun-Times: “With casual aplomb, the astronauts performed their sophisticated experiments, floated weightlessly through, outside and around the Skylab, and fixed their spacecraft like mundane mechanics when something went haywire. It all seemed so routine. In the austere domain of space, as on Earth, how quickly does the miraculous become absorbed into the commonplace.” (C Sun-Times, 9/27/73) Christian Science Monitor: “Even those most intimately involved with the space program, slated now for more international participation as well as applause, would admit we may now but dimly grasp the full significance of our space sorties.” The names of the Skylab 3 astronauts would, nonetheless, be added “to the list of welcomed home heroes of mankind’s young space chapter.” (CSM, 9/27/73) Philadelphia Inquirer: “Space exploration has matured to space work. During 59 days in earth orbit—more than doubling the space flight record set earlier this year by three astronauts in the same Skylab—assignments were carried out with diligence and precision. Scientific experiments and observations could “produce long-range dividends, not immediately apparent.” Despite NASA’s extraordinary safety record space was “a hostile environment posing hazardous challenges to courageous men. But the richest rewards in space will come not from derring do but from workmanlike execution of assignments with down-to-earth relevance to needs of mankind.” (P Inq, 9/27/73)
July 23:	Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Jack R. Lousma, and Dr. Owen K. Garriott received their final major medical examinations at Johnson Space Center before their July 28 launch to join the Skylab Orbital Workshop in near-earth orbit. Dr. Paul Buchanan, Chief of the JSC Health Maintenance Branch, said the astronauts “look good and they are ready to fly,” They would rendezvous and dock with the orbiting laboratory to live and work in it for 59 days before returning to earth. (Wil-ford, NYT, 7/24/73, 10)
The Univ. of California at Davis successfully completed a 15-wk, NASAsponsored study to determine how astronauts on extended space missions would cope with isolation [see May 18]. Six male students, in groups of three, lived in 3- by 5-m (11- by 17-ft) rooms with bathrooms and closets. Interior lighting was controlled to interchange day-night cycles and provide long periods of uninterrupted light barely bright enough to read by. Each room was monitored by closed-circuit TV. The students, selected from 100 volunteers, were paid $1600 each to participate. Dr. Don A. Rockwell, codirector of the study, said it had proved that, while space explorers should be able to live without sex for extended periods, they needed someone outside their spacecraft to whom “they could blow their tops” from time to time. (AP, W Post, 6/27/73)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, now an Eastern Air Lines, Inc., senior vice president, left Moscow after a visit to the U.S.S.R. at the invitation of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries. During the visit, which began April 28, Borman laid a bouquet at the Kremlin wall where Yuri Gagarin and other cosmonauts were buried and visited the cosmonaut training center and a Salyut orbital station mockup at Star City. In an interview he said that he believed the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz space flight was “the forerunner, the prototype to exactly the type of mission that we’ll eventually see going to Mars. It is very difficult to project the pace at which space exploration will go forward, because it doesn’t depend on technology so much as it does on economic and political action. But I think that by the end of this century we will have a manned earth mission to Mars.” (Tass, fbis—Sov, 4/30/73, L2; 5/3/73, G2; Moscow News, 5/19-25/73)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt received the traditional greeting from Congress following their Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. They were welcomed by the House of Representatives, since the Senate was not in session. Cernan told the House that Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s placement of the first U.S. flag on the moon in 1968 had been “a symbol of the courage and the dedication and the effort and self-sacrifice of 200 million people in this country who made that effort possible.” The act had “probably gained more pride and more respect throughout the entire world than any one thing that has happened ... in the entire 200-year history of our country.” With one step by Armstrong, “we are able to gain something that we had never really been able to grab hold of in my lifetime.” Evans said his stay in the CM had made him realize that earth, like spacecraft, had limited consumable resources and “somehow the human survival requirement means that we have got to conserve these resources and man must learn to adapt to his environment.” Schmitt said that, in obtaining knowledge through the Apollo program, man had evolved into entering universe. “Although the nature of that evolution was technological, I believe it will be marked a thousand years from now as a single unique event in human history” appearing “more distinctly even than history’s record of our use of atomic energy. It is at times unseemly, at times shortsighted but always human pathway through time, mankind found that its reach could include the stars.” (CR, 1/22/73, H372-4)
Results of Apollo 14 and 16 (launched Jan. 31, 1971, and April 16, 1972) heavy-particle dosimetry experiments were reported in Science by scientists from Johnson Space Center and the General Electric Research and Development Center. Earlier measurements using Apollo helmets as dosimeters had indicated that a significant 1% of certain nonregenerative motor-control cells in the bodies of astronauts in space would be killed by radiation from densely ionizing, heavy atomic nuclei with the current Apollo spacecraft shielding. Doses of heavy particles penetrating the CMs of Apollo 8, 12, 14, and 16 correlated well with calculated effects of solar modulation of the primary cosmic radiation. Differences in doses at different positions inside the CMs had indicated that the redistribution of mass within the spacecraft could enhance safety from the biological damage that would otherwise be expected on manned, deep-space missions. (Fleischer el al., Science, 8/3/73, 436-8)
An Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial saluted Skylab as “a triumph of man’s ingenuity, endurance and indomitable spirit.” The May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission had been “a tremendous demonstration of why man is vital to the broad expansion of space missions that looms for the next decade, and it demonstrated on live television for every taxpayer who cared to watch exactly what the space shuttle is all about.” The first Skylab crew had salvaged 80% of a successful mission and a $2.5-billion investment from the prospects of total disaster, opened new vistas on the scientific work that could be accomplished from a space platform, and proved that man could live and work usefully for extended periods in space. (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/9/73, 7) July 9-20:	Apollo-Soyuz Test Project specialists from NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences met at Johnson Space Center. They continued development of trajectories and flight plans, agreed tentatively to a scientific experiment plan, and familiarized the Soviet crew of tbe July 1975 mission with the Apollo spacecraft. Participants included astp technical directors Glynn S. Lunney for the U.S. and Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev for the U.S.S.R., Apollo and Soyuz flight crews, the Working Group on Mission Model and Operational Plans, and members of the Working Group on Control and Guidance. The Soyuz cosmonauts [see May 24] attended lectures on and demonstrations of the Apollo spacecraft, docking model briefings, and crew activity discussions. Lunney and Bushuyev reviewed astp milestones and reaffirmed that they were on schedule. On July 14 the Soviet delegation heads and cosmonauts toured assembly and checkout facilities at the Rockwell International Corp. plant in Downey, Calif., where astp work was being carried out. Meeting results were announced by NASA in a July 20 communique. Progress had been reported on crew activities, control center operations, trajectories, and other operational aspects. Agreements were reached on November familiarization of the U.S. flight crews with Soyuz equipment in the U.S.S.R., a preliminary cosmonaut training plan in the U.S. in April 1974 and February 1975, and astronaut training in the U.S.S.R. in July 1974 and March 1975. The training plan was expected to be completed in November and flight procedures finalized by the end of 1974. Final selection of joint experiments would be made in October 1973. Flight safety reports would be exchanged. The U.S.S.R. had specified the Moscow Center of Control of Manned Space Flight near Moscow as astp control center and had announced that Cosmonaut Aleksey S. Yeliseyev would be U.S.S.R. flight director. The U.S. technical director and several U.S. working groups would attend U.S.S.R. ASTP meetings in October, (nasa Release 73—93; nasa Communique)
Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz piloted their T—38 jet training aircraft from Johnson Space Center to Patrick Air Force Base near Kennedy Space Center to watch the May 14 launch of Skylab 1. ICSC technicians meanwhile tested the onboard batteries and emergency detection system on the Saturn V scheduled to boost the Skylab 1 Workshop into orbit. The Skylab 2 launch crew applied the protective covers that would shield the manned Apollo spacecraft during Saturn IB launch vehicle liftoff May 15. (upi, W Star & News, 5/13/73, 6; Wilford, NYT, 5/14/73, 24)
Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D-Fla.) introduced H.J. Res. 632 to redesignate Cape Kennedy Cape Canaveral. {CR, 6/20/73, H5158) June 21—23:	NASA considered but decided against plans to launch a special spacecraft to intercept and study at close range Comet Kohoutek, discovered in March. Kohoutek, 10 times brighter than any comet on record, would be visible from the earth in late 1973. The NASA Science Advisory Committee on Comets and Asteroids recommended a program “to maximize the scientific return from the unique opportunity” by using new and modified instruments and modified schedules on the Skylab Workshop orbited May 14; other spacecraft already in orbit, such as Oao 3 (Copernicus, launched Aug. 21, 1972) and Oso 7 (launched Sept. 29, 1971) ; and sounding rockets, balloons, aircraft, and ground-based observations. NASA would also use a Radio Astronomy Explorer, an Atmospheric Explorer, and Isis 1 (launched Jan. 30, 1969). The agency had considered launching a scientific payload on a Thor-Delta or Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle to examine a comet from the outer reaches of the solar system at short range for the first time, but decided that time was insufficient to prepare the specialized instrumentation required. (Adv Com minutes; NASA OSS; Sullivan, NYT, 6/16/73; CSM, 6/18/73; NASA Activities, 9/15/73, 161) June 22:	President Nixon sent a telegram to the Skylab 2 astronauts following their successful splashdown at the end of a 28-day earth orbital mission [see May 14-June 22] : “The successful completion of the first mission of Skylab is a source of intense pride for the American people. You have demonstrated that just as man can conquer the elements of earth, he can cope with the exigencies of space. You have given conclusive evidence that, even with the most advanced scientific and technological support in the world, the courage and resourcefulness of good men are still central to the success of the human adventure. On behalf of the American people, I welcome you home from the Skylab spaceship to spaceship earth. I also look forward to seeing you at San Clemente on Sunday.” {PD, 6/25/73, 828)
The Space Science Board of the National Research Council released HZEParticle Effects in Manned Spaceflight. The report, prepared for NASA by the Board’s Radiobiological Advisory Panel to the Committee on Space Biology and Medicine, concluded that the high-energy, heavy-ion irradiation encountered by astronauts outside the earth’s magnetosphere or in high-inclination earth orbits would have negligible biological effects for periods of less than two years in space, (nrc Release)
President Nixon entertained Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt at the White House. Members of Congress and the Secretaries of Labor, Transportation, and Commerce also were among the guests at an entertainment starring singer Sammy Davis, Jr. {PD, 3/5/73, 223; W Post, 3/5/73,
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt began an 11-week schedule of public appearances throughout the U.S. with an appearance at the Super Bowl football game in Los Angeles. (NASA Activities, 5/15/73, 89)
Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory held the first public demonstration of its new heart pacemaker that used electric and electronic components designed by NASA for spacecraft use. The new pacemaker, smaller and longer lasting than conventional models, could be implanted more quickly and easily. It had no life-limiting components or radioactive emissions, was immune from outside interference sources, and could be recharged by patients at home. It incorporated modified space satellite power cells, (nasa Release 73—150; Cohn, W Post, 8/8/73) August 8:	Spare-time diversions of the astronauts aboard the Orbital Workshop in the May 25-June 22 Skylab 2 mission and in Skylab 3 since July 28 launch were described in a Christian Science Monitor article. Skylab 3 Astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, the first physicist in space, had been fascinated by the zero-g antics of his spiders Arabella and Anita and his mummichog minnows. Skylab 2 Astronaut Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had experimented with a big blob of water which floated before him instead of splashing on the spacecraft deck. The blob had taken on the form of the sun and planets as he spun it in space. He had blown it into a bubble with a straw and then had blown bubbles within the bubble. His Skylab 2 colleague, Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., had discovered that centrifugal force could impel him around the weightless spacecraft upright if he got himself off to a fast enough start racing around the Workshop. Other astronaut pastimes included “marooning” (doing acrobatics in remote sections of the spacecraft), “hamming it up” for TV and “home movies,” reading novels and poetry, ricocheting weightless rubber balls around the laboratory, and flying paper airplanes. (Salisbury, CSM, 8/8/73)
U.S. Embassy officials in Moscow presented to U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny, on behalf of President Nixon, a lunar sample brought from the moon by the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 7 mission. Podgorny said in accepting the sample that preparations were “successfully continuing” for the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. He wished “all success” to the Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28 to work in the Orbital Workshop launched May 14). (W Star-News, 8/2/73, A2)
The U.S. flight crew for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission was announced by NASA. Prime crew: Thomas P. Stafford, commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; Donald K, ) Slayton, docking module pilot. Backup crew: Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Louama. Support crew: Richard H. Truly, Robert F.	Ovennyer, Robert L. Crippen, and Karol J. Bobko. Joint crew training would begin in the summer of 1973, when Soviet cosmonauts would visit the U.S. for several weeks. U.S. astronauts would spend an equal time in Russia in the fall of 1973. (NASA Release 73-15)
The 16th Annual Goddard Memorial Dinner was held in Washington, D.C., with Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt among the honored guests. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. The citation read: “To the Honorable George M. Low who has held key positions in the space program since its beginning, and has played a vital role in putting men into space and later, on the moon. Among Dr. Low’s outstanding contributions was, as acting NASA Administrator in 1971, the negotiation of the space agreement with the Soviet Union which provided the foundation for the Apollo/Soyuz flight in 1975 and other joint space endeavors.” The National Space Club Press Award was presented to Ralph Morse of Life magazine for “his ingenuity in photographically interpreting the dynamics of the United States Space Program and for his resourcefulness in portraying the human experience in its larger dimension.” The Astronautics Engineer Award went to Wilfred E. Scull of Goddard Space Flight Center for “outstanding leadership—from decision to fruition—of the Earth Resources Technology Satellite Project.” The Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to The General Electric Co. for “outstanding accomplishment” as prime contractor to nasa for the Earth Resources Technology Satellite and ground data handling system. (Program)
The American Museum-Hay den Planetarium in New York commemorated the fourth anniversary of the July 20, 1969, first manned lunar landing, by Apollo 11 (launched July 16, 1969). The Planetarium exhibited the Goddard Memorial Collection of autographed pencil portraits of outstanding contributors to the U.S. space effort by artist William J. Numeroff and showed “The Salvage of Skylab I,” films and narration of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ repair in space of Skylab 1 spacecraft anomalies [see May 14-June 23]. Participants in the program included Skylab 2 backup commander Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart; Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of the U.S. rocket pioneer; and author Arthur C. Clarke. (American Museum Release; pio)
Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was critically burned when a BT— 13 aircraft he was landing incurred engine failure near Galveston, Tex. Doctors reported later that Haise, who had walked away from the accident, had suffered second degree burns over 50% of his body and his condition was “critical but stable.” (W Star-News, 8/23/73, A3)
