Federal support to universities and colleges had declined 7%, to $3823 million, during FY 1973 in the first decline since 1970, the National Science Foundation reported. The drop had been largely the result of a $267-million decrease in funds from the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare but other significant decreases were posted by nsf, down $40 million; Dept, of Defense, down $11 million; and NASA, down $8 million. Federal funds for academic science activities totaled $2463 million, 5% below 1972. Two science fields had shown an increase in Federal r&d support between 1972 and 1973'. Life sciences’ $934 million was a 4% increase; engineering’s $204 million was up 6%. (nsf Highlights, 15 July 74) 15— 16 July: Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1—first U.S. domestic communications satellite, launched by NASA 13 April—began operations during inaugural ceremonies in New York and Los Angeles. Russell W. McFall, Chairman of the Board and President of Western Union Corp. transmitted the first message, from New York to Los Angeles, using the original Morse key to tap “What hath God wrought!” It was the same message sent by inventor Samuel F. B. Morse 24 May 1844 over the first experimental telegraph, a 65-km line between the Capitol in Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md. Regular commercial operations began 16 July, providing services for Westar J’s first two commercial customers, American Can Co. and Bank of America. (Westar Inaugural Transmission press kit, 15 July 74) 16— 29 July: NASA launched Aeros 2 (Aeros-B) aeronomy satellite for West Germany from Western Test Range at 4:51 am pdt on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle into polar orbit with an 879.0-km apogee, 221.3km perigee, 95.65-min period, and 97.44° inclination. The NASA mission objective—to place the Aeros 2 satellite in an earth orbit permitting successful achievement of the scientific objectives—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 26 July. The scientific objective was to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of the main absorption. The long-range objective of the satellite, which carried one Goddard Space Flight Center and four West German experiments, was to provide a model of the ionosphere from which upper atmospheric conditions could be predicted. By 29 July the vehicle and experiments were performing satisfactorily and the West Germans were initiating spacecraft operations. A July 1965 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany had provided for a series of cooperative satellite projects. The Aeros program, the second in the series, was authorized by a 10 June 1969 agreement and Aeros 1 was launched 16 Dec. 1972. The 1974 contract between NASA and the West Germany Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (bmft) for the Aeros 2 launch provided for reimbursement of NASA for launch vehicle and services. NASA would also provide one experiment, tracking, and backup for data acquisition, bmft was responsible for development of spacecraft and instrumentation operation and control of the satellite after launch, and data reduction and analysis except for the gsfc experiment. The spacecraft reentered 25 Sept. 1975. (nasa mors, 30 Nov 72, 8 & 29 July 74; NASA Releases 69-91, 74-183; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 75) The 1969 launch of Apollo 11 was commemorated 16 July by ceremonies at Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. At 9:32 am edt, the moment of launch, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., unveiled a plaque designating the site a National Historical Landmark. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the thousands of guests: “No matter our achievements, ... we cannot relax our pursuit of knowledge, for we must face the coming crises of our time. Every effort must be made to see that the opportunity which our technology presents is not lost. We may be sure that the opportunity will not occur soon again, if ever. To fail now would mean a ravaged environment and depleted resources— a plunge into a new and terrible Dark Age from which there would be no return.” Unless “we continuously restore the fund of basic knowledge, we shall ultimately exhaust it. . . . “Some day we will establish scientific outposts on the Moon, and even tap its mineral resources. And in the not-too-distant future astronauts may tread the surface of Mars and the glaciers of the moons of Jupiter in search of extraterrestrial life. . . . The future began here at 9:32 a.m. on July 16, 1969. At that moment on July 16 in the year 2069, launch windows to Mars, Neptune, and Pluto will be open. Will we fly through those windows? I think we will.” In 19 July ceremonies at the San Clemente, Calif., Western White House, Armstrong presented President Nixon a plaque bearing the names of each astronaut who had represented “this country in a flight above the surface of the Earth.” President Nixon told Armstrong the greatest contribution to the space program was not the exploration or technology but the “spirit you and your colleagues . . . have had the opportunity to demonstrate.” The Smithsonian Institution hosted 20 July activities marking the day of the landing. Speaking on the Mall in Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Under Secretary Robert A. Brooks said Apollo 11 had been a “dramatic demonstration . . . that progress in human affairs does not spring full blown from the efforts of one man or group of men. What we saw was the culmination of the efforts of hundreds of scientists and engineers from Leonardo da Vinci ... to the Apollo 11 astronauts. Each built on what his predecessors had accomplished until the accumulation of knowledge made possible the kind of quantum leap forward represented by the Apollo Program.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, called the day of the landing “the day man ended an era of one-planet civilization and began a new age as traveler and colonizer of the universe.” Despite difficulties, men would “make more of these steps into the vast but exciting reaches of the solar system.” A 21 July service at the Washington Cathedral in Washington, D.C., dedicated the Space Window donated by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator at the time of the landing. The window, designed by Rodney Winfield, depicted whirling orange, red, and white stars and orbiting planets on a deep blue and green field. A thin white trajectory, representing a manned spacecraft, emphasized man’s minuteness in God’s universe. During the ceremony, Armstrong presented a 7.18-g, 3.6-billion-yr-old lunar rock, brought from the moon by Apollo 11, to the Cathedral. The rock would be inserted into a hydrogen-filled plexiglass container embedded as the centerpiece of the window. (PD, 22 July 74, 815; NASA Activities, 15 Aug 74, 5-14; transcript; program)
The TV film “Houston, We Have a Problem” was criticized by former astronaut James A. Lovell, commander of the aborted Apollo 13 moonlanding mission (launched 11 April 1970), in a letter to the NASA Administrator, Dr. James C. Fletcher. The fictitious film focused on the personal lives of the Mission Control team that brought the crippled Apollo 13 spacecraft back to earth. Lovell said the film was “in poor taste”; the safe return of Apollo 13 was one of NASA’s finest hours and “it is not necessary to resort to soap opera plots to enliven the . . . story.” (Carmody, W Post, 1 March 74, C7)
John M. Thole had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science effective 1 Sept., NASA announced. Thole would succeed Vincent L. Johnson, who had retired. Former project manager for the Applications Technology Satellite at Goddard Space Flight Center, Thole had joined gsfc in 1960 and had held a variety of project management positions since that time, (nasa Ann, 26 Aug 74) 26 August-20 September: Thirty NASA engineers and technicians met with U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences counterparts in Moscow as joint preparations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s July 1975 flight continued. On 8 Sept, another group of 47 specialists and engineers headed by U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney arrived in Moscow for 2 weeks of meetings with the Soviet group headed by U.S.S.R. Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev. The project directors announced plans for joint prelaunch tests at the U.S. launch site 1-8 Feb. 1975 and at the U.S.S.R. launch area 5-13 May 1975. Flight crews and technical specialists from both countries would participate. Soviet specialists also announced plans to fly a manned Soyuz mission to test ASTP-related systems. NASA would be informed of further details before the flight to permit tracking. Thirteen U.S. flight controllers were also spending two Weeks in Moscow beginning 15 Sept., meeting with Soviet controllers for familiarization and training, including briefings on Soviet Mission Control Center operations, Soyuz spacecraft systems, and the mission flight plan, (jsc astp Press Communique, 20 Sept 74; jsc Roundup, 13 Sept 74; jsc Release 74-250) year in space. Dr. G. D. Whedon of the National Institutes of Health stated that weightlessness could threaten capable musculo-skeletal functions during space flights lasting up to three years unless measures could be developed to prevent significant losses of calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen. Continued loss of calcium could cause astronauts to break their backs or legs and could promote formation of kidney stones. Dr. William E. Thornton, life scientist in the jsc Astronaut Office, reported that by Mission Day 3 all Skylab crewmen had lost more than 2000 cc (2 qts) of extravascular fluid from calf and thigh; at recovery, a sharp reversal was noted. The Thornton team suggested that the reason for the shift was the intrinsic and unopposed lower limb elasticity, which forced venous blood and other fluids toward the head. Other investigators reported that such cardiovascular changes as the heart’s decreased ventricular size and the suppression of red blood cell production was the body’s accommodation to weightlessness. These physiological changes had been the expected response to a lack of exertion; they reversed after the astronauts’ return to earth, (jsc Roundup, 30 Aug 74,1-2; JSC proj off, interview, 12 Aug 75; Altman, NYT, 1 Sept 74,14)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt became NASA Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs. He headed NASA’s new Office of Energy Programs, supporting Federal agencies responsible for energy research and development. The office consolidated functions previously performed by other Headquarters offices. Dr. Schmitt, science pilot on the Apollo 17 lunar landing mission, had been Chief of the Science and Applications Directorate in the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. He had been on temporary assignment at Headquarters as Special Assistant to the Administrator for Energy Research and Development since 29 Jan. (NASA Ann, 16 May 74)
American Broadcasting Co. Science Editor Jules Bergman recalled tales of astronauts in a TV Guide article and noted that, with the splashdown of Skylab 4, an incredible era of space flight had come to an end. In 30 manned flights the U.S. had moved from the first 15-min sub-oibital flight to 12 Americans walking on the moon and then finally to the near-routine Skylab endurance missions. It would be a long while before someone set out for the planets, a trip which would require far more advanced propulsion systems than now available. But “we will go to the planets. . . . We will go beyond Jupiter. We will go beyond this solar system and eventually build starcraft to go so far that man’s only limit will be his imagination and ingenuity. But the mission clearly for the next decade is this Earth: it is the only home man has at the moment.” (TV Guide, 2 March 74)
The leadership of “NASA’s other hero,” former Administrator James E. Webb, was recalled by Julian Scheer, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in the Washington Post: The fifth anniversary of the 20 July 1969 Apollo 11 lunar landing would bring toasts to former astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and others. But it had been Webb’s “incredible leadership” which had made the event possible. Webb had “fought the Bureau of the Budget for every nickel” and usually got his way. In Congress, few believed he was not a scientist or engineer. He dazzled them with his knowledge of the technical as well as his management of the vast NASA program structure. “But it was in the internal workings of NASA where his strength lay.” He had an uncanny knack for “standing back and looking at the big picture.” He never took on a problem without coming up with as many as four options and, for Webb, every option was an opportunity. Abruptly in 1968, Webb resigned. Most of the major Apollo decisions had been made. “Almost shockingly, it was less than a year away from the first manned lunar landing. Had he . . . waited just a while longer, he could have basked in the moment of tremendous glory.” (W Post, 21 July 74, C6)
The success of Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount solar experiment was more than a milestone in space exploration, Dr. John Eddy, solar physicist of the Boulder, Colo., High Altitude Observatory, said in a New Scientist article. This battery of the world’s most advanced telescopes lofted to the ideal observation site had clarified previous theoretical sketches of the vertical extent of the sun’s chromospheric structures. Spicules, which outlined the giant circulation cells of the chromosphere and extended through the transition region, disappeared at temperatures of 1 million K in the low corona, suggesting that the magnetic field lines diverged in the corona. First results from the atm x-ray observations destroyed the common concept of a homogeneous background corona, which had served as a basis of modern coronal physics, and revealed that the corona was composed almost entirely of closed loop structures fitting magnetic field lines calculated from observed photospheric fields. Reasons for the ATM success included the large-scale and highly sophisticated instruments, large data-storage capability, efficiency of instrument operation, operation of the six instruments in concert, extensive ground support, and astronaut interest and training. Program results would be shared by scientists in many countries and the program appeared a good investment, in scientific yield per dollar spent. (New Scientist, 21 March 74, 738-741)
Tass commentator Georgy Sergeyev commented on the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project: The success of Skylab and the first flight of Yuri A. Gagarin, the space walk of Aleksey A. Leonov, and the exploration of the moon by American astronauts, were only “milestones along the road of exploration of outer space.” ASTP would be another step. The joint Soviet-American mission had become possible, not only because of the efforts of scientists, but also because of the “conditions of a favorable political climate established in Soviet-American relations as a result of the fruitful . . . summit meetings.” The main task was to see that “these changes become irreversible.” astp would go a long way toward “making space exploration really internationalist.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 14 Feb 74, B6)
Johnson Space Center announced two personnel changes: Astronaut John W. Young, veteran of four space flights, had heen named Acting Chief of the Astronaut Office in the Flight Operations Directorate. He was replacing former Astronaut Office Chief Alan B. Shepard, Jr., who would serve as senior adviser to Young. Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart had heen named Director of User Affairs at NASA Hq., effective 1 May, replacing Albert T. Christensen, who would return to private industry. The User Affairs Office maintained close ties with users of NASA’s applications program and ensured a flow of information and that the programs were responsive to user needs. (JSC Releases 74-71; 74-72)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) praised the Skylab 4 astronauts (launched 16 Nov. 1973) on the eve of their splashdown after a record 84-day mission, concluding the Sylab program. On the floor of the precedented.” After damage to the Orbital Worshop during its 14 May House of Representatives Rep. Teague called the Skylab record “un-1973 launch, the three crews had repaired and altered the systems, exceeded their expected workloads, and returned vast amounts of useful information on earth rseources, solar phenomena, physical science, life sciences, and technology. The crews had spent 41 hrs in extravehicular activity and 171% days in earth orbit, demonstrating that man could live indefinitely and work productively in space. To date the U.S. manned space program had amassed 30 flights with some 21 850 hrs of active operation in space. “These programs— Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab—have made direct contributions to our daily lives as well as new scientific knowledge. . . . Skylab has amply demonstrated that space can be used for practical purposes.” (CR, 7 Feb 74, E533) _ _ _
Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974), announced he would leave the NASA astronaut corps 30 Nov. 1974. Dr. Gibson, a scientist-astronaut since 1965, would join Aerospace Corp. of Los Angeles as a senior staff scientist, specializing in the interpretation of solar data gathered during the 171 days of manned operation in the Skylab program. He had held primary responsibility for the 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount operation on Skylab 4, making extensive observations of solar processes, (jsc Release 74-246)
Intention to nominate Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as Administrator of the new Energy Research and Development Administration was announced by President Ford as part of a major reshuffling of key energy posts. Dr. Seamans—former nasa Deputy Administrator, Secretary of the Air Force, and President of the National Academy of Engineering— was reported by the press as selected over former NASA Administrator Thomas 0. Paine and two other candidates to head the new agency replacing the Atomic Energy Commission. Former astronaut and Atomic Energy Commissioner William A. Anders was to be nominated Chairman of the new Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the former aec Chairman, Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, to the new position of Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs. Dr. Seaman’s nomination was sent to the Senate 2 Dec. and confirmed 12 Dec. Anders’ and Dr. Ray’s were sent to the Senate 4 Dec.; Anders’ was confirmed 12 Dec. and Dr. Ray’s 13 Dec. (pd, 4 Nov 74, 1382-3; 9 Dec 74, 1546; CR, 4 Dec 74, S20620; 12 Dec 74, S21317; 13 Dec 74, S21497; O’Toole, W Post, 16 Oct 74, A10; 30 Oct 74, Al)
Construction of the $22-million runway for the space shuttle was begun at Kennedy Space Center after a brief ground-breaking ceremony at the construction site northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. Dr. Debus, KSC Director, said the shuttle would lead to a “new era of international transportation to and from space” and the “boom and bust of the 1960s of this community and the activities of the government will be changed to a more steady—more reliable—situation.” The 90-m wide, 4600-m long, 40-cm thick runway would accommodate a 75 000-kg spacecraft returning from space at a 15° to 20° angle and at a speed of nearly 295 km per hr. More than 8000 km of grooves in the surface would permit drainage and prevent hydroplaning while " landing in the rain. To reduce the speed of the returning shuttle, astronauts would have the help of brakes, parachutes, and a net at the end of the runway. The runway was scheduled for July 1976 completion. (Spaceport News, 4 April 74, 1, 5; McElheny, NYT, 2 April 74, 22)
With the 8 Feb. splashdown of the Skylab 4 astronauts, 1816 employees at Kennedy Space Center saw their jobs come to an end, the Baltimore Sun reported. The Sun quoted a NASA spokesman as saying that by 30 June the contractor and Civil Service work force at ksc would be 9450. The latest group to be laid off included mostly contract employees for Boeing Co., General Electric Co., and International Business Machines, Inc. (AP, B Sun, 12 Feb 74, A9)
The U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating the Skylab program on the first anniversary of the launching of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. The yellow, red, blue, and black stamp depicted the Workshop and Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin as they worked in space to repair the spacecraft, which had been damaged during launch. (Tower, NYT, 28 April 1974, 30)
President Nixon wired salutations to Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue aboard the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans after their successful splashdown at 11:17 am edt. The astronauts, launched 16 Nov. 1973, had set an 84-day space flight record in the Orbital Workshop. The President said: “On behalf of the American people, I salute Skylab’s third crew of astronauts on their safe return to earth. They have successfully completed man’s longest space journey and brought to an end one of the most scientifically productive endeavors in the history of human exploration. From the Skylab program, we have learned that we can live and work in space for long periods of time. And we have found that the results of these efforts can be of enormous practical value to life on earth. “Skylab now joins the ranks of the Santa Maria, the H.M.S. Beagle, the Spirit of St. Louis, and the Eagle. Each of these great vehicles has carried us beyond the contemporary limits of human knowledge into a new comprehension of our own possibilities and a new definition of our own destiny. We welcome the men of Skylab home, and we salute them and all their predecessors who have launched us on this great adventure.” {PD, 11 Feb 74,193; A&A 1973) .
President Nixon was briefed on the space shuttle and the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at Johnson Space Center. Following a tour, the President and Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented the Sky lab 4 astronauts with NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal. Nixon praised the efforts of the “great American scientific, mechanical, and clerical communities” for their contributions to the space program. “You have contributed to . . . the spirit of a great country, which means always look out toward the unknown, go there, take any risk, make any sacrifice, and never be discouraged because sometimes you may fail.” Of the astp, President Nixon said that although systems of government were different, the U.S. wanted “to cooperate with the Russian people and with all the people on the earth in anything that will advance the cause of science, the cause of health, the cause of a better life foT all our children, as well, of course, as the cause of peace.” (jsc Roundup, 29 March 74,1; PD, 25 March 74,345-347)
A New York Times editorial noted that the 8 Feb. safe return of the Skylab 4 astronauts “was considered so certain that the television networks had decided well in advance not to broadcast the splashdown.” It “really was a public tribute to the high technical achievements of the Skylab program and of previous manned American space projects.” With Skylab’s record and dividends, “the case for a permanent manned station in space can now be regarded as proved.” (NYT, 10 Feb 74)
In a Skylab awards ceremony at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented Group Achievement Awards to the Skylab Program Offices at msFc, Kennedy Space Center, Johnson Space Center, and NASA Hq. and to special Skylab teams. Dr. Robert A. Parker, NASA astronaut and Skylab program scientist at JSC, received an Outstanding Leadership Medal. Dr. Fletcher also presented 28 individual Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medals to principal investigators for Skylab experiments and to Comet Kohoutek scientific investigators, (msfc Release 74-227; Marshall Star, 27 Nov 74) Questioned about a newspaper article saying the Viking lander might sink deep into Martian surface dust, Dr. Petrone said that tests mentioned in the article had been made some years earlier, not “two weeks ago” as reported. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified that the lander’s footpad area had been increased since the earlier tests and that radar observations had indicated the proposed landing sites for the first mission appeared “well within the capability” of the lander. Sites for the second mission were still being studied. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 20 Nov 74, A3) 22 November-6 January 1975: NASA launched Skynet IIB, a U.K. military communications satellite, for the U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Office as agents for the U.K. Ministry of Defense. The satellite was launched on a three-stage Thor-Delta launch vehicle from Eastern Test Range at 7:28 pm est into an orbit with a 36 965-km apogee, 185km perigee, and 24.6° inclination. The apogee kick motor, fired at 8:10 pm est on 24 Nov., circularized the orbit with an apogee of 36 595 km, perigee of 35 896 km, period of 24 hrs 19.4 min, and inclination of 2.2°. The spacecraft then drifted to its geosynchronous station at 50° E longitude over the Indian Ocean. NASA adjudged the launch a success 6 Jan. 1975. The first-generation Skynet A and B had been developed for the U.K. in the usaf’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) and launched by NASA 21 Nov. 1969 and 18 Aug. 1970. Skynet IIA failed to achieve a satisfactory orbit when launched 18 Jan. 1974 and reentered 25 Jan. The launch of Skynet I IB had been delayed from 19 Nov. by a defective component in the Delta 2nd-stage attitude control system. (nasa mors, 7 Nov, 5 Dec 74; 6 Jan 75; gsfc Wkly SSR, 21-26 Nov 74; NASA Release 74-303; AP, W Post, 12 Nov 74, C5)
Medical tests of Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—begun after their 8 Feb. splashdown—continued on board the U.S.S. New Orleans. All three astronauts reached their maximum preflight work rates on the bicycle ergometer. Each astronaut completed the full run on a whirling chair, reaching a rate of 30 rpm while making 150 head movements with no problems. A test of muscle function showed no significant decrease. As soon as the men had landed, the pull of gravity had compressed the vertebrae of their spinal columns, removing the inch or more of height gained in weightlessness. Carr had gained slightly in weight; Pogue had lost one kilogram and Dr. Gibson a little more than two. (McElheny, NYT, 11 Feb 74, 7)
Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight in NASA’s FY 1975 authorization hearings on early results from Skylab’s earth resources data. Perhaps the most interesting so far was the unconfirmed indication of mineral deposits near Ely, Nev. The Skylab earth resources experiment package had also identified several areas of citrus fruit fly infestation on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande, demonstrated the use of remote sensing for snow mapping, identified new urbanization patterns in Phoenix, Ariz., and inventoried vegetation patterns in California test sites. A Baltimore-Washington area photo and similar imagery for 12 other cities were being used by the Dept, of Interior to test their use for updating the 1970 census. Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, astronaut on the 25 May-22 June 1973 mission to man the Orbital Workshop, testified that Skylab astronauts were healthy, happy, and not under significant stress during their long flights. After initial decreased appetite, an astronaut had a feeling of well-being with normal thirst and appetite, although he had a continued feeling of fullness in the head and tended to assume a peculiar posture with neck extended and moving backwards and elbows, hips, and knees flexed at 20° to 30°. He tended to become sleepy and required frequent exercise to restore vigor and alertness. His voice had a peculiar nasal quality. After the third day he was virtually immune to motion sickness.. Without gravity, there was no automatic sensation of up and down and without vision he could quickly get lost. Dr. Harry C. Gatos, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist and Skylab materials processing investigator, testified Skylab experiments had shown that segments of crystals partially regrown in space exhibited none of the inhomogeneities from dopants (electronically active chemical elements) that characterized earth-grown crystals and inhibited their efficiency. In addition to preparation of special materials for electronic and medical uses, materials processing studies in space would provide an understanding of the structures of materials and permit preparation of materials to perform closer to their theoretical limits. Crystal-growing technology was developing new means to create and store power and could, within five years, provide a practical economic basis for using solar power. (Transcript)
The International Aeronautical Federation held its 25th Congress in Amsterdam with the theme “Space Stations, Present and Future.” Among speakers, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, U.S. and Soviet commanders in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, stressed how well joint work and understanding had advanced. A paper by Daniel J. Shramo of Lewis Research Center, with B. R. Foushee and P. J. O’Leary of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., described the Centaur primary upper stage for solar system exploration and its potential adaptation as an upper stage for the space shuttle. A Ukranian Academy of Sciences research team reported on experiments in the formation of melts in weightlessness with radiant heating and on prospects of using solar energy for space engineering. Comparative studies of metal solidification had suggested that a more uniform distribution of short-grained structures under weightlessness might become the basis of space technology, with the added attraction of using the sun as an energy source. The team had built a prototype solar plant that could be mounted on a spacecraft or used in a vacuum chamber on the earth. Soviet medical investigations during the flights of Soyuz 12 (launched 27 Sept. 1973), Soyuz 13 (18 Dec. 1973), and Soyuz 14 (3 July) were reported by Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko and others. Findings indicated that prolonged exercises, full and partial spacesuits, and gravity-simulating fittings had reduced effects of weightlessness during the space flight and after the crew’s return. Although reports of initial adaptation symptoms were similar to American findings, the Soviet paper also noted that cosmonauts had reduced vestibular symptoms by deliberately slowing down movements, especially head movements. Prof. Hilding A. Bjurstedt, Head of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, received the 1974 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for studies of physiological responses to environmental stress. Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, was elected iaf President (iaa Ann Rpt, 28 Aug 74; Parks, SF, Feb 75, 42-50; Program, 25th iaf Congress; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74, 21) During September: Large-scale verification tests of the “rectenna” receiving system for microwave energy transmission were run at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA. A microwave energy transmission system was being developed to determine the possibility of transmitting energy through space. The tests established a new record for microwave power transmission, delivering one kilowatt over a 1.6-km range. The 10-yr program had increased DC-to-DC efficiency of transmissions from 17% to 50% and efficiency of the rectenna in converting radio frequency to dc from 25% to 78%. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 15 Oct 74, 57-60)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue (launched 16 Nov. 1973 in the final mission to crew the Orbital Workshop) set a new record for the longest manned ' flight time in space, completing 59 days 11 hrs 9 min at 10:10 pm edt and surpassing the time set by Skylab 3 on its 28 July-25 Sept. 1973 mission. Skylab 4 had been given a go-ahead 10 Jan. for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a planned 84-day mission. (A&A 73)
Analyses of light flashes seen by crew members of the last Apollo missions, tentatively attributed to cosmic ray nuclei penetrating the head and eyes, were reported by Univ. of Houston and Johnson Space Center scientists in Science magazine. Three kinds of flashes—the spot or star-like flash, the streak, and the cloud—had occurred randomly, with no apparent preference for one eye over the other. Astronauts saw many more flashes during translunar coast experiment sessions than in transearth coast, although the cosmic ray flux appeared to be the same inside the spacecraft during both coasts. No physiological explanation was found for this difference in frequency of flashes. (Pinsky, et al., Science, 8 March 74, 957-958)
The U.S.S.R. cosmonaut corps was being built up at same time the U.S. astronaut force was dwindling, a Miami Herald article said. The Herald quoted Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, who had visited the U.S.S.R. during training for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, as saying : “Star City (where most of the cosmonauts live and train) looks like a boom town. There’s no doubt the Soviets have a vigorous ongoing manned space effort planned for the next five or six years.” He said that the number of buildings in Star City had tripled in the previous two years, with more under construction. The total of 75 to 80 cosmonauts was a sharp increase over the estimated 55 of five years ago. In contrast the U.S. astronaut corps had fallen to 34 from a peak of 60 during the Apollo program, with only three training for a flight. Stafford said he did not believe the U.S.S.R. had any new spacecraft under development hut rather planned for the continued use of the Soyuz as a workhorse. (M Her, 21 Aug 74)
“No other person who has flown in space has captured the experience so vividly,” Henry S. F. Cooper said in a review of Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut’s Journeys by Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins. Although the book was “long and rambling,” touching a great many bases in Collins’ career from Air Force test pilot through Gemini 10 and Apollo, “it is something new under the sun to find an astronaut who isn’t afraid to express his feelings.” Collins was best at single impressions, . “little snapshots,” still sharp and clear five years after the lunar landing. Two days out on the mission, “ ‘The moon I have known all my life, that two-dimensional, small yellow disk in the sky, has gone somewhere to be replaced by the most awesome sphere I have ever seen. . . . This cool, magnificent sphere hangs there ominously, a formidable presence without sound or motion, issuing us no invitation to invade its domain.’ ” Collins had cast off the “diffidence astronauts normally wear like spacesuits to protect themselves from prying earthlings. ... ‘I have been places and done things you simply would not believe. I have dangled from a cord a hundred miles up; I have seen the earth eclipsed by the moon, and enjoyed it. I have seen the sun’s true light, unfiltered by any planet’s atmosphere. I have seen the ultimate black of infinity in a stillness undisturbed by any living thing. ... I do have this secret, this precious thing that I will always carry with me.’ ” (NYT Booh Review, 11 Aug 74,1)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue had experienced a harrowing last hour in space when they could not get commands to the secondary control system, which pointed the spacecraft heat shield at the correct angle during reentry. After discovering a leak in the prime reaction control system, the astronauts tried and failed to activate the secondary system. “Our hearts fell and our eyeballs popped,” Carr said at a 22 Feb. Johnson Space Center press conference. Carr, commander of the mission, instead had used a manual procedure to bypass the computer controlling the engine’s firing and guided the spacecraft to a safe on-target splashdown. The press later quoted a NASA spokesman as saying that the failure to activate the backup control system was “just a matter of a switch not being thrown.” (O’Toole, W Post, 15 Feb 74, Al; upi, Richmond Times-Dispatch, 16 Feb 74; Maloney, H Post, 23 Feb 74)
A Federal grand jury had charged Charles R. Riser of Maryland with mail fraud in setting up Andromeda Space Covers, a mail-order firm selling fake space exploration items, the Baltimore Sun reported. Fifteen persons had paid for golf balls driven across the moon by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., during the January 1971 Apollo 14 mission, but he had used only two balls and these were still on the moon. The assistant U.S. attorney on the case said that astronauts might be called to state whether signatures on other souvenirs were authentic. (Erlandson, B Sun, 14 Sept 74, B20)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, launched 16 Nov. 1973, discussed their changed attitudes during an inflight press conference held on their 48th day aboard the Orbital Workshop. Science Pilot Gibson said that from space “you see the Earth as one unit, you see the Sun as a star, and you can see all the other stars out there . . . and just the number ,of possible combinations . . . which could create life, . . . makes [life elsewhere in the universe] seem very much more likely.” Pogue said that the mission had had a great spiritual impact on him. “At the beginning of the mission, I tried to operate like a machine. . . . Now I’m trying to operate as a human being within the limitations I possess.” Now he would “feel much more inclined toward humanistic feeling toward other people.” (Transcript)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first U.S. man in space and the fifth man to walk on the moon, announced his retirement from NASA and the Navy effective 1 Aug. During his 5 May 1961, 14.8-min Mercury -Redstone 2 mission, Shepard flew his Freedom. 7 spacecraft to a 186.2-km altitude and initiated the U.S. manned space program. He commanded the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission 31 Jan.—9 Feb. 1971. Shepard would join the Marathon Construction Co. of Houston, Tex., as a partner and Chairman, (nasa Release 74-203; A&A 1961)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Fraudulent transmissions to Johnson Space Center purporting to be from Skylab 4 astronauts, working in the Orbital Workshop since their 16 Nov. 1973 launch, were heard during a telephone call to New York City from Unifi, Inc., in North Carolina. The supposed astronauts described “an approximately 10-megaton explosion” on the spacecraft as they took military photos of silos over Moscow. After the “astronauts” said they were sending scrambled messages “on channel 5 and channel B,” they were heard supposedly speaking to President Nixon at the White House. They acknowledged that their wives had been notified and were being flown to Houston. The voices then reported that their “secret documents and equipment” had been jettisoned. The transmissions then abruptly ended. The press later reported that 12 other persons had heard similar “space messages.” A Houston area telephone company employee was later'taken into custody. (Anderson et al., W Post, 19 Feb 74, B17; jsc Hist Off, interview, 9 Dec 75)
Johnson Space Center announced award of a 12-mo, $300 000 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. Denver Div. to study technical and operational concepts for manned and automated assembly of space systems from the space shuttle orbiter. Martin was asked to consider use of manipulative devices, an astronaut maneuvering unit, and simple docking systems, (jsc Release 74-251) _ _
The European Space Research Organization decided to award a $226million, six-year contract to vfw—Fokker/ERNo Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor heading a European team to design and develop Spacelab, the reusable, manned laboratory to be carried into orbit on NASA’s space shuttle in the 1980s. The unanimous decision, made at a Paris meeting of esro’s Administrative and Finance Committee, followed six weeks’ evaluation of two industrial proposals. The second proposal had been submitted by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm. The contract provided for delivery of one Spacelab flight unit, fully qualified and ready for installation of experiments, by April 1979. Two engineering models and three sets of ground support equipment and initial spares would also be delivered. Spacelab, to be reusable for 50 missions of 7 to 30 days each, would permit scientists and engineers to work in earth orbit in shirtsleeve comfort and without extensive astronaut training. The first launch was scheduled for 1980. (esro Release, 5 June 74)
The first prototype B-l intercontinental strategic bomber was unveiled at Palmdale, Calif., by the Air Force and Rockwell International Corp. Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger told on-lookers that the new aircraft was needed to complement the U.S. arsenal of land-based and submarine-based missiles. Although smaller and lighter than the B-52 it was meant to replace, the B-l could fly farther and faster, carry almost twice the payload, and use a shorter runway. Powered by four 133.4-kilonewton-thrust (30 000-lb) turbofan engines and lifted by variable geometry, or “swing” wings, the bomber could fly efficiently at speeds in excess of mach 2. The projected cost of production models— $76.4 million each—made the future of the aircraft controversial and uncertain, (dod Release 505-74; Getler, W Post, 27 Oct 74, A6; Wright, NYT, 27 Oct 74,43) 26 October—4 November: An agreement for NASA to submit life sciences experiments for flight aboard the next available Soviet biological satellite was negotiated during the fifth joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine in Tashkent, U.S.S.R. The first U.S. experiments would be passive specimen modules, completely autonomous from spacecraft power, life support, and data-recording systems, and would require no operational commands from the ground during flight. NASA would prepare descriptions of the proposed experiments in December and deliver flight hardware by 15 Aug. 1975. U.S. investigators would also participate in pre- and postflight studies of blood and tissue samples from animals flown aboard the next Soviet biological satellite. The protocol was confirmed by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences 4 Dec. Representatives also discussed preparations for the joint July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission; exchanged results from Apollo, Skylab, Cosmos, Salyut, and Soyuz programs; and discussed pre- and postflight examinations, vestibular training, and crew reaction to flight. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 16 Dec 74, 42-3; NASA Release 74-237; NASA Int Aff, interview, 17 Oct 75; Moscow Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, BIO; 8 Nov 74, U1) 27 October-2 November: The 67th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) convened in Sidney, Australia. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was presented the 1973 fai Gold Space Medal for his role as Skylab 2 commander, and Astronaut Alan L. Bean was presented the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for his role as Skylab 3 mission commander. Both men also received the De la Vaulx Medal for their successive space duration records. (naa News. Oct 74, Dec 74,1) 28 October-9 November: Luna 23, second Soviet lunar mission of 1974, was launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tvuratam into a parking orbit with 246-km apogee, 183-km perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.5° inclination, where the “automatic station” was separated and launched on a near-to-planned trajectory to the moon. After a 31 Oct. flight path correction, the spacecraft on 2 Nov. entered a, lunar orbit with 104-km apogee, 94-km perigee, 117-min period, and 138° inclination. On 4 and 5 Nov. the orbit was changed to 105-km apogee and 17-km perigee. The spacecraft landed in the southern part of the moon’s Sea of Crisis 6 Nov., but rugged terrain damaged a device designed to take rock samples from a 2.5-m depth. The planned drilling and collection of lunar soil had to be abandoned for a reduced equipment-testing program. Work with the station was discontinued 9 Nov. (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, Ul-2; 10 Nov 74, Ul; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4 Nov 74, Ul; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74, 13; SF, April 75,152) _
Former Mercury astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., the first American to orbit the earth, was elected U.S. Senator from Ohio by a wide margin over his Republican opponent, Ralph J. Perk. Glenn had withdrawn from a 1964 senatorial bid after a fall affected his inner ear. In 1970 he lost the Democratic primary to Howard M. Metzenbaum, who in turn lost the general election to Robert Taft, Jr. Metzenbaum, appointed to fill the vacated seat of William B. Saxhe in September 1973, lost to Glenn in the 1974 Democratic primary. (Farrell, NYT, 6 Nov 74, 37)
NASA announced selection of 39 scientists to provide experiments for the 1978 Pioneer twin missions to Venus. The selection, made from 162 scientists who had submitted proposals to NASA, included one scientist each from Germany and France. The scientists would participate in a detailed study of the planet, including composition, structure, and radiation field of its atmosphere; nature of the clouds; and magnetic and radiation environment of the planet, (nasa Release 74-155) 24 June—12 July: Eight U.S. astronauts—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, Donald K. Slayton, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, Jack R. Lousma, Robert F. Overmyer, and Karol J. Bobko—took part in training in Star City, near Moscow, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. A ninth, Eugene A. Cernan, took part in the first two weeks of training, representing the Johnson Space Center Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. In addition to studying Soyuz spacecraft systems, the astronauts trained with the Soviet flight crews in simulators and mockups. They also continued planning procedures and checklists for the joint mission, (jsc Release 74-121; JSC Roundup, 30 Aug 74) 25 June-19 July: The Salyut 3 research station and—nine days later—the Soyuz 14 spacecraft carrying a two-man crew were launched into nearearth orbit to establish a U.S.S.R. manned orbital workshop. Salyut 3 was launched at 4:55 am local time 25 June (7:55 pm EOT 24 June) from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with 252-km apogee, 213-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to improve the station’s design, onboard systems, and equipment and to perform scientific research during space flight. By 30 June Salyut 3, which consisted of two cylinders more than 21 m in length and weighing some 18 500 kg, had been raised to a near-circular orbit with a 268-km apogee and 265-km perigee. Soyuz 14 was launched 3 July at 11:51 pm local time (2:51 pm EDT) from Baykonur Cosmodrome carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich, commander and veteran of the 12 Aug. 1962 Vostok 4 mission, and Yuri P. Artyukhin, flight engineer, to rendezvous with Salyut 3. The launch was seen by Soviet citizens by delayed broadcast on Moscow TV. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 338-km apogee, 201-km perigee, 89.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said during a 4 July Tass interview that the main objectives of the mission were “testing methods and systems of controlling the craft, improvement in the life-sustaining complex, [and] exploration of new possibilities of using both separate craft and groups of space objects to accomplish scientific and applied tasks in a nearearth orbit.” Tass also reported that a 4 July trajectory correction placed the spacecraft in an orbit with a 277-km apogee, 255-km perigee, 89.7min period, and 51.6° inclination. All spacecraft systems were successfully checked out and the crew was reported to be in good health. The Soyuz 14 cosmonauts rendezvoused and docked with Scdyut 3 on 5 July during their 17th orbit, successfully demonstrating techniques the Soviets would use during the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project maneuvers. After docking, Popovich and Artyukhin checked the station’s onboard systems and microclimate and entered the 99-cu-m three-room laboratory. During their 15-day mission the cosmonauts studied geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, atmospheric formations and phenomena, physical characteristics of outer space, and manufacturing techniques, as well as testing the Salyut space station’s improved design and solar-panel energy system. The crew also studied the influences of space on the human organism and exercised to prevent loss of muscle tone, using an onboard comprehensive trainer to simulate running, jumping, and weight lifting. . Tass reported 15 July that some Soviet scientists considered terminating the mission because unexpected, intense solar flares 4-8 July dramatically increased the radiation exposure. However, because the flares subsided and the space station’s orbit prevented excessive exposure, the crew’s work was not disrupted. While the cosmonauts worked in space, two Soviet researchers lived in a duplicate station on the ground, simultaneously performing the same work. All commands relayed to the orbiting Salyut 3 were first checked on the ground and alternate versions of decisions for unforeseen situations were calculated. On 8 July the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew, in training at Star City for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, telegraphed congratulations to the Salyut 3 cosmonauts on their “great success.” They said they looked forward to meeting the two after their “happy return.” By 18 July the crew completed most experiments and began transferring equipment to Soyuz 14. After checking out spacecraft systems, the cosmonauts undocked 19 July. Retrorockets were fired, parachutes deployed, and Soyuz 14 softlanded at 5:21 pm Baykonur time (8:21 am edt) 140 km southeast of Dzhezkazgan 2000 m from the planned target after 15 days 17 hours 30 min in space. The crew left the spacecraft unaided, and on-the-spot medical checks showed the cosmonauts’ health was “good.” All mission tests were reported completed. For the first time, a U.S.S.R. orbital mission had been in touch with mission control continuously because of maritime tracking. Salyut 3 was the third space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew on Soyuz 10 docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. A second crew, launched 6 June 1971 aboard Soyuz 11, entered the orbiting station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days. The three died during reentry when an open valve evacuated air from the spacecraft. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973 but apparently an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 20-26 June, 3—10 July 74; gsfc SSR, 30 June, 31 Aug 74; Tass, FBis-Sov, 25 June-23 July 74; UPl, W Star-News, 14 July 74; Browne, NYT, 9, 20 July 74; SBD, 9, 27 July 74; A&A 1973)
Evidence revealed during U.S.—U.S.S.R. planning for the joint 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had indicated the Soviet Union was never in the race to the moon, the Associated Press reported. U.S. officials had learned the Soyuz capsule was designed for relatively brief earth orbital flights and for ferrying cosmonauts to and from a space station, but it could not make a journey to the moon. AP quoted Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, a member of the astp planning team, as saying, “Our Apollo spacecraft is far, far more sophisticated and has got a greater capability than their Soyuz. That doesn’t say the Soyuz is no good. It was just built for a different job.” In addition, Soyuz was designed to be controlled from the ground or by preautomated devices. “Their spacecraft ... is designed around a philosophy that it doesn’t need a man to fly.” Cernan said that the U.S.S.R. “had no major over-all goal like landing on the moon. Their goals were all to be first. Get the first iron ball in orbit. Get the first man there . . . the first woman . . . the first multiman spacecraft.” By proceeding in this way, politically they “gained some significant firsts.” (Benedict, H Chron, 7 June 74)
The Navy had selected International Business Machines Corp. Electronic Systems Center as prime contractor for the light airborne multipurpose system (lamps) helicopter, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Under a $13.8-million contract, IBM would develop and test a prototype antisubmarine warfare and avionics and weapon control system for installation and integration in a helicopter furnished by the Navy. (Av Wk, 8 April 74,24) 8 April-3 May: Some 75 Soviet aerospace specialists—including U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev, prime crewmen Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, Flight Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and training officer for astp crews Valery F. Bykovsky—joined U.S. astp astronauts and specialists at Johnson Space Center to continue technical discussions and planning for the July 1975 joint astp mission. Agreement was reached that specialists and flight crews would visit the U.S. launch site in February 1975 and the U.S.S.R. launch site in May 1975, for familiarization with the spacecraft and to test compatible equipment. NASA had defined no technical need for U.S. representatives at the Soviet launch site during actual liftoff; U.S. specialists would be in the control center. Apollo docking module and Soyuz life-support-system tests were reviewed, in addition to safety assessment reports on control systems and spacecraft manufacturing test and checkout. Schedules for each of the five joint experiments—ultraviolet absorption, biological interaction, microbial exchange, multipurpose furnace, and artificial solar eclipse— were approved. Agreement was also reached on the basic approach and content of the joint flight readiness review, to be held in May 1975. The U.S.S.R. crew and U.S. astp Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton walked through hundreds of procedures for the first time as crews, to verify the integrity of the docking module that would connect the Soyuz and Apollo command and service modules. At a 26 April press conference Stafford demonstrated his proficiency in the Russian language by answering newsmen’s questions in Russian. Cosmonauts and astronauts agreed that “we’ve no problem in language.” One cosmonaut said, “Our work is considerably better when the American crew speaks Russian and our crew speaks English.” Glynn S. Lunney, astp Technical Director for the U.S., said during a 3 May press briefing that the work in the U.S. and jointly was on schedule. The progress “has been good and . . . gratifying.” Prof. Bushuyev said that “there can be no longer any doubt that we will be successful in preparing for and achieving our joint flight in July 1975.” (jsc Roundup, 12 April 74, 1; astp Communique; Press briefing transcripts, 26 April 74, 3 May 74)
Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Jack R. Lousma, launched
George Cunningham, paralyzed from the neck down in a high school football game, was the first quadriplegic to use a device developed for astronauts disabled in space, the Baltimore Sun reported. He could place a telephone call, control a radio or TV, open the curtains in his hospital room, or call the nurses’ station by blowing into a tube. The device, Nu-Life, made up of two tiny video display screens and a miniature computer, was operated by inhaling and exhaling into a plastic tube or controlled by eye rotation, a turn of the head, or a touch of the tongue. (AP, B Sun, 21 March 74, A3) 23 March-5 April: NASA’s Mariner 10, launched 3 Nov. 1973, became the first spacecraft to explore Mercury, during a 12-day flyby of the planet— returning some 1700 TV photos and much new information on its atmosphere, surface, mass, and shape. The incoming encounter sequence began 23 March at 5 600 000 km from Mercury, transmitting the clearest photos yet taken of the tiny planet. Although most of the photos were recorded on tape before transmission, real-time photos with reduced resolution were sent to analyze the reflective properties of Mercury at different lighting angles. By 28 March photos were showing the-planet to he heavily cratered like the moon. During the incoming near-encounter, from 17 to 3% hrs before encounter, 18 frames were transmitted. Mosaics were made for locating smaller areas photographed later at higher resolutions. Spacecraft instruments identified an extremely thin atmosphere surrounding the planet, containing helium at concentrations above lunar levels and small amounts of neon, argon, and possibly zenon. Mariner 10 passed within 704 km of Mercury at 4:47 pm edt 29 March, within 56 km of the aim point. Data were transmitted without interruption over the 150 000 000-km distance until earth occultation began at 4:50 pm edt. Radio signals were recovered following the 12min occultation. Photos of the planet—described by scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory as “superb”—showed details less than 1.6 km in size and covered almost half the planet’s surface, which was pocked with craters as deep as 32 km and between 8 and 160 km wide. Giant cracks in the surface suggested high heat beneath. Some ancient volcanic activity was seen in a few rille-like ravines that crossed the craters and domelike hills. Absence of halo craters indicated young craters probably had been covered by the dust storms that constantly swept the planet. At a jpl press briefing following the encounter, Dr. James C. Fletcher said onboard instruments showed that Mercury had an unexpected magnetic field, estimated to be 1 % that of the earth. The magnetic field was measured at 90 to 100 gammas at the spacecraft’s closest approach, with an extrapolated value at the surface of 100 to 200 gammas. As Mariner 10 raced by Mercury on 30 March, photos of the morning side of the planet showed a much smoother region than the rugged area seen under the afternoon sun. The north pole region appeared much less pitted and flatter than the south pole. Instruments found that Mercury was two-thirds iron, making its density greater than previously believed and probably responsible for the unexpected magnetic field. Concentrations of uranium and thorium were comparable to those on the earth. Preliminary results, presented at a 31 March press conference at jpl, included a Mercury mass measurement 100 times better than previous ones, a detached well-defined bow shock wave, a temperature varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side (— 300°F to 800°F) with no thermal anomalies detected, opaque surface soil with the top few centimeters 1.0 to 1.5 times as dense as water and 50% as porous, and high-energy electrons in the mev range observed from 700 to 5000 km above the surface. An ultraviolet scanner had detected what appeared to be an egg-shaped moon moving in orbit around Mercury, but the Mariner navigational team later identified the object as a dim but very hot star, known as 31 Crater in the constellation Corvus. Despite a power anomaly, Mariner 10 continued to transmit TV pictures in real-time at 117.6 kilobits per sec and tape-recorded frames at 22.05 kbps. TV imagery was discontinued 5 April when the resolution became equal to that of earth-based telescopes. All mission events were accomplished as planned and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. The spacecraft was expected to swing back by Mercury in September, (nasa mor, 24 April 74; jpl Press Kit, 19 March 74; NYT, 24 March 74, 30 March—1 April.74; W Post, 29 March—1 April 74; W Star-News, 28 March 74; LA Times, 20 March-1 April 74)
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., defeated Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum in the Ohio Democratic primary in his third try for nomination to the U.S. Senate. Glenn’s first try for a Senate seat in 1964 had ended when injuries from a fall forced him out of the primary. In 1970 Metzenbaum defeated Glenn, in the primary. Glenn became the first U.S. astronaut to orbit the earth 20 Feb. 1962. (Farrell, NYT, 9 May 74, 2: A&A 1964; Hope, W Star, 6 May 70, Al)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Apollo 17 astronaut and now Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator for Energy Research and Development, testified in Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on FY 1975 authorizations: One of the most important contributions NASA could make to energy research and development was the application of managerial techniques developed in the space program, permitting programs, schedules, and budgets to be defined and then adhered to without major degradation of the original goals. “This mission-oriented approach to research and development and its broad integration of the great capabilities and imagination of industry will... be applied just as successfully to the critical problems that face the Nation and the world in energy.” (Transcript)
The first Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), placed on the moon by Apollo 12 astronauts in November 1969, had far exceeded its one-year life expectancy and was still functioning, along with instruments in alsep packages from Apollo 14 through 17, nasa announced. From alsep magnetometers, Dr. Palmer Dyal, Ames Research Center lunar investigator, had calculated that the moon had a magnetic field 1000 times weaker than the earth’s, with an iron content about 9% by weight, in contrast to the earth’s 30%. The heat flow measured by alsep instruments was half the earth’s, indicating differentiation and upward concentrations of radioactivity early in the moon’s history. Seismometers had uncovered a new class of moonquakes originating at depths of 100 km or less below the lunar surface. Dr. M. Nafi Toksoz of Massachusetts Institute of Technology earlier had reported that preliminary information indicated the moon had a small core less than 800 km across, lying inside a molten shell 600-1000 km down from the surface, where deep moonquakes had been detected. Seismic, magnetic, and heat-flow data had also suggested that the moon was further along than the earth in its evolutionary history, (nasa Release 74-313; NASA prog off, interview, 17 Nov 75; McElheny, NYT, 18 Nov 74)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue briefed members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the Skylab program: Carr said that, in space, material samples such as paper, teflon, nylon, and neoprene-covered nylon were self-extinguishing when ignited, because of a lack of convection. Polyurethane, however, burned “like something soaked in gasoline. ... I am very certain that we will never ever see polyurethane foam in a spacecraft.” Dr. Gibson said that a leg muscle problem that had hindered previous Skylab crews in their ability to walk and run upon return to earth had been solved by a very crude treadmill device used to simulate walking and running. “We worked at it every day, and the condition we came back in was good testimony to the utility of that device.” Pogue narrated a dramatic presentation of slides taken from the Skylab Workshop—of mountainsides eroded by stripmining, forests denuded by the clearcutting of timber, cities obscured By smog, and rivers and lakes muddied by pollution and silt. He said that the astronauts had been constantly amazed how clearly such effects could be seen from their perch in space. “It has an emotional feedback.” Carr said that it had become “very, very clear . . . that we don’t have a whole lot of places to live comfortably on this Earth and we must take care of it.” Dr. Gibson said that the crew would like to see future missions make more use of man’s capability to use his own judgment in data collection. “We would like to see instruments with high-data capability which could be pointed and selectively operated.” Carr said that, “if you are going to use man in space, he is going to be happy if he can use his own judgment and ... is productive. If he is nothing but a switch twiddler working against the clock, he is going to become very bored, and he is going to have psychological problems.” (Transcript)
The Apollo 16 command module (launched 16 April 1972) went on public display at the Alabama Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The CM, called Casper, had carried Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and John W. Young to the moon and back during the fifth successful lunar landing mission. (Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 1)
NASA authorized two flight kits for Apollo-Soyuz astronauts: an official flight kit, containing selective items for memorabilia, and an astronaut preference kit, containing 20 personal items selected individually. Special flight items having particular significance for the mission would be suggested by the Director, Johnson Space Center, and approved by the Administrator. (NASA nmi 8020.19B)
Dr. Robert A. R. Parker, scientist-astronaut and program scientist for the Skylab mission, had been named Chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, Johnson Space Center announced. Dr. Parker succeeded Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, who had been named Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs at NASA Hq. in May. The s&ad would serve as an interface between eventual space shuttle payload users and nasa and participate in the shuttle flight research program. Dr. Parker had been named a nasa scientist-astronaut in 1967 and had been a member of the support crews for the Apollo 15 and 17 missions. (JSC Release 74-186)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, who splashed down 8 Feb. after 84 days aboard the Orbital Workshop, completed a third day of post-splashdown tests before a brief welcoming ceremony at dockside in San Diego, Calif. The astronauts then flew to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., for a reunion with their families. Medical tests would continue throughout the week and the three men would continue to eat the precisely controlled diet begun three weeks before their 16 Nov. 1973 launch. (McElheny, NYT, 11 Feb 74,7)
Three Intelsat IV communications satellites transmitted the Muhammad Ali-Joe. Frazier boxing match in New York City to 17 countries. The three-hour match, won by Ali by a decision, was transmitted to Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nicaragua, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Thailand, United Kingdom, Venezuela, and Zaire. (ComSatCorp Release 74-6; W Star-News Library) 28 January-1 February: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 10th Annual Meeting and Technical Display 28—30 Jan. and 12th Aerospace Sciences Meeting 30 Jan.-l Feb. in Washington, D.C. “Spaceship Earth—A New Perspective” was the theme of the meeting, chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President of Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning. At the honors banquet 30 Jan. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for 1973 for scientific, engineering, and organizational contributions to manned and unmanned space missions, beginning with the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958. Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Space Physics Branch, was given the aiaa Space Science Award for 1973 for his leading role in the Pioneer missions and his contribution to man’s understanding of interplanetary space. The Goddard Award was shared by Paul D. Castenholtz, Rockwell International Corp.; Richard C. Mulready, United Aircraft Corp.; and John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology—for significant contributions to the development of the practical liquid oxygen and hydrogen rocket engine. Winner of the aiaa History Manuscript Award for 1973 was Dr. William M. Leary, Jr., Univ. of Georgia historian, for “The Dragon’s Wings: The China National Aviation Corporation and the Development of Commercial Aviation in China.” Carroll H. Woodling, Chief of Johnson Space Center Crew Training and Simulation Div., received the de Florez Training Award for advancing development of space flight simulators and for flight training programs. The G. Edward Pendray Award was awarded to Frederick I. Ord-way III, Univ. of Alabama, for his contributions to the literature recording the history and benefits of the space program. Willis H. Hawkins, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., was awarded the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for contributions to the design and development of aerospace vehicles— including vertical take-off, transport, interceptor, and supersonic fighter aircraft-—and to missile and space programs including ramjet and reentry test vehicles. The Lawrence Sperry Award went to Dino A. Lorenzini, Air Force Academy, for developing a modern inertial guidance test facility incorporating computer-control, data-acquisition, sensor-excitation, and seismic-isolation technology. . Dr. Harold A. Rosen, Hughes Aircraft Co., received the Spacecraft Design Award for contributions to the development of satellite communication systems, including the spin-stabilized synchronous-orbit spacecraft concept and commercial systems. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace of the Air Force Systems Command delivered the von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Composites,” pointing to a need for competitive cost and innovative design to realize the advantages of composites in material, fabrication, and configuration. The Dryden Research Lecture was delivered by Herbert F. Hardrath, Langley Research Center, who reviewed the use of fracture mechanics to choose materials, configure safe and efficient structures, specify inspection procedures, predict lives of flawed structures, and develop the reliability ofcurrent and future airframes. Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of the GE Space Div., was installed as 12th president of aiaa. The 19 new Fellows elected included Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director; John P. Campbell and John P. Reeder, LaRc; and Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. Inducted as Honorary Members were Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.). (AdcA, Mar 74; AIAA Bull, Jan 74; aiaa Releases, 21 Dec 73; aiaa History Newsletter, 24 May 74; Ksc Release 14r-74; arc Astrogram, 18 Jan 74, 1; Marshall Star, 30 Jan 74,1)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Chief of the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center and Apollo 17 astronaut, began a 90-day assignment as special assistant to the NASA Administrator to coordinate NASA’s effort in energy research and development and facilitate NASA aid to other agencies working on energy research, (nasa Release 74-37; Off Energy Prog, interview, Aug 74)
Astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield was presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1973 by Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas in a ceremony at National Geographic Society Headquarters. Hartsfield received the trophy—presented annually to the Air Force employee who made the most significant contribution to U.S. progress in space—for his part in saving the $2.5-billion Skylab program. Hartsfield, serving as capsule communicator during the Skylab 2 mission (25 May-22 June 1973), played a key role in preparing and evaluating crew procedures and equipment for transporting, installing, and deploying the parasol sunshade to protect the Skylab Orbital Workshop after it had been damaged during its 14 May 1973 launch. Hartsfield also had been instrumental in developing procedures for installation by the Skylab 3 crew (launched 28 July 1973) of a compact, lightweight replacement package for the failing gyroscopes in the Skylab attitude control system, (ngs Release, 8 Oct 74)
A digital computing cardiotachometer developed for monitoring beattobeat heart rates of astronauts training underwater was being used in two Birmingham, Ala., hospitals, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The device, designed to operate with a standard electrocardiographic unit, employed an electronic digital system to use the time between two consecutive heart beats to calculate the patient’s pulse rate. A numerical display showed the subject’s pulse rate 0.3 sec after detecting his second heart beat, (msfc Release 74-140)
Photographs and visual observations made by astronauts aboard the Skylab Orbital Workshop had revealed eddies embedded in warm-water currents flowing poleward from equatorial oceans, Robert E. Stevenson of the Office of Naval Research reported in a Nature article. Observations from Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973-8 Feb. 1974) over four ocean areas had confirmed initial evidence from Caribbean photographs taken on Sky-lab 2 and 3 (25 May-22 June, 28 July—25 Sept. 1973) that eddies with vortices of 5500- to 37 000-m dia were present wherever other conditions were suitable, regardless of water temperature. Findings were also confirmed by the Navy’s Weather Reconnaissance Squadron Four with bathythermographs. Formerly, turbulence had been difficult to document because of limited oceanographic techniques, insufficient information about such features, and the lack of photos from orbital platforms which enhanced the ocean and atmosphere manifestations of the eddies. (Nature, 23 Aug 74, 638-40)
