Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)
Doctors had rechecked x-rays of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s lungs taken before the 15 July launch and found that they also had shown a shadow revealed by postflight x-rays, Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, NASA’s ASTP physician, said at a Johnson Space Center press briefing. Dr. Nicogossian said that the spot had not been noticed before because the x-rays were difficult to read and the spot had been covered by normal vasculature and bony structure. Only a 6 Aug. tomogram [see 25 Aug.] had verified that the shadow was a lesion. Dr. Nicogossian said the nitrogen tetroxide inhaled by the ASTP astronauts during reentry [see 15—26 July] had not been shown to have caused or increased the size of the lesion. Dr. Nicogossian added that, if cancer were diagnosed during the surgery, the usual medical procedure was to remove a part of the lobe, but he did not think that would prevent Slayton from flying in the future. Slayton said that he felt “pretty damn lucky” that the lesion had been discovered when it was. “This thing could have been discovered before the flight. . . . And I could have easily gotten jerked off the flight, so that would have been bad. Secondly, if we hadn’t had the gas in the cockpit on reentry, . . . [the doctors] could very easily not have picked this thing up until my next annual physical which is 6 or 8 months off.” Then it would have been a “lot tougher” to fix. Slayton, one of the seven original U.S. astronauts, had been grounded in 1962 because of an erratic heart rate, first detected in 1959, but had been returned to flight status March 1972 in time for assignment to ASTP. He told the briefing that he hoped to be out of the hospital within 7 days and back to work in 2 wk, and on flight status again within a month. (Transcript, ASTP PC—63, 20 Aug 75)
NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin as Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in the Office of Manned Space Flight, effective 1 Aug. In his new position Griffin would plan for the most economical and flexible operation of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. Griffin, who was Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs before this appointfnent, would be replaced by Dr. Joseph P. Allen, an astronaut assigned to the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. (NASA anno 17 July 75)
Air Force Systems Command Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory scientists were studying changes in human body weights and sizes as part of a NASA-requested anthropometric study to help engineers design cockpits and crew stations for future use. NASA engineers who wanted to lay out the Space Shuttle work station were concerned that body sizes of the pilots might change before the station was used. The scientists performing the study, using both current data and data that went back as far as the Civil War, estimated that in 1985 a pilot would average nearly 2 kg heavier and 1.5 cm taller than in 1967, when he had weighed 78.5 kg and was 177 cm tall. In addition to statistics, NASA requested drawing board manikins for designing the Shuttle’s work areas. The study had produced two 2dimensional manikins like cardboard dolls with movable joints; each manikin was articulated in nine places to represent typical ranges of body movement. A 95% manikin represented a person 189.0 cm tall; a 5% manikin, representing a 168.3-cm astronaut or pilot, was designed so that only 5% of the 1985 pilot-astronaut population would be smaller. An engineer using both manikins could design a crew station or cockpit that would accommodate 90% of all astronauts and pilots. (AFSC Release OIP 072.75)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
NASA’s Airborne Infrared Observatory, a four-engine C—141 jet transport equipped with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, was dedicated to the memory of Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, the founder and former director of the Univ. of Ariz. Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. The Kuiper observatory, based at Ames Research Center, would fly at altitudes up to 13 500 m with the telescope operating through a cavity in the aircraft’s fuselage. Dr. Kuiper, who had died in 1973, had been one of the foremost authorities on lunar science. He had played an active role in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor programs and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, had directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. He also had participated in the Mariner 10 mission, launched 3 Nov. 1973 to Venus andMercury, and the Pioneer 10 mission, launched 2 March 1972 toward a December 1973 encounter with Jupiter. (NASA Release 75—149; A&A 73, 350)
The development of space law, which had begun about the time of the launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 in 1957, was a unique process. “The problems are both literally and symbolically out of this world,” NASA General Counsel Neil S. Hosenball said in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Star. Does any state have the right to claim the natural resources of celestial bodies? Were earth’s criminal and civil laws applicable in space? What was the difference between establishing a planetary base and planting a nation’s flag? Which court would rule on extraterrestrial squabbles? These were some of the questions lawyers and politicians would have to consider in the space age. Few precedents existed, and no judge had yet heard a case in a legal dispute originating outside the earth’s atmosphere. In fact, a world court, recognized by all major powers, did not exist. In 1962, a United Nations ad hoc committee on peaceful uses of outer space had developed principles later incorporated into the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. These included a ban against military activity in outer space and against any nation’s claiming a section of space or a planet as its own. Other treaties dealt with specific points such as the rescue of astronauts and the registration of spacecraft and space stations. Hosenball stressed that most charters and treaties were drawn up ahead of time in anticipation of problems likely to occur as space exploration expanded. The Sentinel quoted G. P. Zhukov, chief legal counsel of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, as saying that detente between , the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had been assisted by the success of “legal regulation in space. . . . Man’s foot had not yet stepped on the surface of-the moon and we had already formulated what man could and could not do on the moon. The law was ahead of science.” (Orlando Sentinel Star, 12 Aug 75)
A planet’s size and bulk might be more important than its location in the solar system in determining whether it can support life, Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said in a New York Times article. Conventional scientific thought had always been that the chance of life’s evolving on a planet was narrowly restricted by the planet’s distance from its parent star. However, planetology—the study of comparative geology of the planets, made possible by space probes such as Pioneer, Mariner, and Viking—provided evidence for the newer theory. The most important single factor in the geology of earth-like planets was the amount of internal heat left over from their birth. Planets as large as earth conserved heat, losing it very slowly through volcanic action over long periods of time. Molten volcanic material carried gases, including water vapor, that had been trapped below the planet’s surface; the vapors condensed into oceans, other gases formed an atmosphere, and life began. Mariner’s photos of Mars had confirmed the existence of volcanoes; but, because of the planet’s relatively small size, these exhausted their internal heat supply and died out rapidly about 100 million yr ago. During its active period, Mars must have had in its atmosphere large volumes of volcanic gases, including water vapor; Mariner photos had shown what were apparently dry river beds. When the volcanoes became extinct, the water and atmosphere leaked away into space and the small planet was left dry and nearly airless. Any life forms found on Mars by Viking or future space probes would probably be fossils. The study of lunar material added another example to the comparative geology of earth-like planets: The moon rocks brought back by Apollo astronauts had revealed volcanic activity on the moon; because the moon was smaller than Mars, this activity had stopped even earlier and the gases and moisture escaped even more quickly, leaving another dry, airless, and lifeless body. Scientists concluded that Mars was cold and lifeless not because it was farther from the sun than earth but because it was smaller and geologically inert. If the earth were moved out to the orbit of Mars, the average temperature of the earth would drop somewhat but its insulating atmosphere, continually replenished by volcanic gases for some billions of years longer, would maintain a livable temperature over large areas of the surface. (Jastrow, NYT, 24 Aug 75, E7)
The lung condition of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, who had inhaled nitrogen tetroxide fumes during Apollo reentry [see 15— 24 July], had improved, NASA Flight Surgeon Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian told reporters at a crew-status briefing. The astronauts had been transferred from the intensive-care unit of Tripler Hospital to other hospital quarters. Astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s x-rays showed a 70 to 80% improvement in the condition of his lungs; astronauts Vance D. Brand and Thomas P. Stafford had improved, but not as much. (ASTP Transcript PC—58)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) inserted into the Congressional Record a summary of the Central Intelligence Agency’s report on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The summary indicated that “although the Soviet have experienced many space problems the prospects for a successful mission are good.” The report continued that the Soviet preparations were more extensive and thorough than for previous efforts, and that past failures had occurred at a phase during the mission which would not jeopardize U.S. astronauts should there be a recurrence. The report did point out that the Soviets had encountered severe problems in space. (CR, 14 July 75, S12511)
NASA and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had agreed on a joint tour of the U.S. and the Soviet Union by the 5 crew members of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission [see 15—26 July], U.S. astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton would join Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov on 21 Sept, in Moscow for a 2-wk tour of the U.S.S.R. Plans for the U.S. tour were not disclosed. (NASA Release 75—230) In another paper Rango reported that low-resolution meteorological satellite data and high-resolution earth-re sources satellite data had been used to map a snow-covered area over Wyoming mountains. Predictions based on satellite data of the April through June 1972 streamflow were within 3% of the actual total. Also, composite results from 2 yr of data over the mountains indicated that Landsat snowcover observations could be useful in predicting runoff and seasonal streamflow. James C. Barnes of Environmental Research and Technology, Inc., reported that the earth resources experiment package (EREP) flown aboard the 1973—74 Skylab Orbital Workshop missions had provided the first opportunity to examine reflectance characteristics of snowcover in several spectral bands from the visible to the near infrared. Results indicated that near-infrared methods could distinguish between snow and water droplet clouds and could detect areas of melting snow. (NASA Hq WB, 28 Feb 76, 2; NASA SP—391, text) The evidence was consistent with calculations made in 1971 by Canadian astronomer Dr. Michael W. Ovenden. Dr. Ovenden’s studies of irregularities in the orbits of planets, especially Uranus and Neptune, suggested that a major disruptive event had occurred in the solar system approximately 16 million yrs ago. He had arrived at this time by age-dating carbon-bearing meteorites that had fallen to earth, and theorized that the event could be explained by the explosion of a huge planet 90 times the size of earth. During the meeting Dr. Stuart Bowyer, Univ. of Calif, astronomer, surprised the 740 astronomers attending the meeting by reporting that a Univ. of Calif, telescope flown aboard the Apollo spacecraft during the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [see 15—26 July] had picked up the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation of a star. EUV, a small segment of the spectrum between normal ultraviolet and x-rays, had been considered by astronomers as practically invisible because of probable absorption by interstellar dust and gas. Dr. Bowyer said that the EUV had come from a white dwarf star 300 light yrs away in the constellation Coma Berenices. (NASA Gen Mgmt Review Rpt, 18 Aug 75, 9; Alexander, LA Times, 26 Aug 75)
NASA announced that the U.S. tour by the five Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crewmembers had been postponed to 13 Oct. because of astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s scheduled lung surgery. The crew’s tour of the U.S.S.R., scheduled to begin 22 Sept., would continue on schedule [see 15 Aug.]. (NASA Release 75—236)
Studies of the heavy particle cosmic-ray exposure received by the astronauts during the nine Apollo lunar orbital missions revealed a significant variation in exposure as a function of the amount of shielding and the phase of the solar cycle, Science magazine reported. The command module pilot, who remained in the spacecraft while the two other crew members landed on the moon, had received the least exposure. The ankle, the least shielded part of the body, received a higher exposure than the chest, which had greater shielding. A sharp rise in exposure had been evident beginning with Apollo 14 when mission times increased. Observed variations in flux from mission to mission—the flux during Apollo 16 and 17 was 2.4 times higher than Apollo 8 through 12—was attributed to solar modulation of the primary cosmic ray beam. Data obtained during the Apollo missions would be used for planning long-range missions and for estimating expected biological damage. (Benton et al., Science, Vol. 187, 263—5)
President Ford, in a White House ceremony, presented the National Space Club’s Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Skylab 4 Commander Gerald P. Carr on behalf of the nine astronauts who inhabited the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched 14 May 1973) during periods in 1973 and 1974. The astronauts were cited for their “exceptional accomplishments in the Skylab program .... When the entire mission was jeopardized the first crew, through uncommon ingenuity, saved the mission. The scientific content of the program is of extraordinary significance, in all disciplines. The demonstration that men can live and work in space for extended periods sets the stage for future exploration of space.” At the Space Club’s 18th annual Goddard memorial dinner, the following awards were presented: Award Recipient (Affiliation) Citation Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Memorial Trophy NASA Skylab Astronauts Charles P. Conrad Joseph P. Kerwin Paul J. Weitz Alan L. Bean Owen K. Garriott Jack R. Lousma Gerald P. Carr Edward G. Gibson William R. Pogue For their exceptional accomplishments in Skylab program Astronautics Engineer Award John M. Thole (NASA) For direction of the OSO and ATS programs Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award NASA-Fairchild Industries Ats 6 team For demonstration of a significant advance in space communications Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship Dr. Bruce F. Smith (NASA) For demonstrated abilities in addressing, theoretically and experimentally, a broad range of astrophysical problems Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Scholarship Alice K. Babcock (Georgetown Univ.) To continue higher scientific education Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Historical Essay James E. Oberg (USAF) For essay, “Russia Meant to Win the Moon Race?” Nat’l Space Club Press Award Roy Neal (NBC) For resourcefulness in reporting the U.S. space effort {PD, 14 April 75, 372; program)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Donald K. Slayton, and Vance D. Brand participated in a 9-hr exercise at Kennedy Space Center to test the Apollo spacecraft’s internal systems, earth-landing systems, and instrument packages. The astronauts climbed into the Apollo, which was inside a huge altitude chamber, to test the systems at simulated altitudes of up to 61 000 m while cabin pressure was maintained at 34 474 newtons per sq m. Pressure inside the cabin was also lowered to zero to test the integrity of the astronauts’ space suits. On 16 Jan. the U.S. backup crew for the mission, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma, participated in a similar exercise. (/VASA Activities, Feb 75, 11; KSC Release 5—75)
Charles M. Duke, Jr., an astronaut since 1966 and lunar mobile pilot on the Apollo 16 lunar landing mission (16—27 April 1972), announced he would leave NASA, effective 1 Jan. 1976. He would also resign from the Air Force after nearly 19 yr of service. DuringApo//o 16, Duke logged 11 days 1 hr 43 min in space, including a 71-hr 14-min stay on the lunar surface. He and John W. Young made 3 surface explorations of the Descartes region for a total of 20 hr 15 min of lunar excursion. Since April 1973 Duke had served as technical assistant to the manager for Space Shuttle systems integration. (JSC Release 75—74)
Soyuz 20, the unmanned Soviet spacecraft launched from Baykonur 17 Nov., docked automatically withSalyut 4 using onboard radio devices and computer installations for a program of “testing unit constructions and onboard systems. . .in joint flight,” Tass announced. Salyut 4, the orbiting space station, had been visited by the crew of Soyuz 17 for almost 30 days and by the crew of Soyuz 18 for more than 60 days. The Soyuz 20 mission had been analyzed as transfer of fuel to Salyut 4; in orbit since 26 Dec. 1974, the space station was thought to be running low on maneuvering fuel. Reporters had speculated that a new two-man crew might be sent to Salyut 4 later this year for a stay of 3 mo or longer that would break the 84-day record set by U.S. astronauts in 1974. The value of the automatic docking for resupply would be the economy of not sending men with each flight, although the Soviets had never indicated the cost of their launches. Tass reported that the “space complex Salyut-4— Soyuz-20” was in an orbit with apogee 367 km, perigee 343 km, 51.6° inclination, and 91.4 min period of revolution. (IF Post, 21 Nov 75, B14; NYT, 21 Nov 75, 25; FBIS No. 225, 19 Nov 75, No. 226, 20 Nov 75; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 108) 19 November—23 December: Atmosphere Explorer—E, third in a series of new deep-dipper spacecraft designed to investigate the ionosphere, was launched from Eastern Test Range aboard a Delta vehicle at 9:07 pm EST (0206GMT) into an almost perfect orbit: apogee, 3026 km; perigee, 157 km; inclination, 19.7°; period, 118.1 min. In orbit the satellite became Explorer 55. Major difference between the original and new generation of atmosphere explorers was the unusually large onboard propulsion system that enabled the later spacecraft to move themselves up or down in space by hundreds of km or go from highly elliptical to circular orbits. The name “deep-dippers” meant that the spacecraft could drop into the atmosphere and pull out again, taking measurements only while in the upper reaches of the thermosphere. This region, important because it absorbed most ultraviolet light and heat received from the sun and because movement of that heat determined the structure of the upper atmosphere, had been difficult to study because the altitude was too high for all aircraft and most balloons and too low for other satellites. The dipping orbit prevented accumulation of excessive heat in the metal skins of the AE spacecraft. Explorer 55 would also carry a backscatter ultraviolet spectrophotometer to obtain a vertical profile and density measurements of the ozone layer between 20°N and S; the measurements would be compared with those from Nimbus 4, launched in 1970, to evaluate the long-term accuracy of the Nimbus instrumentation. A mission operations report 23 Dec. said Explorer 55 had completed more than 400 orbits and all subsystems were performing well. (NASA Release 75— 290, 70-29, 72-212; KSC Release 266-75; SBD, 21 Nov 75, 114; KSC Spaceport News, 31 Oct 75, 3; MORs 13 Nov 75, 3 Dec 75, 23 Dec 75)
The U.S.S.R.’s Baykonur cosmodrome, located in the city of Leninsk near Tyuratam, was three to four times as big as Kennedy Space Center, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander Thomas P. Stafford said at an ASTP press briefing at Johnson Space Center. ASTP astronaut Vance D. Brand said that 50 000 persons inhabited the launch complex. The briefing followed the crew’s return from the Soviet Union where they had participated in the final training session before the scheduled July launch [see 14—30 April]. The astronauts said that at the Soviet spaceport they had been shown “everything we had a requirement to see,” the launch pad, spacecraft, test and checkout facilities, automatic checkout equipment (ACE) rooms, and crew quarters. The one “drastic difference” between the tour received by the Soviet cosmonauts in the U.S. and that of the American astronauts in the U.S.S.R., said Stafford, was “we didn’t go to Disneyland over there.” Astronaut Donald K. Slayton described the launch pad as “relatively simple.” The spacecraft, assembled on top of a railroad car, was hauled to the pad about 4 days before launch. The stacked vehicle was jacked up and set on the pad; after checkout, the vehicle was rotated to the proper launch azimuth. The booster was held to the pad by four support arms which were popped out of the way by counterweights once the vehicle started to move. Stafford said that Leninsk was a new city built in a desert. The continued construction activity indicated that the Soviets “are not slowing down one bit in their space program.” The Soviets had told their U.S. counterparts that they would continue to have several manned flights a year operating in low earth orbit. (Transcript)
The Saturn IB, used to launch three U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts into space [see 15—24 July], had experienced no unscheduled holds whatever during countdown, making it the most perfect launch of the Saturn series, Ellery B. May, manager of the Saturn Program Office at the Marshall Space Flight Center, said. Saturn 210, manufactured in 1967, was 10th of the IB series and had the oldest engine used. All Saturn launches had been successful and had met their objectives; although some had anomalies, such as leaks or faulty wiring, no major configuration changes were ever necessary. The ASTP mission marked the end of the Saturn series, but its impact on technology would continue. “Space Shuttle main engines (SSME) are an outgrowth of technology from Saturn engines,” May explained. The major difference between the two was that the Shuttle must have much higher pressure systems than ever before required and must be reusable. (MSFC Release 75 — 174)
A decrease in the amount of ozone in the stratosphere would cause an increase in skin cancer in white (the most susceptible) Americans, Walter Sullivan wrote in a New York Times article. The findings were based on the combined results of a 1974 NASA study that used instrumented aircraft to profile ozone and nitrogen oxide in the stratosphere, the National Cancer Institute’s 1974 Third National Cancer Survey, and the Dept, of Transportation’s 3-yr study “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft” [see 21 Jan.]. The NASA study, which used high-altitude U-2 aircraft, confirmed that atmospheric ozone increased from the equator to the poles and was also influenced by regional and seasonal variations. Ozone molecules above the latitude of Houston were only three fifths as plentiful as above the latitude of Minneapolis. Correspondingly, the Cancer Institute survey showed an annual incidence of nearly 400 skin-cancer cases per 100 000 whites in Dallas, Tex., and less than half that figure in the Minneapolis area. These data, when combined with the DOT study, indicated that the number of skin-cancer cases in the U.S. would increase by 6000, or 1%, a year if 120 supersonic transports operated in the stratosphere for 4 hi daily, thus depleting the zone by 0.5%. (Lowenstein et al., Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, Nov 75, 2185— 90; Sullivan, ATT, 7 Feb 75, 11) 7 February—1 March: The eight prime and backup Soviet cosmonauts training for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joined with U.S. prime and backup astronauts in the U.S. to continue training for the joint mission. The cosmonauts—Aleksey A. Leonov, Valery N. Kubasov, Anatoly V. Filipchenko, Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, Vladimir A. Dzhanebekov, Boris D. Andreyev, Yury V. Romanenko, and Aleksandr S. Ivanchenkov—arrived in Washington, D.C., 7 Feb. and traveled to Kennedy Space Center the following morning. The group toured KSC 8 Feb. giving the cosmonauts their first glimpse of the U.S. launch complex. Col. Leonov commented that the pad from which Alan B. Shepard was launched in 1961 “is a very simple launch stand compared to the ones we use now.” Following a tour of Disney World in Florida 9 Feb., the cosmonauts spent 10 Feb. inspecting the Vehicle Assembly Building, where the Apollo would be stacked on the Saturn IB launch vehicle; the Launch Control Center firing room, from which the rocket would be controlled; and Launch Complex 39 Pad B, from which the Apollo spacecraft would be launched. Press coverage of the first Soviet visit to KSC noted that previous invitations for Soviet officials to visit KSC had been turned down,apparently because of Soviet unwillingness to reciprocate with invitations to Baykonur Cosmodrome. But in May U.S. astronauts would return the visit by going to the Soviet launch site. The astronauts and cosmonauts flew to Johnson Space Center to begin a 2-wk training period that included exercises in command and docking module simulators and mockups; joint language-training sessions; briefings on experiments, contingencies, and mission rules; and practice run-throughs of the planned joint activity days. Following a press conference at which U.S. and Soviet ASTP crew members were introduced to JSC employees, the Soviet cosmonauts returned to the U.S.S.R. in two groups, on 28 Feb. and 1 March. (NASA Release 75—34; JSC Release 75—07; NASA ASTP Status Report No. 7; Spaceport News, 21 Feb 75; JSC Roundup, 28 Feb 75, 1; McElheny, NYT, 10—17 Feb 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $59 950 contract to Abbott Laboratories for living human kidney cells to be used by U.S. astronauts in the German electrophoresis experiment during the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Abbott Laboratories would provide the cells as part of an experiment to find a way to isolate effectively the one kidney cell in 20 that produced the enzyme urokinase, an enzyme capable of dissolving blood clots. Because gravity made such separations difficult on earth, scientists hoped to develop new technology in the zero-g environment of space. The experiment was being developed, built, and tested by West Germany’s Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm Gmbtt. (MSFC Releases 75- 7, 75-13) mobile launcher inside the Vehicle Assembly Building on 13 Jan. Engineers began electrical and mechanical systems tests on the first stage and installed flame curtains and panels to shroud the outboard engines. The Saturn IVB second stage was mated to the booster 14 Jan. and the instrument unit added to the stack 16 Jan. A boilerplate unit simulating the Apollo command module was added 17 Jan. The boilerplate would be removed and replaced with the actual spacecraft, and the rollout of the entire vehicle to the launch pad was scheduled for March. The docking system and docking module were mated 17 Jan. after combined systems tests. The complete unit would be placed into the spacecraft adapter in February. Swing-arm launch-control center integration was completed 21 Jan. (KSC Release 165—74; MSFC Release 75—19; Spaceport News, 23 Jan 75, 3; 6 Feb 75, 3; Marshall Star, 2 Jan 75, 2)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton began a 3-wk preflight medical isolation at 12 pm CDT. Called the flight health stabilization plan, the isolation limited the astronauts to specific working and training areas at Johnson Space Center. In offhours they were being housed in special mobile homes. Only previously screened personnel, wearing surgical face masks, could come into face-to-face contact with the astronauts. (JSC Release 75—59: Ezell e£ al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 313)
Marshall Space Flight Center was seeking industry proposals for procurement of parallel definition studies of the atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space (AMPS) payload, a reusable research facility to be integrated with Spacelab. The proposed 12-mo studies were to define an overall AMPS program with special emphasis on ground- and flight-support systems and subsystems, systems engineering and integration, and ground/orbital operations with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. AMPS, a single laboratory system flown with the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments and observations in atmospheric science, magnetospheric physics, and plasma physics. (MSFC Release 75—172) 4—6 August: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, at its 1975 aircraft systems and technology meeting in Los Angeles, Calif., presented the following aerospace awards. Award Recipient (affiliation) Purpose Aircraft Design Walter E. Fellers (Northrop Corp.) For 30 yr of outstanding achievement in design and development of fighter aircraft to meet rapidly changing requirements Octave Chanute Alan L. Bean Jack R. Lousma Dr. Owen K. Garriott (NASA Skylab 3 astronauts) For outstanding contributions to manned space flight and scientific research. Using the most sophisticated instruments ever flown in space, crew performed scores of scientific experiments and observations vastly expanding man’s knowledge and enhancing quality of life on earth 38th Annual Wright Brothers Lecture Henri Ziegler (Airbus, France) Topic: International Cooperation in Aerospace Projects: cooperation between European industries and between Europe and United States (AIAA Release, 22 July 75)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs since May 1974, would resign effective 30 August. Previously, Dr. Schmitt had been chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, at Johnson Space Center. Selected as a scientist-astronaut by NASA in 1965, he had been the lunar module pilot on Apollo 17 (7—19 Dec. 1972) and the only civilian scientist to walk on the moon. Dr. Schmitt planned to return to his home state of N. Mex. to pursue geological consulting and personal activities. (NASA anno, 11 Aug 75)
The U.S.S.R. had turned down a U.S. invitation to participate in another joint manned space mission in 1976, Thomas O’Toole of the Washington Post reported a U.S. space official as saying. O’Toole reported that in 1974 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low had suggested to Soviet Academy of Sciences President Vladimir Kotelnikov that two Soviet cosmonauts and three American astronauts dock with a Soviet Salyut space station and work together in earth orbit for up to 2 wk. However, the Soviets had replied that they would undertake a repeat of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for 15 July launch) but could not prepare to fly an Apollo-Salyut in any reasonable length of time. The Post quoted Dr. Low as saying, “Any second American—Russian space flight will have to wait until the 1980s.” The Post also quoted Dr. Low as saying that NASA had suggested an Apollo-Salyut mission as early as 1971, but the Soviets had requested a change back to an Apollo-Soyuz mission during a presummit meeting in April 1972 just before President Nixon’s Moscow visit. Dr. Low said that the Soviets had said that it was too expensive to modify Salyut to accept both a Soyuz and an Apollo spacecraft at the same time. (O’Toole, W Post, 14 July 75, Al)
Rockwell International Corp. announced that its Electronics Research Div., under a contract awarded by NASA on 18 Feb. 1974, had developed a single-chip bubble-domain memory element with a capacity of 102 400 bits, believed to be the largest capacity memory device ever built. The new data recorder—a major milestone in NASA’s continuing program to develop an all-solid-state data recorder for future U. S. spacecraft—was one-third the size and one-half the weight of current equipment. It was expected to use half the power and have 10 times the life expectancy of present recorders. Objective of the effort was to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating high-capacity memory elements with reasonable yield and operating margins. (Rockwell Int’l Release ERD-1; LaRC proj off, interview, 18 Jan 77) 22 May—7 June: The U.S. and Peru launched more than 40 sounding rockets and balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for the Inca god of flight, to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere from Chilca Launch Range in Peru, a location on the magnetic equator where the earth’s magnetic field is horizontal. Instruments aboard the rockets and balloons measured the composition of the neutral and ionized atmosphere, density and temperature, wind shear, and turbulence. The measurements would be compared with data from Explorer 51 (Atmosphere Explorer—C, launched 15 Dec. 1973) and the ground-based Jicamarca and Huancayo Observatories. Tbe overall mission included the launch of 4 Nike-Tomahawks, 8 Nike-Apaches, 7 Super Areas, and 10 Super Lokis, as well as two balloons measuring 36 m in diameter and 12 ozonesonde balloons. Project Antarqui was a continuation of a NASA sounding-rocket program conducted during the 1964— 65 International Quiet Sun Year when 77 sounding rockets had been launched during the first 4 mo of 1965 from a sea-going launch platform, the USNS Croatan. Wallops Flight Center managed the program for NASA; the Instituto Geofisico del Peru arranged for the use of the range, supplied range operation and logistics support in Peru, correlated ground-based measurements from Jicamarca and Huancayo, assisted in recovery operations, and performed some preliminary work at the range. In addition to WFC, Goddard Space Flight Center, Dudley Observatory, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Univ. of 111., Penn. State Univ., Univ. of Denver, and GCA Corp. supplied scientific payloads for the sounding rockets and balloons. (WFC Release 75—6; NASA Activities, June 75, 14; WFC proj mgr, interviews, 11—12 Jan 75) 24 May—26 July: Tne U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 18, carrying cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 7:58 pm local time (10:58 amEDT). According to the Tassnews agency, the spacecraft entered orbit with a 247-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the purpose of the mission was “to conduct further experiments with the orbital research station ‘Salyut—4,’ started on January 12, during the joint flight of the delivery spaceship ‘Soyuz—17’ and the station ‘Salyut—4’ as well as to test individual elements and systems of the spaceship in various modes of flight.” During the first day in orbit Klimuk and Sevastyanov checked out essential spacecraft and life-support systems and prepared for orbital maneuvering. The crew switched on the main engines twice on 25 May to raise the spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and docking with Salyut 4. On 26 May Soyuz 18 approached the station by an automatic control system. At a distance of 100 km the crew took over control and manually docked the spacecraft with the Salyut 4 station in pitch darkness. After docking, the crew switched on the station’s lights and began activation and checkout of the onboard systems. The crew transferred equipment and boarded the station where they found a “Welcome to our common home” sign left by the station’s previous tenants, Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and Georgy Grechko. The cosmonauts reported that all systems were operating normally and that they themselves were in good health. By 28 May the station and spacecraft were in an orbit with a 349-km apogee, 338-km perigee, 91.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. During their 63 days in orbit, the cosmonauts studied the sun, planets, and stars in various bands of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation using several x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; investigated geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, photographing the U.S.S.R. in the medium and southern latitudes; studied physical processes in the earth’s atmosphere and in space; performed medical and biological research with particular emphasis on the impact of weightlessness on the human organism; and tested the station’s design and onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised a garden of onions and peas as a forerunner of providing self-sufficient food supplies in space. Tass reported that, for the first time during a space flight, the polar fights were investigated using integral photography and spectrography methods. Twice during the mission Klimuk and Sevastyanov spoke with cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov who were also in orbit participating in the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project begun 15 July. By 23 July the cosmonauts were preparing the space station for automatic operation. On 26 July at 3:56 pm Baykonur time (6:56 am EDT), Soyuz 18 and its crew undocked from Salyut 4. They softlanded 56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan at 7:18 pm Baykonur time (10:18 am EDT). ' Tass reported that by 27 July the cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood pressure fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned to normal. Decreases in erythrocytes and increases in leucocytes disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and resistance to functional tests had almost reached preflight baselines. Both Klimuk and Sevastyanov had lost some weight—3.8 kilograms and 1.9 kilograms respectively—during the mission. The Soyuz 18 crew’s 62-day 23-hr 40-min mission broke the previous 29-day 13-hr 20-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 17. The current world’s record for time in space was held by the Skylab 4 astronauts for their 84-day 1-hr 16-min mission, 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974. Salyut 4, which had been visited by the two crews of Soyuz 17 and 18, was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station on 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted experiments for 24 days but were killed during a reentry accident. Salyut 2 was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion of wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 and a two-man crew, carried by Soyuz 14, lived and worked aboard the station from 3—19 July 1974. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. 1974, returned to earth in 48 hr after an unsuccessful attempt to dock with the station, which itself reentered the earth’s atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 24 May— 28 July 75; GSFC WklySSR, 22—28 May 75; AP, B Sun, 27 July 75, A3; Lib of Congress, “S&T News Alert,” No 2600, 19 Sept 75) 27 May—14 June: A one-third-scale model of the Space Shuttle Orbiter was tested in Ames Research Center’s 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel, to gather low-speed flight data in support of approach and landing tests of the first full-scale Orbiter at Flight Research Center in 1977. In addition, data were gathered to calibrate the vehicle’s air data probes. The model, built by Shuttle prime contractor Rockwell International Corp., was 13.1 m long and weighed 20 400 kg. Additional wind-tunnel tests were scheduled for November 1975 and February 1976. (4-Strogram, 5 June 75, 1; Young, JSC aerodynamic subsystems mgr, interview, 21 April 77) In a speech, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Union M. Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s intention to play an important role in the peaceful uses of outer space; the programs of ESRO—ESA offered a particularly well chosen range of satellites for research and applications. Y. Demerliac, Secretary General of Eurospace—Groupement In-dustriel Europeen D’Etudes Spatiales—reminded the audience that since 1962 Europe had developed 43 satellites, including four communications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of the 104 ground stations or antennas in the network of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). More than two-thirds of these had been sold to non-European countries. Director General of ESRO Roy Gibson (United Kingdom) said the creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: the convention of the new agency gave it a specific mandate to work toward a rationalization of Europe’s space program which its predecessors ESRO and ELDO (European Launcher Development Organization) did not have. He hoped that the 3-day presentation of ESRO— ESA and other European programs would give the visitors an impression of the total competence and capability of Europe’s up-to-date, rather dispersed space effort. (ESRO Release 28 May 75)
Former astronaut Alfred M. Worden, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Application Div., announced that he would leave government service, effective 5 Sept. Worden was also retiring from the Air Force after 20 yrs. During the Apollo 15 lunar landing mission (26 July— 7 Aug. 1971), Worden was command module pilot and, with fellow crewmen David R. Scott and James B. Irwin, spent 12 days 7 hr 12 min in space. Worden transferred to ARC in September 1972 as a research scientist in the Airborne Science Office. He was also Chief of the Systems Studies Div. before his appointment to the Application Div. In his announcement Worden said he would spend one year lecturing on “Spaceship Earth” and writing a book commissioned by the High Flight Foundation, an interdenominational evangelistic organization based in Colo. (NASA Release 75—248)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics presented its Haley Astronautics Award to Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue at the AIAA-American Geophysical Union Conference on the Exploration of the Outer Planets, in St. Louis, Missouri. The award was presented “for demonstrated outstanding courage and skill during the recordbreaking 84-day Skylab mission.” During the mission, which had begun 16 Nov. 1973, the crew had successfully completed 56 experiments, 26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed subsystem objectives, and 13 student investigations. They also collected extensive earth-resources data and logged 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount data, making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 3 Sept 75, 4) 20 September—5 October: Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton and their families visited the U.S.S.R., joining Soviet ASTP cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov and their families for a goodwill tour of the Soviet Union. The two crews had not met since they said goodbye in space during their historic mission [see 15—24 July]. After greetings at the Moscow airport with wide grins, bear hugs, and back slaps, Stafford told the airport crowd in Russian, “We are very pleased to be back in the Soviet Union again. Now we can say our joint work has been fulfilled successfully. I am confident that our flight will serve progress and peace on earth.” During the welcoming ceremonies Boris Petrov, U.S.S.R. Chairman of the Intercosmos Council, told the Americans, “The Soviet people were glad to see your success and are eager to welcome you on earth and in the Soviet Union.” The astronauts, cosmonauts, and their families visited Star City on 21 Sept, to thank the Soviet space community for its work on the ASTP mission. “For 2 years Star City was a second home to us,” Stafford told the crowd of Soviet space workers. “Thank you for all your work.” The astronauts’ families laid flowers at the memorial to Yuri Gagarin, first man to fly in space. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton presented Star City with a plaque bearing the Soviet and American flags and exchanged other gifts with the Soviets. On 22 September Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee, met the ASTP astronauts and cosmonauts at the Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each as “hero” and congratulating them on their historic mission, saying it would “pave the way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the 35min reception he told the crews of his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear arms. “Both sides—the United States and the Soviet side—should make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations, really good, in all aspects, from every point of view,” he said. On 23 Sept, the two crews and their families began a six-city tour of the Soviet Union that took them to Leningrad, Kiev, Volgograd, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tbilisi. Everywhere the crews were swamped by enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of up to 3000 persons waiting on comers and at airports for hours to cheer the spacemen. “The hospitality is fantastic,” Stafford remarked at Volgograd. The New York Times reported that each appearance of the spacemen was greeted with applause and cheering and they responded with waves and autographs. The astronauts ended their Russian tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell press conference back in Moscow. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton praised the “enthusiastic people with warm hearts” they had met during their tour. During the press conference—held exactly 18 yr after the U.S.S.R. had launched the first manmade satellite, Sputnik 7, on 4 Oct. 1957—Stafford encouraged continued cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. in such areas as lunar and planetary exploration, space medicine, space meteorology, and earth environment. The three U.S. astronauts and their families flew to London for an overnight stay before flying back to Houston on 5 Oct. (B Sun, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75; NYT, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75)
At a Moscow exhibition of space art to commemorate the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, Soviet art glorified man’s role in space, whereas U.S. art emphasized technology, the Baltimore Sun reported. U.S. artists, commissioned by NASA and the National Gallery of Art to record the space program, showed basically factual treatments of blastoffs, launch towers, and mazes of steel gridwork. Artist Alden Wicks depicted Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building as “The New Olympus.’’ Men played subordinate roles in U.S. art; they swarmed through control centers or, as in Jamie Wyeth’s “Firing Room,” sat by the dozens in front of individual TV monitors. Engineers ministered to launch vehicles like priests before an idol. Even in the pen-and-ink drawings of individual astronauts, faces were diminished by the detailed minutiae of spacesuit and life-support paraphernalia. By contrast, man dominated the Soviet art. Artist Anatoly Yakushin depicted pioneer rocket theoretician Konstantin Tsiolkovsky against a geometric maze, but man controlled the idea. A painting by Boris Okorokov showed a young flight controller commanding abstract equipment, in contrast to Wyeth’s passive TV-monitor watchers. The irony of the two artistic visions was that they “reverse the technological visions of the nations’ manned space programs,” the Sun said. In reality, U.S. flights left much of the flying up to the astronauts, while the Soviets had kept their cosmonauts as passive as possible. Also included in the exhibition were paintings by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, the only one of the artists who had seen outer space. He painted cosmic scenes in brilliant colors: His deep space was not a flat black, but a composite of black and indigo, streaked with magenta and stars with violet coronas. The Leonov earth as seen from space was deep marbled blue with atmospheric sheaths surrounding it in hard-edged layers, pale hues close to the planet, darkening in stages to the night of Space. (B Sun, 16 July 75, A4)
The unexplained loss of calcium by astronauts during prolonged manned missions “seems to be a slow persistent loss,” Dr. David L. Winter, NASA Director for Life Sciences, said during a press briefing. Data indicated calcium had been lost in space at the rate of 0.5% a month, a rate that showed “no evidence of leveling off.” Bones tended to lose calcium at varying rates, weakening selective bones. Scientists were studying various ways, including diet management, to compensate for the calcium loss. Dr. Winter said that the observed decrease in red blood cells during the Skylab missions was not because of red-cell destruction but rather a slowdown of the red-cell production. “We seem to have stumbled on a way in which red blood cell production is suppressed.” This mechanism, unknown before, would be a very interesting and important process to study. ' Physical criteria for the selection of astronauts for the Space Shuttle would vary according to function, Dr. Winter said. Pilots would be selected using very rigid criteria; these would not be imposed upon astronauts, i.e. mission specialists, whose function would be primarily scientific. Because the objective for Shuttle missions would be to get the best qualified scientists, it would be impossible to predict what size, shape, age, or sex these scientists would be. The purpose of the Shuttle was to permit anyone with a legitimate need to go into space; therefore, NASA’s approach would be to broaden the selection criteria as much as possible. (Transcript)
Canada would develop the remote manipulator system (RMS) for NASA’s Space Shuttle to permit astronauts inside the Shuttle Orbiter to deploy or retrieve payloads in space, NASA announced. Canada would fund the $30 million project, providing the first flight unit to NASA without charge in 1979. Canada would also supply flight units for follow-on Orbiters. Costs for these units would not include charges for Canada’s research and development. (NASA Release 75 — 135)
Flight Research Center pilots began flight tests as part of a cooperative industry-government program to measure noise levels of five business-class jet aircraft during various landing approach maneuvers. Object of the tests was to define noise characteristics for this class of aircraft and the effectiveness of alternate landing-approach procedures in reducing community noise levels. Using a Rockwell Sabreliner, Grumman Gulfstream II, Gates Learjet, Beech-Hawker 125 provided by the National Business Aircraft Association, and Lockheed Jet Star provided by NASA, FRC pilots flew four landing approaches over a microphone array. A normal 3° approach provided baseline information; a 3° decelerating approach with engines at reduced power, a 4° approach with normal power, and a two-segment approach starting with 6° angle and shallowing into a 3° approach provided additional data. (NASA Release 75-103) During practice sessions similar to those held in the U.S. 7 Feb.— 1 March, the participants practiced communications skills, transfer procedures, joint activities, and contingency situations, using the Soyuz simulator at the Gagarin Cosmonaut Center in Star City. On 19 April the crews visited the mission-control center at Kaliningrad and, on 28 April, became the second group of westerners to visit the Baykonur cosmodrome (French President Charles de Gaulle had been the first western visitor when he witnessed the launch of Cosmos 122 on 25 June 1966). At Baykonur the U.S. crewmen saw the actual flight hardware as well as the primary launch pad 2 km away, and the prime and backup crews each spent an hour in the Soyuz spacecraft. The astronauts later reported to the press that they had found no significant differences between the actual spacecraft and the simulators used during training. (Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 278—280; JSC Releases 75- 22, 75— 25; WPost, 30 April 75, A21 ,SBD, 18 April 75, 273; A&A 66, 223)
Scientists believed that light flashes observed by Skylab 4 crew members during their 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974 mission as they flew through the South Atlantic Anomaly—a slight asymmetry in the earth’s magnetic field where the Van Allen radiation belt dipped unusually low over Brazil—were a previously unsuspected form of radiation, Science magazine reported. The radiation seemed to consist of atomic nuclei heavier than hydrogen which, when stripped of electrons, would carry multiple positive electric charges. The astronauts had seen the flashes when the spacecraft cabin was dark and they were preparing for sleep. Scientists suspected that the flashes were stimulated within the retina of the eye by the high-energy cosmic-ray particles. Normally earth was shielded from cosmic rays by the magnetic field, but strong penetrating cosmic rays could reach as far into the field as the Skylab orbit. Because the magnetic-field shielding of the earth weakened toward the geomagnetic poles, it was possible to predict variations in cosmic-ray exposure as Skylab moved away from the poles. During two test periods, light-flash observations of Astronaut William R. Pogue showed a close correlation with exposure variations. (Pinsky et al., Science, 30 May 75, 928—930; Sullivan, NYT, 29 May 75, 10) The new space agency’s symbol was a rounded “e,” for European, on a globe representing earth, with fine lines suggesting both orbit and axis and a white dot representing a satellite in space. (ESRO—ESA Releases 20 May 75, 23 May 75, 2 June 75) 30 May—8 June: The 31st Annual Paris Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport in France. New restrictions on flight demonstrations by high-performance aircraft, imposed by the French government after the 1973 Air Show crash of the Soviet Tu —144 supersonic transport, had placed the show’s emphasis on displays of the latest aerospace hardware and technology from throughout the world. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the general turndown in the economy throughout the western world had caused a decline of 20% in exhibitors from the 1973 show. France emphasized the cooperative nature of its major programs, displaying the French—British Concorde SST, the French—German Alpha Jet trainer-attack aircraft, the French—British Jaguar close-air support aircraft, and the multinational A—300B twin-engine wide-body transport. The U.S. pavilion reflected the changing environment at the show, reserving 66% of its floor space for company exhibits restricted to industry visitors; the remaining 33% contained exhibits open to the general public. In 1973 60% was exhibitor space and 40% for the general public. Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. displayed aircraft that were potential replacements for the Boeing 707 and McDonnell DC— 8 on commercial airlines. The Boeing aircraft, a three-engine member of the 7X7 family, incorporated the NASA-developed supercritical wing. “Blue Planet” was the theme of the public section of the U.S. pavilion which emphasized technological fallout and practical uses on earth of space technology. Included were full-scale models of the Viking spacecraft scheduled for launch to Mars later in the year, and of Martin Marietta Corp.’s large space telescope. The 80 participating British companies emphasized their country’s capability in avionics and equipment and aerospace technology. Among the new aircraft exhibited by the British were the BN2 Islander, a floating aircraft for service between islands; the Lock-spieser LDA— 1, for cargo and agricultural uses; and a new version of the BAC 111 fighter aircraft. West Germany’s display stressed its participation in international consortiums as a major hope for continuing growth. Messerschmitt— Boelkow—Blohm GmbH pointed out in its display that 70% of its revenues in 1974 had been derived from multinational projects. (Av Wk, 2 June 75, 14-20; 9 June 75, 12-17)
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronaut Donald K. Slayton entered Texas Medical Center to undergo exploratory surgery for a small lesion on his left lung. NASA physicians had discovered the lesion in x-rays taken during the astronaut’s postflight recovery from gas inhalation [see 25 July]. Slayton’s x-rays had shown a complete clearing of lung infiltrates but revealed a 4-mm discrete shadow. Specialized x-rays, called tomograms, taken 6 Aug. had confirmed that the shadow was indeed a lesion and not a part of the normal lung structure. NASA physicians, conferring with chest specialists at the Texas Medical Center, recommended surgery; all the doctors agreed that the lesion had not resulted from the gas inhalation. (JSC Release 75-69)
Most of the 40 participants at a space-food exhibition banquet in Zvezdny Gorodok, U.S.S.R., found the meal tasty but not very filling, the Washington Post reported. Presiding over the affair, cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, Soviet commander for the scheduled July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, said that after the third day of spaceflight, when an astronaut’s appetite improved, he could consume four meals a day. The banquet menu included fruit juices, coffee, borsch, cabbage soup, bite-sized bread, and a compote of cucumber, chicken necks, and kidney. During the dinner Leonov revealed that the Soyuz 18 cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, launched 24 May and in orbit aboard the Salyut 4 space station, would continue in orbit during the ASTP mission and would probably remain in orbit for another month. (Piper, W Post, 27 June 75, A2)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) said in a speech on the Senate floor that he had asked the Central Intelligence Agency to assess the safety of Soviet manned space technology. “The inlaunch failure of another Soviet manned satellite last Saturday [7 April] reinforces my deep concern that the upcoming joint Apollo-Soyuz experiment may be dangerous to American astronauts. . . . The history of the Soviet-manned program shows an appalling lack of consistency. As soon as one severe problem is solved another occurs.” (CR, 9 April 75, S5527)
Astronaut Donald K. (Deke) Slayton had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Operations for Approach and Landing Test at the Johnson Space Center, announced Center Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. In the newly created position, Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the approach and landing test project for the Space Shuttle program. He most recently had been docking module pilot of the U.S. crew for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 75—314; JSC Release 75—100)
The upper stage and instrument unit of the Saturn IB rocket that carried the U.S. astronauts into orbit for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project reentered the earth’s atmosphere at 9:45 pm EDT. The 14 100-kg stage and instrument unit, empty of 320 cu m of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, broke into pieces as they reentered over the Pacific Ocean. Reentry was activated by ground commands; excess fuel was dumped through the engine, slowing the stage and ensuring that disintegration came in a remote ocean area. (MSFC Release 75 — 160)
NASA announced retirement from military service of NASA Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974) astronauts Gerald P. Carr and William R. Pogue effective September 1. Carr, a Marine Corps colonel, would remain with NASA as a civilian astronaut. Pogue, an Air Force colonel and an astronaut since April 1966, would leave NASA to become a vice president of High Flight, an interdenominational evangelistic foundation founded by former astronaut James R. Irwin. As crew members on Skylab 4 Pogue and Carr, along with Dr. Edward G. Gibson, share the world record for individual time in space of 2017 hr 15 min 32 sec. Pogue’s departure would reduce the number of NASA astronauts to 31. (NASA Release 75—233)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.), a critic of the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, reported that the Soviet Union had bugged the conversations of U.S. astronauts and technicians at the Moscow space center before the July space flight. Using information received from two sources and confirmed through official channels, Sen. Proxmire said that the bugs were discovered while the astronauts and technicians were watching a televised Soviet hockey game. Wanting a closer view of the game, U.S. astronaut Robert F. Overmyer moved his chair nearer the TV screen, causing a wire leading from the chair into the floor to snap. The Washington Post quoted a spokesman for NASA as confirming the incident, but saying there was no evidence the wire “had anything to do with a listening device.” (AP, W Post, 2 Aug 75; Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 17)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt, the only scientist astronaut to walk on the moon, had announced his candidacy for U.S. Senator from N. Mex., the Washington Post reported. A Republican, Dr. Schmitt would oppose Democratic Senator Joseph M. Montoya, who was expected to seek reelection. (IF Post, 10 Sept 75)
NASA announced the appointment of David R. Scott as Director of Flight Research Center to replace Lee R. Scherer, who had become Director of Kennedy Space Center. Scott had been an astronaut on Gemini 8 (16 March 1966), on Apollo 9 (3 — 13 March 1969), and on lunar landing mission Apollo 15 (26 July—7 Aug. 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, Scott served as technical assistant to the Apollo Program Manager at Johnson Space Center, and as special assistant for mission operations and government-furnished equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA anno, 18 April 75)
President Ford presented the Harmon Aviation Awards, given for outstanding feats of individual pilot skill, worthy of international recognition, and contributing to the art and science of flight. The 1974 Astronauts’ Trophy was awarded to the Skylab 2 crew who, during their 25 May to 23 June 1973 mission, became the first astronauts to successfully accomplish major repairs on a spacecraft in space. Skylab 2 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., accepted the award on behalf of himself and crewmembers Paul J. Weitz and Joseph P. Kerwin. President Ford presented the 1974 Aeronauts’ Trophy to the son of Malcolm S. Forbes for the latter’s series of 21 flights in a hot-air balloon that took him 4000 km across the U.S. from Coos Bay, Ore., to Gwynn Island, Va. The 1974 Aviators’ Trophy went to Col. Edward J. Nash, Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations of the 21st Air Force, for his 21 000-km round-trip airlift mission in a C —5 aircraft from the U.S. to Israel, and for his direction of continuous C—5 and C —141 operations from the U.S. to the Azores and on to Israel between 14 Oct. and 14 Nov. 1973. The 1973 Aviators’ Trophy was awarded to L/C Edgar L. Allison for piloting an HC—130H aircraft of the Air Force 57th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron nonstop on 20 Feb. 1972 from Taiwan to Scott Air Force Base, 111., a distance of 14 053 km, without refueling. This established a record for the longest straight-line nonstop flight in a turboprop aircraft. (PD, 5 May 75, 480—481)
Successful lung surgery performed 26 Aug. on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Astronaut Donald K. Slayton revealed no evidence of malignancy, the Johnson Space Center Roundup reported. During the 2.5-hr surgery, doctors at the Texas Medical Center removed a triangular wedge that included the 4-mm nodule detected during postflight x-rays [see 20 Aug.] plus a small amount of normal surrounding tissue. Adjacent lymph nodes were biopsied and found normal; doctors found no signs of any other lesions. Slayton would remain in the hospital for 7 to 10 more days. (JSC Roundup, 29 Aug. 75,1)
During recovery operations of the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, the Apollo spacecraft would not be retrieved by helicopter as usual on Apollo missions, Dr. Donald E. Stullken, chief of Johnson Space Center’s Mission Support Branch, said during a press briefing. Instead, the recovery ship would steam up alongside the command module and haul it aboard using the ship’s boat and aircraft crane. Navy personnel would open the hatch and the crew would step out on the ship’s deck. Arnold D. Aldrich, deputy manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at JSC, said that the most extensive modification required for the ASTP mission was redesigning the Soyuz spacecraft to accommodate the newly added docking system. The front end of the Soyuz had been modified with respect to structural configuration, thermal design, and the requirement to fit all the new system under the launch shroud that covered the entire Soyuz during the boost phase. John E. McLeaish, JSC Public Affairs Officer, said that NASA would provide U.S. and Soviet air-to-ground communications, air-to-air communications, and U.S.- and U.S.S.R.-originated commentary for newsmen during the mission. All Russian would be translated simultaneously into English, using a “voice-over” technique; a few communication lines would transmit raw Russian with no translation. The U.S.S.R. would provide an interpreter to assist newsmen in the U.S. with interpretation or explanation, if necessary. Questioned about the political significance of the ASTP mission, U.S. crew member Donald K. Slayton replied, “I think we’d be naive to assume that this program is going to end all conflicts between our two societies, certainly. I think . . . it’s a step in that direction, but there’s little doubt in my mind that we’re going to continue to have conflicts in many different areas. However, if we can kind of break the ground and get at least one area where we continue to work constructively on something, we’re certainly not going to end up in any major confrontation.” (Transcripts)
Press briefings on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project were held at Johnson Space Center. ASTP participants would be conducting experiments in space sciences, life sciences, and applications, ASTP Project Scientist Dr. Thomas Giuli said at an experiments briefing. The five space-science experiments included a soft x-ray experiment to study radiation by scanning across the celestial mode, pointing at known discrete sources in the soft part of the spectrum from 2 kev to 0.1 kev, and investigating 10 specific x-ray sources known to emit only in regions below 2 kev. A helium-glow experiment would investigate temperature and density of the interstellar medium in the vicinity of our solar system by observing two special frequencies of extreme ultraviolet light emitted from the sun after they traveled into interstellar space, hit the interstellar medium, and were reflected back again. Other space-science experiments included a study of the sun’s outer atmosphere during an artificial eclipse created by maneuvering the Apollo spacecraft. During the “eclipse,” the Soyuz crew would photograph the sun’s corona. Among the earth environmental and applications studies was an experiment to measure neutral atomic oxygen and neutral atomic nitrogen of the earth’s upper atmosphere. Another experiment would try to devise a simple means of monitoring the aerosol content of the earth’s atmosphere. A water-resources management experiment, planned and coordinated with the government of India, would photograph the Himalayan area to map drainage patterns and water-reservoir locations. Life-science experiments included a study to observe optical sensations from cosmic rays experienced by the crew, an investigation of mutation in cells grown in space, and studies of the effect of space flight on the ability of microbes to infect humans and of changes in the human immunity system to resist infections under space flight conditions. . At a mission profile briefing, Kenneth A. Young of JSC’s Mission Planning and Analysis Div. said that plans called for a 9-day Apollo mission beginning 7.5 hrs after the launch of Soyuz by the U.S.S.R. The planned rendezvous period would be 2 days, with docking scheduled for the 30th inertial orbit, or third day in flight, of the Apollo spacecraft. Following much negotiation, U.S. and Soviet mission planners determined that the two spacecraft would dock over Soviet territory, providing real-time telemetry coverage for the Soviet Union, but at a location where NASA’s Ats 6 communications satellite could provide communications coverage to the U.S. The first handshake would take place over Spain. The spacecraft would undock on the 5th day and perform several joint experiments while separated. Soyuz was scheduled to land the following day. Apollo would continue unilateral experiments in orbit before landing at the end of the 9th day in space. Astronaut Richard H. Truly said, during a joint crew activities briefing, that while the Apollo and Soyuz were docked, all communications would be conducted in the language of the listener regardless of the nationality of the speaker. (Transcript)
Dust storms had been observed on the moon every sunrise and sunset by a three-axis microparticle detector left on the moon by Apollo 17 astronauts during their December 1972 mission, a Nature magazine article reported. The article, based on a report by scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, said the GSFC scientists suspected that the dust was being lifted from the lunar surface and then driven away from the rising or setting sun by electrostatic fields associated with the transition from day to night, or vice versa. The finding supported a theory advanced 20 yr ago by Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., who had suggested that electrostatic forces transported dust from lunar highlands to lowlands, accounting for the smooth appearance of the lunar seas. Although the Apollo landings had shown that those seas had been formed by lava flooding rather than deep dust accumulations, their surface was covered with very fine dust. Also, because neither wind nor rain existed on the airless moon, some other process must have been responsible for the evident erosion. Electrostatic levitation was being suggested as one possible explanation. Because the lunar vacuum acted as an insulator, the dust cloud hugged the surface, reaching only between 20 and 30 cm high, explaining why it had been detected from a low angle by instruments on the lunar surface but never by orbiting astronauts or earth-based equipment. (Hughes, Nature, 10 April 75, 481—2)
Former astronaut William R. Pogue (USAF, Ret.) received the 1974 Thomas D. White Space Trophy during ceremonies at the National Geographic Society Headquarters in Washington, D.C. Pogue received the trophy—given annually to the military or civilian member of the Air Force who made an outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace—for his achievements as pilot of Skylab 4, third and final mission aboard the U.S.’s first manned orbiting workshop. The mission (16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974), longest manned flight in history, had established the foundation for future long-term missions in space. Pogue had retired from both the Air Force and the astronaut corps on 1 Sept. (DOD Release 456 —75)
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
At an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew-status briefing, Richard S. Johnston, Director of Life Sciences, told reporters that Houston control could not make voice contact with the crew during Apollo reentry [see 15—24 July]. The first medical bulletin on the astronauts’ condition, received at Houston several hours later, had informed Houston officials of the crew’s eye and lung irritation. After splashdown, astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Donald K. Slayton had noticed that fellow crewman Vance D. Brand had passed out. He had revived after about 1 min when Stafford adjusted his oxygen mask and ensured a proper flow of oxygen. Johnston also said that preliminary diagnostic procedures had indicated that the crew did not have “any apparent medical problem at that time” but that x-rays had shown increased hylar markings originating from the center of the chest. The doctors elected to move the crew to sick bay and keep them under observation. The astronauts had been given cortisone to decrease the inflammation of their lung tissue and relieve the symptoms of cough and substernal discomfort. During the briefing, word came that the astronauts had arrived at Tripler Hospital in Hawaii where they would enter the intensive care unit. “They walked in smiling and they looked happy,” said JSC Public Affairs Officer Robert V. Gordon. (ASTP Transcript PC—56)
