NASA Hq announced appointment of R.D. Ginter as assistant administrator for energy programs, effective Jan. 2. Ginter had been acting in that position since Sept. 1975, following the departure of astronaut (now U.S. Senator) Harrison H. Schmitt (R-NM). Ginter had joined NASA in 1960 after 8yr as a missile project officer with the U.S. Navy and served in a variety of positions, including chief of the Scout launch vehicle program, director of the Technology Applications Division, and director of the Energy Systems Division. He received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1966 for his work as program manager for the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle. (NASA Release 77-9)
W Post staff writer Thomas O’Toole quoted administration sources as saying President Carter had chosen Dr. Frank Press, head of the department of earth and planetary sciences at the Mass. Inst, of Technology, to be White House science adviser. Press, considered one of the world’s leading seismologists, had been one of a team of geophysicists who first described Antarctica as a continent rather than as an island of ice floating on earth’s crust. He had also helped design and build the seismometers left on the moon by six crews of Apollo astronauts. A member of the Natl. Science Board, Press had been consultant to 7 federal agencies including DOD, the State Dept., and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Offered the job of science adviser to the president, Press apparently had not accepted it at once, and said by telephone from MIT that “nothing is settled.” (IVPost, Feb 11/77, A-2)
The NY Times reported that Capt. Edgar D. Mitchell, astronaut on the Apollo 14 mission, had taken 55 special stamp covers on his flight and had just sold the first for $4200. The San Francisco firm that auctioned the stamp earlier in Oct. said the buyer was a major stamp dealer in Italy. In 1972 NASA had reprimanded the Apollo 15 astronauts for smuggling 400 first-day covers to the moon and selling 100; the 300 covers not sold were turned over to the U.S. for “safe storage in the archives.” The Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 silver medals on the 1971 moon flight, keeping 150 for “private use,” but had not been reprimanded because none of the medals had been sold. The Calif, dealer said Mitchell, now a civilian living in Fla., had brought in the covers for appraised and was advised to find the market value by selling one. NASA said it knew Mitchell had taken the covers in his “personal preference kit”; when it asked about them, he replied “It’s,none of your business,” and a few days later had announced his retirement. Official NASA comment on the sale: “Unfortunate.” (NYT, Oct 23/77, 45)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) would present the gold space medal, given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum, at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records. Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of 2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed circuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine aircraft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.) Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting 107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich, for being the only person to win the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its environment. The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77) During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Aircraft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)
H. Julian Allen, originator of the concept of bluntness as an aerodynamic technique for reducing heating of spacecraft reentering earth’s atmosphere, died of a heart attack at Stanford Univ. hospital at the age of 66. A major figure in modern aerospace technology, Allen’s work had made possible the safe return to earth of U.S. astronauts and had revolutionized the design of ballistic missiles. After earning bachelor’s and engineering degrees from Stanford, Allen in 1936 had joined the Natl. Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) at its Langley laboratory in Hampton, Va., and had returned to Calif, in 1941 when the Ames installation came into being. He had worked there ever since, serving as ARC director from 1965 to 1969. His scientific contributions included a general theory of subsonic airfoils which led to use of low-drag airfoils in World War II on aircraft such as the Mustang fighter. He led in developing high-speed wind tunnels at ARC, now recognized as primary national resources for advancing aircraft design and national defense. He had received national and international honors, including NASA’s distinguished service medal and medal for exceptional scientific achievement. He was a fellow of many societies, including the Royal Aeronautical Society of London. (ARC Release 77-06)
The initial phase of Shuttle approach and landing tests (ALT) that began Feb. 18 at DFRC might end ahead of schedule, DFRC announced, if the 4th and 5th flight of the combined 747-and-orbiter vehicles continued to meet program objectives. Donald K. Slayton, ALT program manager, said that if performance measured up to previous successful flights, the 6th test (now scheduled for Mar. 4) would be dropped. Program officials had praised the performance of the 747 and its piggyback passenger, Slayton said; flight data had verified preflight wind-tunnel test results and simulations conducted by Boeing. Early completion of inert tests with an unmanned orbiter would put the orbiter in its hangar a week ahead of schedule to prepare for its next flight, in the captive-active phase. Five flights scheduled in this phase would carry astronaut crews to perform systems checks and go through crew procedures as the 747 went through maneuvers up to, but just short of, actual release of the orbiter. Tests later in the summer would release the orbiter for an unpowered landing on DFRC’s dry lakebed. (NASA Release 77-36; DFRC Release 8-77)
MSFC announced plans for a teleoperator retrieval system (a retrievable reusable low-thrust stage for maneuvering payloads in low earth orbit) to fly on the Space Shuttle in the early 1980s, its first use probably a Skylab-orbit adjustment to permit revisiting or control its reentry over an open ocean area. Riding into orbit on the Shuttle, the TRS would be deployed and remotely operated by an astronaut aided by a television image from a camera mounted on the TRS. It could also maneuver to higher orbit and return, using its own guidance and computer systems, to be remotely controlled again for retrieval into the Shuttle when it came within range of the TV signal. MSFC would manage development of the TRS, and Martin Marietta would be responsible for vehicle integration. (MSFC Release 77-201)
MSFC reported that the number of visitors to the center in 1976 had increased 11 °7o over the previous yr to a total of 95 529, representing each of the 50 United States and several foreign countries. The guided bus tours of the center, cosponsored by MSFC and the Alabama Space and Rocket Center, last year added new items and increased activities at some of the former Saturn test sites. The tour stop presenting the story of the Space Shuttle and its payload had added a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle main engine. Tourists could also enter a full-scale mockup of Skylab to see how the astronauts lived in orbit; and the east and west test areas being converted for Shuttle testing were now available for viewing. The Redstone test stand already on the tour route had been refurbished and was added to the Natl. Register of Historic Places. (MSFC Release 77-3)
NASA announced that Dr. David R. Scott, director of Dryden Flight Research Center, would leave the agency Oct. 30 to form with others a firm in Los Angeles specializing in technology transfer. Deputy Director Isaac T. Gillam would be acting director until a replacement was selected. Before becoming director of DFRC in 1975, Dr. Scott had been deputy director since 1973. He had left the astronaut corps in 1972, having flown on Gemini 8, Apollo 9, and as spacecraft commander of Apollo 15 (fourth manned lunar landing, during which he was first to visit the moon’s Hadley rille and Apennine mountains). He had also been technical assistant to the Apollo program manager at JSC and special assistant in the Apollo spacecraft program office. (NASA anno Oct 12/77; NASA Release 77-217; DFRC Release 34-77)
Johnson Space Center announced that the ninth group of Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Nov. 7 for physicals and interviews. The group, 21 mission specialist applicants and 2 pilot applicants, included 12 civilians; 2 were women, bringing the number of female applicants interviewed to 20. Of the military applicants, 5 were Navy; 4, USAF; and 1 each from the Army and Marines. NASA had screened 183 applicants so far, 79 seeking to be pilots and 104 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-70; NASA Release 77-232) •
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
NASA announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for the 30 to 40 openings as Space Shuttle astronauts after a yr-long recruiting effort. Candidates selected would report in 1978 for a 2yr training period at Johnson Space Center. Of the 8037 applicants, 6735 were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot; 1142 of the applicants were women. NASA would announce selections in Dec. 1977. (NASA Release 77-145; JSC Release 77-39)
NASA announced tentative selection of 18 scientists to participate in the Space Telescope project. The 10-ton spacecraft scheduled for Shuttle launch in 1983 to orbit at 500km (310mi) altitude would make observations deeper into space, and with more detail, than heretofore possible, covering about 350 times the volume of space now visible from earth-based telescopes. It had been designed for remote operation from the ground, including maintenance or retrieval by a space-suited astronaut for return to earth to be overhauled and relaunched. The telescope could accommodate 5 different instruments at its focal plane: both the faint-object camera (ESA) and the wide-field camera could cover ultraviolet and blue spectra, the latter the red and near-infrared regions as well; the two spectrographs would offer a range of resolution impossible with a single instrument; and the photometer could calibrate the other instrument and image the galactic background. (NASA Release 77-239)
NASA announced a yr-long schedule of test runs and captive-flight tests on the first-built Space Shuttle orbiter, Enterprise, that would take place at the Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Called approach and landing tests (ALT), the series of flights with a modified Boeing 747 serving as a ferry aircraft and airborne launch platform would begin with several taxiing tests with the orbiter atop the carrier; following would be six inert-captive flights in which the jumbo jet would carry the unmanned orbiter to a 7620m (25 000ft) altitude. Unmanned flights would verify performance of the two vehicles in mated flight. Then would come a series of captive-active flights with the orbiter’s systems powered up and the Enterprise manned by 2 astronauts. The first orbiter off the assembly line arrived at DFRC Jan. 31 from Rockwell Intl.’s Palmdale plant; upon completion of ALT, the carrier would take the prototype to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground-vibration tests. After these tests, NASA said, the Enterprise would return to Palmdale to be prepared for orbital flight in the early 1980s. The orbiter now under construction (OV-102) would be the first used in actual orbital-flight tests, now scheduled to begin in mid-1979; six test flights would demonstrate the orbiter’s capabilities in earth orbit before the start of operational flights, scheduled to begin in 1980. (NASA Release 77-16)
James B. Irwin, eighth astronaut to walk on the moon, remained in satisfactory condition after triple bypass surgery at the Texas Heart Institute. “He is still in intensive care but is doing very well,” said a spokesman at St. Lukes Episcopal Hospital in Houston. The operation consisted of replacing three vein segments with veins removed from Irwin’s legs. Irwin, 46, lunar-module pilot on the Apollo 15 mission July 26, 1971, had resigned from the astronaut corps in May 1972. (NYT, Jan 8/77, 17)
NASA announced that Skylab 4 commander Gerald P. Carr would leave JSC June 25 to join a Houston firm, Bovay Engineers, Inc. Carr, one of 19 astronauts selected in Apr. 1966, had shared a spaceflight-duration record of 2017hr (84 days) with Dr. Edward G. Gibson and William R. Pogue, and had retired from the U.S. Marine Corps in Sept. 1975 to become a NASA civilian employee. His departure left 27 astronauts on the active list at JSC. (NASA Release 77-129)
JSC announced that the 10th group of Shuttle astronaut applications would report to the center Nov. 14 for physical examinations and interviews. This group consisted of 24 mission specialist applicants and one pilot applicant; 17 were civilians, 1 a woman, and 8 were from the military—3 each from the USAF and Navy, 1 each from the Marines and Coast Guard. This group would bring the total to 80 pilot applicants and 128 mission specialist (21 women) applicants screened at JSC. In Dec., NASA hoped to name as many as 20 in each category for 2 yrs’ further training before final selection as astronauts. (JSC Release 77-75; NASA Release 77-236)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its first free flight at Edwards Air Force Base in Calif, with a “flawless landing” on a runway in the Mojave desert 53min 51sec after taking off at 8am local time (11am EDT) and 5min 22sec after release from its 747 carrier. Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Charles Gordon Fullerton were the Enterprise pilots; veteran test pilots Thomas C. McMurtry and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew the Boeing 747. Spectators, estimated to number about 70 000, had begun arriving the previous night (Thursday, Aug. 11) to cheer the landing just after 9am local time with the desert temperature nearing 100°F. The orbiter had separated from its carrier 3min late because the heat of the air had slowed the climb. The 747 had “strained its engines” to carry the 73ton Shuttle as high as possible; it had climbed to 27 000ft (8100m) before it started downward, in order to gain speed. The 122ft-long orbiter, released at 22 100ft (6738m) altitude, had soared one way, the 747 another, to ensure separation. Pilots of the T-38 chase planes following the flight had assured the crews of the 747 and the orbiter that they were clear of each other. “Thanks for the lift,” Haise told the 747 crew as the craft separated. Haise had rehearsed the free flight the previous day in a small twin-engine jet modified to behave like the Shuttle. Actual separation, which could not be rehearsed in advance, was the only way to prove that the Shuttle would lift cleanly over the tall vertical tail fin of the 747. Separation had occurred without difficulty, however, and both pilots reported themselves delighted with the orbiter, which had handled in unORIGINAL PAGE- 53 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 QF POOR QUALITY Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise separates from its Boeing 747 carrier in first free flight, August 12, 1977. (NASA 77-H-552) powered flight as easily as design engineers had predicted. It was “a lot like flying a Concorde,” according to Haise, and Fullerton described it as a "very crisp, very stable airplane.” On the orbiter’s way down, Haise had pulled up in three inflight “flare” maneuvers to test its landing characteristics. One of the identical redundant computers on the orbiter had failed at separation, cutting off flight-control accelerometers, without affecting the flight. The Enterprise landed like a glider, without engines, relying on its battery of computers and “the most advanced control system ever installed in a spacecraft.” It had approached the ground at an 11° angle, more than 3 times as steep as a commercial jetliner’s approach, and at a speed of 338kph (210mph) compared to a typical 747 landing speed of 170mph. The orbiter had touched down a mile in front of the aiming point, because Haise underestimated its glide capability; it had rolled another 2mi before stoppping. For this first free flight, the orbiter wore a tail cone over its three aft rockets; on the fourth flight, scheduled for Oct., NASA would remove the cone, causing the orbiter to land more steeply (as it would upon returning from space). In regular use, the Shuttle as a weight-saving measure would have no power after firing its rockets to deorbit, no airbreathing engines for maneuvering in the atmosphere; it would be slowed by air friction only and would glide down at 200mph or more to a landing. For the actual spaceflight early in 1979, the Shuttle would ride into orbit pushed by solid-fuel rocket motors on a giant external tank and by the liquid-fuel rockets on its tail. Purpose of the free flight exercises was to verify the orbiter’s subsonic airworthiness, the operation of the integrated system, and the pilot-guided vs. automatic approach and landing capabilities. The ability to land at an airport instead of parachuting into the ocean gave the Shuttle the “versatility and economy required to make space operations routine in the next decade,” according to the W. Star. (NASA Release 77-160; NASA Actv., Aug/77, 2; NYT, Aug 13/77, 1; WPost, Aug 13/77, Al; WStar, Aug 13/77, A-3; B Sun, Aug 12/77, 7; C Trib, Aug 13/77, 1-1; Time, Aug 22/77, 64)
NASA announced it had scheduled the first free flight of the Shuttle orbiter for 8am PDT Aug. 12 at Dryden Flight Research Center. Briefing the press Aug. 11 would be Deke Slayton, ALT program manager at Johnson Space Center, and John Young, chief of the JSC astronaut office; Chet Lee, Hq director of Space Transportation Systems operations, speaking on payloads, pricing policies, and users; and Aaron Cohen, manager of the orbiter project at JSC, on orbiter systems. (NASA Release 77-158; DFRC Release 26-77)
The Chicago Tribune reported that astronaut Walt Cunningham had written “the first kiss-and-tell treatise about the space program,” a book called The All-American Boys, intended as a “candid, close-up, even critical look” at NASA, the space program, and his fellow “partynauts,” none of whom had dared to be as critical as Cunningham in his first “but probably not last” book. The review said the book was “about people—imperfect mortal men—and what happens when they suddenly find themselves cast as superheroes in a world that literally knows no bounds.” (C Trib, Nov 10/77, 1-17)
Kennedy Space Center reported it had loaned its hyperbaric chamber to the Univ. of Fla. College of Medicine at Gainesville, for use in research. KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or recompression) chamber in its operations and checkout building to treat astronauts affected by decompression sickness (the “bends”) during manned altitude-chamber tests of the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms, carbon monoxide poisoning, or gas gangrene might require administration of hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber) for periods up to 24hr. The end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975 had ended NASA’s immediate need for the altitude or the hyperbaric chambers, but KSC had kept them for possible use in Space Shuttle training. (KSC Release 101-77)
Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR, late in Dec. to begin training for flight positions on Soyuz/Salyut missions. Flight candidates from Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania were to arrive for training at the center during 1977. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9) February I: NASA announced it had received 1147 applications for its Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least 15 pilot and 15 mission specialist candidates. Deadline for applications would be June 30, 1977. Those selected would report July 1, 1978, to Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; appointment as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of the course. NASA had mailed 11 822 applications to persons outside the agency, and another 350 to employees at NASA centers. All the applications received so far had been from civilians; the astronaut selection board would receive applications from members of the military services just before the deadline. Most of the applications were for the mission specialist category: 922 for that group, 225 for pilot, and 118 for both. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would be responsible for vehicle systems. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in areas of consumables usage, experiment operations, and crew activities. Crews would number up to seven: commander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists (who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors of the payload being flown). Payload specialists would operate specific payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to recruit qualified minorities and women as Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 77-18)
JSC reported that another 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report for individual interviews and physical examinations; the group included 17 pilot and 3 mission specialist applicants. Eight of the applicants were from the USAF; 6, Navy; 2, Marines; 4, civilians. Of the more than 8000 applicants, about 200 would go to JSC for screening, the final group due in mid-Nov. and selections in Dec. (JSC Release 77-54; NASA Release 77-205)
JSC reported the first 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants were due for screening. Center Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that the quality of the applicants would make it “difficult to narrow the field . . . paring that number will be a real challenge.” (NASA Release 77-161) * NASA announced it had appointed Isaac T. Gillam, IV, deputy director of DFRC, succeeding Gerald D. Griffin, recently appointed deputy director of Kennedy Space Center in Fla. Gillam, who had directed Shuttle operations at Dryden in the current approach and landing tests, had joined NASA in 1963 after serving in the USAF as a pilot, missile launch Jcrew commander, and ROTC instructor. After receiving a B.A. from Howard Univ., he had done graduate work at Tenn. State Univ. and had been assistant professor of air science there. NASA had appointed him assistant manager of the Delta program in 1966 and program manager in 1968. In 1973, he became program manager for small launch vehicles, and had gone to DFRC in 1976. He had received NASA’s distinguished service medal for his work with launch vehicles. (DFRC Release 27-77; NASA Release 77-164; NASA anno Aug 4/77)
Johnson Space Center announced that a sixth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report this week for individual interviews and physical examinations. This group, all mission specialist applicants, included one woman. (JSC Release 77-56; NASA Release 77-215) •
NASA reported that its announcement on selection of Shuttle astronauts, set for December, would not be forthcoming until January. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, agency administrator, had met Dec. 12 with officials of the selection program but, because of current NASA budget activity, had not reviewed the data presented. On Dec. 16 Dr. Frosch had notified JSC director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, who had supervised the selection program, that the review would proceed after the end of the year. (NASA Release 77-254)
The moon landing effort was possible only because the U.S. had laid the basic theoretical groundwork in the 1940s and 1950s, the WPost reported, quoting Richard C. Atkinson, new head of the Natl. Science Foundation. The man who “probably controls more basic research spending than anyone else in the world” said that Americans should not hope science would come up with an overnight solution to the energy crisis that would preserve their current lifestyle—“Science just doesn’t operate with those turnaround times,” he said. The fact that many people expected such solutions indicated “a basic incomprehension of what science is all about,” an ironic byproduct of the mind-boggling scientific achievement in the past 20yr. “After Sputnik . . . there was a big rush to catch up here . . . They put in a lot of high-powered curricula . . . Now we have a small core of students really well educated in science and a huge group that just [drops out] . . . Those people never have any exposure again. Even college graduates now are really poorly informed on science matters.” Liberal education, Atkinson said, should include solid grounding in basic sciences so that citizens could understand issues like the fate of nuclear reactors and the gene-manufacturing possibilities of recombinant DNA. “I worry,” he said, “that the nation may turn to applied research so strongly that it neglects basic research, and basic research remains our fundamental commitment.” {W Post, June 19/77, C-4) Earlier unmanned tests of the piggyback orbiter in Feb. and March had gone smoothly; since then, engineers had installed control systems, guidance instruments, and power units whose repeated malfunctions had delayed the manned tests originally scheduled to begin May 26. The June 18 test had been delayed for 24hr by problems with the entry hatch and by the failure of guidance-system computers. The astronauts reported trouble with a cabin-pressure valve and with radio communications, and said they had experienced more airframe surface noise than expected. NASA had scheduled a second “manned inert” test for June 28, with the first free flight set for late July or early Aug. (WStar, June 19/77, A-6; C Trib, June 19/77, 1-3; NYT, June 19/77, 19; W Post, June 19/77, A-18; June 20/77, A-6)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERNO of Bremen, W. Germany, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload). Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif. Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)
JSC reported the 8th group of Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to the center Oct. 25 for physical examinations and interviews. The 20 mission specialist applicants in this group were all military except for one civilian; they represented the USAF (13), the Army (3), the Navy (2), and the Marines (1). The group included one woman, USAF Capt. Jane L. Holley. Of the 160 applicants screened at JSC, 77 wanted to be pilots and 83 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-66; NASA Release 77-225)
NASA announced it had scheduled the second free flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about Sept. 13 at DFRC with astronauts Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. The free-flight test series called for 3 more flights before the orbiter would go to MSFC for vibration tests early in 1978. (NASA Release 77-186)
NASA announced that simulation of a 1980s Spacelab mission using the Galileo II (a Convair 990 jet transport converted to a sophisticated flying laboratory) would begin May 16 with the first of nine daily 6hr flights from ARC carrying four payload specialists and a mission specialist. Known as ASSESS (airborne science/Spacelab equipment-system simulation), the flights would rehearse NASA and ESA personnel in the roles they would perform in actual Spacelab missions, giving the managers practice in coordinating payload management between experiment operators on Spacelab and investigators on the ground [cf. Apr. 19]. The actual missions would be the first chance for scientific personnel without astronaut training to obtain in orbit data on earth resources, infrared astronomy, medicine, and atmospheric pollution. The Spacelab program that began in 1972 had included 6 simulations to gather data on Shuttle-Spacelab operations; the first set of flights, called ASSESS 1, had consisted of 5 simulations on Galileo over 6 days in June 1975. The new series, ASSESS 2, would fly a different route each of the 9 days, ranging over the Pacific and to the northern and southern borders of the United States, as far east as the Dakotas, and would end May 26. The Galileo II would fly to Paris May 30 for exhibition at the Paris Air Show, then fly to Cologne in West Germany where the ESA experiments would be removed. Mission specialist on ASSESS 2 would be astronaut Karl Henize of JSC with astronaut Robert Parker, also of JSC, as backup. NASA payload specialists on ASSESS 2 would be David S. Billiu and Robert T. Menzies of JPL, with Leon Weaver of MSFC as backup to both; ESA payload specialist would be Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, with Juergen Fein of West Germany as backup. The other payload specialist position would be shared by Michael Taylor of England (on 6 flights) and Klaus Kramp of West Germany (on 3 flights). The simulation would confine the crew to the aircraft and an adjacent mobile van containing living quarters similar to those available on the Shuttle. (NASA Release 77-94; ESA anno May 10/77)
JSC announced that the second group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Aug. 15 for individual interviews and physical examinations. Like the first group, all those in the second group had applied for pilot positions. The second group included 11 USAF applicants, 7 Navy, 1 Marine, and 1 civilian. (NASA Release 77-171; JSC Release 77-44)
NASA announced that a fourth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to JSC Sept. 19 for a week of physical examinations and individual interviews. All of this group were pilot applicants, one a civilian. Of the others, 12 were USAF; 4, U.S Navy; 3, U.S Marine Corps. A final group would report to JSC in mid-Nov. (NASA Release 77-192)
NASA reported that JSC had produced a compact medical kit containing most of the instrumentation of a well-equipped physician’s office, using techniques and tools developed to monitor astronauts’ vital signs during spaceflight. The NASA “black bag,” weighing less than 14kg and fitting into a case 18cm by 56cm by 36cm, would contain electronic equipment, drugs, bandages, and instruments needed to diagnose and treat many kinds of illnesses or accidents; electronic tools included an electrocardiograph and electroencephalograph, plus either a strip-chart recorder or a cassette tape recorder, with a coupler built in to transmit data over a standard telephone line. The package would improve the treatment possible on emergency or house calls and provide more complete data before hospital admission. (NASA Actv, Nov 77, 24) •
MSFC reported that astronaut Paul Weitz had arrived on center to check out a procedure developed for jettisoning a jammed-open outer door of the Shuttle scientific airlock while on a space mission. Weitz would wear a pressurized space suit for the task, to be carried out in MSFC’s neutral buoyancy simulator. The 75ft-diameter tank filled with water 40ft deep would duplicate movement of people or hardware almost as if weightless in space. Engineers and technicians could design instruments and procedures to handle almost any foreseeable problems before actual spaceflight, and unforeseen problems (such as solar array failure on Skylab) could be solved during a space mission. Center workers had been devising a way to remove the outer door of the airlock in case it could not be closed at the end of a mission, using a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle cargo bay in the simulator. Underwater TV cameras would record the astronaut’s movements on control room monitors, and both video and voice communications would be recorded for later study. Scuba divers in the simulator would help as needed. (MSFC Release 77-158, 77-166)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
MSFC announced that on Jan. 28 NASA had invited industry to submit proposals for supplying design, development, and manufacture of Space Telescope support systems module and optical telescope assembly. The telescope should permit observation of about 350 times the volume of space now acessible to ground-based telescopes. MSFC said it expected award of contracts by Oct. or Nov. 1977 if Congress authorized the mission and appropriated the necessary funds. The 2.4m telescope, included in NASA’s FY 1978 budget recently submitted to Congress, would weigh about 10 tons. The Space Shuttle would carry it as a payload in 1983, launching it to orbit at about 500km altitude at an inclination of 28.8° to the equator. Once there, it could serve for a decade as an in-space observatory operated remotely from the ground, but would be designed for maintenance and servicing by a space-suited astronaut or for retrieval and return by Shuttle for overhaul and subsequent relaunch. NASA would announce to the scientific community in Feb. an opportunity to submit proposals for scientific instruments to be carried on the Space Telescope for its initial launch. (MSFC Release 77-16; NASA Release 77-19)
JSC announced that another set of 20 Shuttle astronaut candidates would report to the center Oct. 17 for physical examinations and individual interviews. All of this group would be mission specialist applicants, 8 of them women. Applicants screened at JSC so far had totaled 140, 77 of them pilots and 63 mission specialists; the 17 women were all mission specialist applicants. (JSC Release 77-59; NASA Release 77-218) •
Fifteen yr almost to the day after the U.S. placed its first man in earth orbit, NASA would begin flight tests of the Enterprise-first Space Shuttle orbiter off the assembly line—to be carried piggyback on a Boeing 747 on Feb. 11, 1977, for its first trip through earth’s atmosphere. The flight of Marine Lt. Col. John H. Glenn on Feb. 20,1962, lasted less than 5hr; since that flight, the U.S. had accumulated 22 504 man-hours in space by using 43 astronauts on 31 separate manned missions that included 9 trips around the moon, 6 moon landings, and 3mo earth-orbital missions on Skylab. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft Friendship 7 weighed only 1315kg, with barely enough room for the pilot and a few instruments, and had parachuted into the Atlantic after its one-time use. The orbiter would weigh 67 500kg empty, could carry up to 7 crew members, and was designed to land on a runway and be prepared for another flight within weeks. In contrast to Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, Spacelab missions carried by the Shuttle might last from 7 to 30 days. First of 6 orbital tests of the Shuttle was set for 1979, and operational flight for 1980. (NASA Release 77-21; NASA pre-ALT rept Feb 11/77)
NASA announced that a third group of 20 astronaut applicants, all in the mission specialist category, would report to JSC Aug. 29 for a week of individual interviews and physical examinations. Eight of this group were women; all 20 had Ph.D. or medical degrees, or both, and one had a degree in veterinary medicine. (NASA Release 77-176)
NASA announced that the first 20 of about 200 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to JSC Aug. 2 for a week of individual interviews and physical exams. Ten of the group were from the USAF, 7 U.S. Navy, 2 Marines, and 1 civilian. Although all the initial group had been pilot applicants, NASA expected the number interviewed at JSC would divide evenly between pilot and mission specialist applicants. NASA would complete processing by mid-November and hoped to select as many as 20 astronaut candidates in each of the two categories in December. Candidates would report to JSC in 1978 for 2yr of training and evaluation; final selection as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. (JSC Release 77-42)
NASA announced it would conduct the third “manned inert” flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about July 26 at Dry den Flight Research Center. At the controls of the orbiter atop its Boeing 747 carrier would be astronauts Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton, making their second piggyback run in this test series. They had made the first captive flight June 18; the second, on June 28, had Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. In the first flight, lasting 56min, Haise and Fullerton had checked out the orbiter flight controls at low altitude and low speed. For the third test, the 747 would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7895 meters (25 905ft) where it would “push over” in a practice separation; the orbiter and 747 crews would go through all the motions except actual separation. The flight would be a dress rehearsal for the first free flight of the orbiter, scheduled on or about Aug. 12. (NASA Release 77-146; JSC Release 77-41)
NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA Release 77-44)
About 300 people had assembled at Cape Canaveral, the W. Post reported, to celebrate the anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11, the mission that first landed humans on the moon. On July 16, 1969, a Saturn V rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center had carried 3 astronauts, none of whom attended the observance. (fV Post, July 17/77, A-18)
The Washington Post reported that NASA would try to save the Skylab space station “which is moving closer to earth and may fall in bits and pieces over the next few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch a “remote-controlled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new orbit, where it would be available for future astronaut visits. The 118ft Skylab launched in 1973 had been circling the globe every 1,5hr at a 200mi altitude. It had been home for three 3-man crews for as long as 12wk at a time; its last 84-day manned mission in 1974 was still the world’s endurance record for time in space. (W Post, Oct 30/77, A-10)
The United States planned to orbit in 1983 a 9080kg 645cm telescope that would observe images almost to the edge of space and the beginning of time, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. “Without the blurring of the atmosphere,” said Dr. John Bahcall of Princeton Univ.’s Institute for Advanced Study, “we would be able to see things that are 10 times smaller than we have seen, or 10 times farther away. It would be like reading the writing on a quarter that we could only tell was round before.” If approved by Congress, the $435 million Space Telescope would be carried from earth by astronauts manning the Space Shuttle. The telescope would investigate quasars radiating thousands of times the energy generated by ordinary stars of the same size, and would observe the birth of stars, map nearby planets and galaxies, and compute distances to the nearest stars. In addition to optics half the size of Mount Palomar’s, the Space Telescope would carry lenses and instruments to scan ultraviolet and infrared spectra not accessible to earthbound telescopes because of atmospheric blockage. The telescope would relay its views to earth using geostationary satellites over the U.S. NASA would send Shuttle astronauts to the telescope every 5yr to replace wornout or damaged parts. (W Post, Jan 21/77, C-24)
