Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
NASA’s Skylab workshop launched in May 1973 might descend to 150 nautical miles (173 statute miles, 278km) altitude and begin reentry into earth’s atmosphere as early as late summer of 1979, JSC Roundup reported, citing orbit data from the North American Air Defense Command’s satellite trackers, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and the Swiss federal observatory. NASA would try two ways of postponing Skylab reentry: first, to reactivate the workshop’s thruster attitude-control system in the spring of 1978 and put it into a very slow tumble, decreasing atmospheric drag and perhaps adding several months to its orbital lifetime; second, to use a teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) launched on an early Space Shuttle mission (about Oct. 1979) and flown by remote control to dock with Skylab. Once docked, the TRS propulsion system could either raise Skylab’s orbit or control its reentry. Although Skylab would break up and burn during descent, some debris would probably survive reentry, and probably would land in an ocean, because 80% of the Skylab orbit had been over water (between 50°N and 50°S). Skylab, largest payload in earth orbit at 85 tons, and about 96ft in length, had been manned during 3 missions by 3 different astronaut crews. When the last crew had left Skylab, NASA estimated the workshop would remain in orbit until 1983; however, its altitude had dropped more rapidly than expected because of increased atmospheric drag caused by sunspot activity. (JSC Roundup, Feb 17/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, Feb 10/78, 2; Marshall Star, Feb 8/78, 4; W Post, Feb 2/78, A-2; C Trib, Feb 6/78, Sec. 1; Nature, Feb 9/78, 499)
The 16th Aerospace Sciences Meeting at MSFC of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics with nearly 700 registrants concluded with posthumous presentation of the space systems award to Dr. Werner von Braun, first MSFC director. Former astronaut Maj. Gen. Thomas Stafford had accepted the Haley spaceflight award on behalf of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew. (Marshall Star, Jan 18/78, 1)
MSFC announced that the American Inst, of Astronautics and Aeronautics (AIAA) had installed Dr. William Lucas, MSFC director, as a fellow at the 14th AIAA annual meeting Feb. 8. AIAA had selected Dr. Lucas “in recognition of your many outstanding contributions and acknowledged leadership in the professional aerospace community,” according to a letter from AIAA president R. H. Miller. Others named AIAA fellows were former astronauts Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and David Scott, Dr. Donald Hearth of Langley Research Center, and Harvard Lomax of ARC. Elected an honorary fellow was former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. {Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
The Congressional Record, at the request of Congressman Olin D. Teague (D-Tex), reported the remarks of Dr. Robert A. Frosch, administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, who introduced the President at the KSC ceremony, presenting for the first time the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to six astronauts. Dr. Frosch said in part: “NASA people have been privileged, not only to continue and to advance the 20th century transportation revolution in aeronautics, but to participate in laying the foundations of the future human adventure in and use of space. . . . The true marks and memories of a civilization are found not only in its physical creations, and how it cares for itself and its people, but in the progress it has contributed toward liberation of the mind from the constraining horizons of the past. One major force has been the growth of scientific knowledge through the exercise of human reason. “The spirit of man aspires to the stars. Every generation has looked out at the universe in search of faith, of hope, of beauty, of adventure, and of the power of knowledge. In our generation, a very few have taken the first brave steps out there to begin the great human adventure of using and understanding the universe beyond the earth. To honor those recent accomplishments, and to lead our way into America’s next decades of space, it is my privilege to introduce the President of the United States.” (CR, Oct 4/78, E 5400)
Soyuz 29 cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivan-chenkov had set a space endurance record in Salyut 6 Sept. 20 after more than 96da aloft, the Washington Post reported; the USSR had not indicated how much longer their flight would last. At 9:17am Moscow time (2:17am EDT), the two had surpassed the previous record of 96da lOhr, set by Soyuz 26 cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Yuri Romanenko Feb. 11 aboard the same spacecraft. The two missions had been similar, consisting of scientific experiments and maintenance activities. Grechko and Romanenko had broken the 84day lhr 16min endurance record set in 1978 by Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue. (W Post, Sept 21/78, A-16; W Star, Sept 20/78, A-13; FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 20/78; AvWk, Sept 25/78, 13)
Langley Research Center announced that Dr. Leonard Hayflick, senior cell research biologist at Children’s Hospital Medical Center of Northern Calif., would speak on “The Biology of Human Aging” Sept. 18 as part of LaRC’s colloquium series. According to Dr. Hayflick, the ability of the human body to maintain itself had been demonstrated from its large-scale immune and endocrine systems down to the cellular level; its highly adaptable self-maintenance ability had appeared in biological responses of astronauts to sustained zero-g environments. Why did this self-maintenance ability give way to the aging process and eventually death? Could the biological clock be altered, and would it be desirable to do so? Dr. Hayflick would discuss aging both from a demographic and a biological point of view. After explaining cell-culture technology and its implications, Dr. Hayflick would summarize some modern theories on the aging process. (LaRC Release 78-45)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would present a portrait of Virgil (Gus) Grissom on loan from NASA to the Grissom Library, Newport News, Va. The library, opened in 1961, had been named in honor of Grissom in Aug. 1961 after his historic flight as pilot of the Mercury-Redstone 4 (Liberty Bell 7) suborbital mission. Grissom, who had lived in nearby Stoneybrook Estates from 1959 to 1962, had kept in touch with the library by working with the children’s summer reading program. He had been killed in Jan. 1967 with Edward White II and Roger Chaffee in an Apollo spacecraft fire during tests at KSC. Grissom and Slayton, who were among the original seven astronauts selected by NASA in 1959, had trained and worked at LaRC during the Mercury program. (LaRC Release 78-52)
NASA announced that 35 new astronaut candidates would report to JSC July 10 to begin 2yr of training and evaluation, including life-support and ejection-seat training for the T-38 aircraft, aircraft physiological training, and T-38 aircraft systems and operations. In Aug., the candidates would take the standard USAF water-survival course at Homestead AFB in Fla., and would attend lectures on spaceflight history, technical-assignment methods and procedures in the astronaut office, manned-spacecraft engineering, Space Shuttle program, aerodynamics, flight operations, and the many disciplines associated with preparing and operating vehicles in space. Astronauts, engineers, and JSC management and support contractors would be instructors and lecturers. (NASA Release 78-98; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1; Marshall Star, July 19/78, 2)
The National Academy of Engineering elected 100 engineers to membership in the academy, including astronaut Neil Armstrong, the NYT reported. Election honored persons contributing to engineering theory and practice or pioneering in new or developing fields of technology. (NYT, April 2/78, 35; Bridge, Spring 78, 2)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would be guest speaker Oct. 5 at a NASA-LaRC colloquium and a public lecture to commemorate NASA’s 20th anniversary. Slayton, one of the original seven astronauts selected in 1959 for Project Mercury and the only one still active in the space program, was orbital flight test manager for JSC’s Space Shuttle Project Office. He had been chief astronaut and director of flight crew operations before going into space in July 1975 with the ApolloSoyuz Test Project. Title of Slayton’s colloquium lecture would be “The Space Shuttle”; his public lecture, “Manned Space Flight: Past Triumphs, Future Challenges.” (LaRC Release 78-47; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 2)
NASA reported that President Jimmy Carter had named six astronauts to receive the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, first such medal ever awarded by the UlS. The six were Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; Charles Conrad, Jr.; John Glenn; Virgil Grissom (posthumous); and Alan Shepard, Jr. The President would present the medals Oct. 1 during a visit to KSC on the 20th anniversary of NASA’s establishment. Congress had authorized in 1969 the award “to any astronaut who in the performance of his duties has distinguished himself by exceptionally meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind.” Citations were as follows: —	Neil Armstrong, for actions during Gemini 8 in Mar. 1966 to overcome problems and land his spacecraft safely, and for “steady cool professionalism, repeatedly overcoming hazards” on the Apollo 11 mission in July 1969, when he became the first person to walk on the moon. —Frank Borman, who had commanded Gemini 7 in Dec. 1965 and Apollo 8 in Dec. 1968, both of which “significantly hastened and facilitated achievement of the manned lunar landing objective.” On Apollo 8 he had commanded the first manned spacecraft to escape the earth’s gravity. —	Charles Conrad, Jr., who from Aug. 1965 to June 1973 had participated in four spaceflights of increasing duration, complexity, and achievement. His contribution had culminated in the first manned Skylab mission in May and June 1973, when he commanded the crew that performed “lengthy, dangerous, and strenuous activities that were necessary to repair damage inflicted on the orbital workshop during launch and thereby save the two-billion-dollar program.” —	John Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth in the third manned mission of Project Mercury in Feb. 1962, when his professional handling of extreme difficulties with the spacecraft “demonstrated the value of the human pilot in space. ... He returned to a nation and a world that seized on him as a major hero. This difficult role he handled with the same polite dignity that he brought to all his assignments.” —Virgil Grissom (posthumous), second American in space who from July 1961 to Jan. 1967 had participated in Mercury and Gemini spaceflights and had lost his life during preparation for the first Apollo flight. Experience gained from the first manned Gemini flight in March 1965, which he commanded, led to “procedures necessary for the support of subsequent long-duration and rendezvous missions.”
If research now in advanced stages went well, Space Shuttle orbiter crews would enjoy tasty and nutritious meals served in an attractive manner, NASA announced. Menus would be well balanced (3000 calories a day) with hot entrees, “reasonably cold” fruit beverages or dessert, and plenty of condiments. A typical daily menu on the Space Shuttle might be: breakfast—orange drink, peaches, scrambled eggs, sausage, sweet roll, cocoa; lunch—cream of mushroom soup, ham and cheese sandwich, stewed tomatoes, banana, cookies, and tea; dinner-shrimp cocktail with sauce, beefsteak, broccoli au gratin, strawberries, pudding, cookie, and cocoa. Many of the foods (breakfast bars, for example) would come off supermarket shelves. All meals would be prepared with variety in mind, so that a crew would have a different menu for sue successive days; on the seventh day the cycle would begin again. Dining would be from a food tray at a table in the galley, or the tray could be held in the lap or affixed to the wall. Ordinary eating utensils would be used. Foods planned for Shuttle crews included (thermostabilized) thermal/heat-processed foods canned or packaged in laminated foil pouches, such as cheese spread, tuna, beef with barbecue sauce; (intermediate moisture) foods preserved by controlling the available moisture, such as dried apricots, peaches, breakfast bars; (rehydratable) dehydrated foods reconstituted with water, such as scrambled eggs, beef patty, chicken and noodles, all beverages; (irradiated) foods exposed to ionizing radiation to effect preservation, such as bread, rolls, and beefsteak; (freeze-dried) foods with all water removed to be rehydrated, or eaten as is with saliva acting as the moistening agent, such as strawberries, shrimp, bananas; (natural form) foods such as nuts and cookies. All this was far from the space meals of an earlier era, when Mercury and Gemini astronauts had to squeeze various kinds of food into their mouths from tubes, or when floating crumbs had to be recaptured before they got into the instruments. Some of the same people who had pioneered space food preparation were still working at JSC putting together the Space Shuttle food systems. From the beginning of the national space effort, the topic of food had captured the attention of both observers and participants. On short spaceflights, food was not too important; it became a more serious consideration, then a vital one, as crews began to range farther and stay longer. First menus had included only the tubes of paste-like food served at room temperature, lukewarm dehydrated cubes, or a few freeze-dried items. By the time of the long-duration Apollo flights, the types of and systems of preparing space food had become more sophisticated, and new means of heating and cooling had brought improved palatability. A breakthough came during Apollo 8 when the crew was surprised with a home-cooked Christmas dinner: pieces of turkey with most of the trimmings, eaten with a spoon rather than squeezed from a container. The turkey and gravy was a thermostabilized product packaged in a laminated foil pouch, leading to the development of a “spoon-bowl” plastic pack for rehydratable foods into which water was injected through a valve. Contents were spooned out through a zippered opening. Main differences between Space Shuttle food and that served on earlier flights would be greater variety and larger amounts, more efficient handling of food, and more comfortable natural dining arrangements. (NASA Release 78-176)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
Administrator Robert Frosch said NASA would analyze any chemical samples of UFOs received from credible sources but would not initiate any research programs, Goddard News reported. Frosch outlined NASA’s position in a letter to the White House, in response to an inquiry from the director of science and technology policy. NASA was most often asked about the purported UFO sightings by astronauts and President Carter; NASA had satisfied itself that the astronauts had seen nothing abnormal in the space environment, and the bright object President Carter reported seeing in the sky when he was governor of Ga. had been classified as “unidentifiable” by the Natl. Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena. Some students of astronomy had suggested that what Carter saw was the planet Venus, at times much brighter than a first-magnitude star. Although the USAF had routinely investigated reports of all UFO sightings until 1969, when it terminated its “Project Blue Book,” it no^ limited its interest to sightings important to defense surveillance. The Air Force had concluded that never in almost 2 decades of investigating UFOs had it found “evidence of technological developments . . . beyond the range of present-day scientific knowledge.” (Goddard News, Mar 78, 3)
NASA announced Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. biotechnologists and engineers would use frogs on the Space Shuttle as research subjects to study inner-ear balance as the cause of space sickness that had afflicted some astronauts. Under a 6mo contract with Ames Research Center, Lockheed researchers would first study the behavior in space of the frog’s otolith nerve bundle, which closely resembled man’s. Microelectronic sensors inserted in the frogs would periodically feed data into recorders on the ground and in space. Preflight ground-based tests using a centrifuge would furnish baseline data to compare with information obtained in weightlessness. (JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 4; NASA Act, May 78, 10)
The JSC Roundup reported on a 2-day conference, “Meeting Our Energy Needs Today and Tomorrow,” with Dr. Peter Glaser, commonly thought of as the initiator of the solar-power satellite concept, as featured speaker. Glaser, designer of three instruments deployed on the lunar surface by the Apollo astronauts, had proposed a solar-power-satellite concept in 1968 before the days of concern with an energy shortage. He said the scientific community had slowly become aware that solar energy “shines brighter than ever as the major energy source.” Glaser summarized the advantages of collecting the solar energy constantly available in space, as opposed to disadvantages of any terrestrial energy source: absence of gravity and weather; avoidance of thermal pollution and waste; and the ability to direct a beam of collected energy to any location on earth, sunny or not, having usable land or not, close to the user or not. Solar-energy development would depend on development of the Space Shuttle, he noted, and was an idea becoming economically attractive and socially acceptable. Microwave and laser beams could transmit this energy to earth; directing a microwave beam accurately had been demonstrated. As for safety, Glaser pointed out that one cannot concentrate microwaves into a weapon system, whereas lasers could be lethal, so that all nations would have to agree that the laser method would never be used as a weapon. Glaser described the phased-array transmitting antenna already constructed on a 5-story-high project in the Aleutian Islands. He estimated 84% solar-power satellite efficiency in producing 30kw of power, as compared to current power plants with an efficiency range of about 40%. (JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 4)
Johnson Space Center reported that 11 of 35 current astronaut candidates had undergone parasail training Aug. 28 at Vance AFB, Enid, Okla., learning how to land by parachute in the event of an emergency ejection from the T-38 aircraft over land. Other astronaut candidates had taken the course before entering the NASA program. The six female astronaut candidates along with five male counterparts had taken the 1-day training exercise. {JSC Roundup, Sept 1/78, 1)
NASA announced that 11 of its 16 launches scheduled for 1979 would be reimbursables (launched by NASA for other agencies or corporations). Paying customers included DOD, NOAA, the United Kingdom, Western Union Corp., ComSatCorp, and RCA. As in 1978, most of the 1979 launches would emphasize use of space for the direct benefit of people: communications, environmental, and meteorological information. Activities in 1979 would include the first launch and orbital flight of the Space Shuttle; Jupiter and Saturn encounters by two Voyager spacecraft; and the Pioneer 11 flyby of the rings of Saturn. NASA would launch the Space Shuttle from KSC into its first orbital flight Sept. 28 with astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen as crew. They would land 53hr later at DFRC. The 1979 schedule would begin with two launches Jan. 25: DOD’s spacecraft charging at high altitudes. (SCATHA) from Cape Canaveral, and a stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE-A) from Wallops Flight Center. In April NASA would launch NOAA-A for NOAA and Navy-20 for DOD from Vandenberg AFB. It would launch in May FltSatCom-B from Cape Canaveral, and UK-6 for the United Kingdom from WFC; Westar-C in July and Intelsat V-A in Aug., both from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp; in Sept., its third high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-C from Cape Canaveral, and its Magsat-A from Vandenberg; in Oct., the solar maximum mission (SMM-A) from Vandenberg. NASA would launch Intelsat V-B from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp in Nov.; in Dec., NOAA-B for NOAA from Vandenberg, and RCA-C for RCA from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-196)
The Congressional Record reported that President Carter had nominated former astronaut Maj. Gen. Thomas Stafford to be Air Force deputy chief of staff for research and development. Stafford, who had spent more than 500hr in space, was serving as commander of Edwards AFB Flight Test Center. The nomination, which carried a promotion to the rank of Lt. Gen., was subject to Senate confirmation. {CR, Feb 28/78, S 2580; NYT, Feb 26/78, (27), 14) During February: Gossamer Condor, the manpowered aircraft that won the $85 000 Kramer prize in 1977, was on display at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., the National Aeronautic Association reported. The 96-ft wingspan had been cut into 4 pieces for shipping across country with the fuselage and stabilizer. Gossamer Condor had the largest wingspan and was the lightest of any plane in the museum, the wing-covering accounting for only 4.51b of the craft’s total 701b. An intricate web of piano wire held the structure together. Flight speed, reaching lOmph, had required the manpower equivalent of one-1 third of a horsepower. Designer Paul MacCready had substantiated his belief in the potential of ultralight craft. (NAA newsletter, Feb 78, 4)
LaRC reported the White House had issued a statement July 20, 1978, commemorating the ninth anniversary of man’s first walk on the moon. The statement read in part: “Nine years ago today, the world paused to watch two brave men tread the surface of the moon. It was a moment without precedent in human experience, a moment when terrestrial life reached out to touch another world. It is a source of pride for us that those men were Americans. Today, the lunar surface is criss-crossed in a half dozen places with the footprints of American astronauts and implanted with a variety of American scientific instruments. “The Space Shuttle, our next major manned space project, will begin regular, routine economical operation in the early 1980s. ... In the deeper reaches of space, we will continue to seek to expand our knowledge of the solar system and the universe of which we are a part. “As time and technology take us ever more deeply into the space age, it will continue to be our policy to conduct operations in space as required for our national well being and to support the right of all nations to do likewise. In so doing, we remain committed to the underlying principle of the exploration and use of space for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of all mankind.” (Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2; Spaceport News, July 21/78, 1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 4; DFRC X-Press, July 28/78, 4)
LaRC reported NASA had appointed astronaut Donald Slayton to manage the orbital-flight test (OFT) program for Space Shuttle at JSC. One of the original 7 Mercury astronauts and a member of the U.S. crew of the Apollo-Soyuz test project, Slayton would be responsible in his new position for all mission-unique activities associated with the 6 Shuttle orbital-flight tests scheduled to begin in the spring of 1979. He would represent program manager Robert Thompson across the total program to ensure timely and appropriate resolution of all OFT mission-unique issues. (LaRC Release 78-12)
NASA announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Corp. a $32 million contract to develop a teleoperator retrieval system (TRS), a reusable TV-equipped propulsive device for use by Space Shuttle crews to deliver, stabilize, and recover satellites in orbit. Managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the contract called for delivery of flight hardware by September 1979. The TRS, a low-thrust box-like spacecraft operated from the Space Shuttle by remote control, could be carried in the orbiter cargo bay or left in space after completion of a mission for retrieval by the next Space Shuttle. First mission for the TRS would be a docking with Skylab to boost it into higher orbit or to aid a controlled reentry; a camera on the forward end of the TRS would permit an astronaut to maneuver it for rendezvous and docking, or for other purposes. The TRS would return to the Space Shuttle using its own guidance and control system. (NASA Release 78-96; Marshall Star, July 5/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, July 14/78, 2; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1)
For 4yr, the LaRC Space Systems Div. and Flight Dynamics and Control Div. had analyzed the Space Shuttle orbiter’s entry guidance and control system at the request of JSC, the Langley Researcher reported. The system had been designed to control the orbiter from deorbit until landing, regulating both the aerodynamic surfaces and a reaction control system (RCS) composed of small rocket thrusters such as those on Apollo spacecraft, so that orbiter control had turned out to be a hybrid between aircraft and spacecraft control. Onboard computers could direct the entire orbiter entry without pilot input, or a pilot could take over control if necessary. A primary tool in the LaRC analysis had been a reentry flight dynamics simulator (RFDS) that permitted evaluation of the onboard-control system in both the automatic and the manual modes. It had also aided in developing alternate control systems to be used by the pilot if the main control system could not handle a situation. The simulator cockpit, though not an exact representation of the orbiter cockpit, did contain all the instruments and controls necessary to simulate flight: cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) showed displays identical to those on board, changing guidance information automatically as the orbiter entered various flight regimes. Push buttons and toggle switches would permit the pilot to take over any of the control functions. LaRC investigators had found that the system was dangerously sensitive to possible sensed angle-of-attack errors in the automatic mode at hypersonic speed. Shuttle astronaut Col. Henry Hartsfield had been unable to maintain vehicle control in the manual mode. This and other problems had led to major system redesign that had been tested at LaRC and found to solve the sensed angle-of-attack problem. Investigators had then begun work on other system problems. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 1)
The British Interplanetary Society’s journal Spaceflight reported that NASA had developed a lunar- and planetary-sciences teaching aid, using actual samples of lunar material encased in a clear plastic disk, to educate both the earth-science student through the Aerospace Education Program and the museum visitor through the NASA exhibits program. The hand-held aid would permit looking at, or viewing through a microscope, both sides of a sample. Under an 8yr program for lunar- and planetary-science education, colleges had been able to borrow thin-section microscope slides of lunar material along with a teaching manual, and museums and fairs could display several dozen prepared lunar samples in cases. But until now, NASA had directed no program toward the secondary school earth-science student. The new school-use program which included a film on lunar science, the sample disk, workbook material, slides, and an audio cassette) would require considerable interaction between teacher and class. Student reaction to the museum program, which included a shorter sound-slide presentation and the disk, had been highly favorable. NASA expected to test museum-visitor reaction later in 1978 and to use about 2/31b of lunar materials to make 100 lunar-sample disks available for use in both programs. Apollo astronauts had brought back 843.51b of lunar material during lunar explorations in the late 1960s and early 1970s. (S/, June 6/78, 218)
NASA announced it had selected 15 Space Shuttle pilot-astronaut candidates and 20 mission-specialist candidates as its eighth group of astronauts, including 6 women, 3 blacks, and an American of Japanese descent. The first women and minority astronauts could be in orbit within 3yrs. Selection criteria for the more than 8000 applicants had been motivation, educational background, and work experience. All but one of the 15 pilot candidates and 7 of the 20 mission-specialist candidates had come from the U.S. military services. Of the 35 selectees, 10 were from the Air Force, 9 from the Navy, and 1 each from the Marine Corps and the Army. The mission specialists selected had come from medical, biological, earth sciences, physical and chemical sciences, and engineering disciplines. The number of selections had been keyed to the expected need for Shuttle crews to supplement the 17 pilot and 10 scientist astronauts now on flight status in Houston. The new astronauts would begin 2 years of training July 1 at Johnson Space Center in Houston. ' Selected to train as mission specialists were Anna Fisher, Shannon Lucid, Judith Resnick, Sally Ride, Margaret Seddon, Kathryn Sullivan, USAF Maj. Guion Bluford, USMC Capt. James Buchli, USAF Maj. John Fabian, Navy Lt. Dale Gardner, Terry Hart, Steven Hawley, Jeffrey Hoffman, Ronald McNair, USAF Capt. Richard Mullane, George Nelson, USAF Capt. Ellison Onizuka, Army Maj. Robert Stewart, Norman Thagard, James Van Hoften; as pilot astronauts, Navy Lt. Cdr. Daniel Brandenstein, Navy Lt. Cdr. Michael Coats, USAF Maj. Richard Covey, Navy lt. Cdr. John Creighton, Navy Lt. Robert Gibson, USAF Maj. Frederick Gregory, Stanley Griggs, Navy Cdr. Frederick Hauck, Navy Lt. Cdr. Jon McBride, USAF Capt. Steven Nagel, USAF Maj. Francis Scobee, USAF Capt. Brewster Shaw, Jr., USAF Capt. Loren Shriver, Navy Lt. Cdr. David Walker, and Navy Lt. Cdr. Donald Williams. (NASA press conference Jan 16/78; Marshall Star, Jan 17/78, 1; W Star, Jan 17/78, A-5; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 19)
NASA announced results of a demonstration of curriculum-sharing planned by LaRC using television through the communications technology satellite Cts at North Carolina A&T State Univ., Greensboro, N.C. This was the first time a predominantly black college had participated in such an experiment. NASA’s portable earth terminal (PET), a ground-based communications system contained in a trailer, had transmitted 2 days of telecasts originating at North Carolina A&T to Cts 22 500 mi up, which relayed the programs to Jackson State Univ. in Miss.; Bell-Northern Research Ltd., Ontario, Canada; and Stanford Univ. and Rockwell Inti, in Calif. Participants in each location could see and communicate with each other. The program, funded under NASA contract to demonstrate the use of satellites in sharing curriculum information, research techniques, and results, included a question-and-answer session with Frederick Gregory, black Shuttle astronaut recently selected by NASA. ARC had made available almost 7 hr of satellite time for the project. (LaRC Release 78-9; NASA photo L-78-1209; Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 1)
A Saturn IB rocket, twin of the one that launched Skylab and Apollo/Soyuz test project (ASTP) astronauts into space, would begin a barge journey from KSC to Tokyo Apr. 5, KSC announced. The Saturn IB, part of the largest group of U.S. space hardware ever displayed overseas, would be only one of hundreds of artifacts borrowed from NASA centers across the U.S. for a Japanese space science exposition scheduled to begin July 16, ninth anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11. The U.S. display would include full-scale Mercury-Redstone, Mercury-Atlas, and Gemini-Titan rockets; a lunar rover; Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft that had actually flown in space; a detailed mockup of the Viking lander; and an ATS-6 (applications technology satellite) communications satellite. The Association for the Space Science Exposition, an umbrella organization for the Japan Science Society and the Japanese Maritime Science Promotion Foundation, had organized the exposition at an estimated cost of $21 million and would defray all costs of dismantling, loading, round-trip shipping, reloading, and reinstalling artifacts. The National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution had coordinated the loan of the space artifacts. (KSC Release 38-78; Marshall Star, April 19/78, 2)	•
The W. Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee had cut NASA’s budget, endangering 3 of the agency’s most ambitious plans for the next 5yr: to search for life beyond earth, to keep the Skylab space station from falling back to earth, and to fly a rare joint mission with West Germany around the north and south poles of the sun. The subcommittee had cut $1.4 million from NASA’s request for $2 million to begin a program called SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), in effect killing the program. A NASA official said the funds would not be enough “to start design work on the antennas we were going to use to listen for extraterrestrial signals.” The subcommittee also denied NASA $20.5 million to use for Space Shuttle astronauts to fire the abandoned Skylab space station into a higher and safer orbit. NASA considered the most critical cut to be $5 million from the $13 million sought to start in 1983 the solar-polar orbiter mission that would have used two spacecraft, one built by the U.S. and the other by West Germany. The West Germans had warned that any U.S. delay meant that Germany would drop out of the mission. (IVPost, May 5/78, A13)
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'
The Washington Post reported that, as a result of belated discovery that Soviet radar in Europe would interfere with two NASA satellites scheduled for launch in 1980 to communicate with orbiting spacecraft, NASA would have to spend $100 million to redesign the satellites’ electronic systems. NASA had awarded Western Union a $786 million contract to build six 50001b tracking and data-relay satellites (giant orbiting transmitters and receivers, each carrying two umbrellalike antennas weighing 501b apiece and unfurling in orbit to a diameter of 16.5ft) that would have replaced 60% of NASA ground-station antennas at an estimated saving of more than $100 million a yr. The 3-mo delay necessary for redesign was important because it would affect communications with the Space Shuttle; failure by the Pentagon and the CIA to warn NASA of the size and scope of Soviet communications interference in high-orbit regions had delayed discovery of the problem. NASA testimony before two Senate committees revealed that Soviet radars from the Baltic tp the Black Sea were emitting beams that converged high over the Atlantic and Pacific in the exact places NASA wanted to put the TDRS. Built to replace obsolete and expensive ground antennas at Ascension Island; Quito, Ecuador; Santiago, Chile; Guam; and Hawaii, the TDRS would improve communications by allowing ground controllers to talk to other satellites and Space Shuttle astronauts during more than 90% of each earth orbit. The electronic interference was said to have been unintentional. NASA “did not fully understand the environment and the effects it would have on the system,” said C. Curtis Johnson, satellite project manager at Goddard Space Flight Center. “Otherwise, we would have been more careful in the specifications of the system.” NASA had considered reducing the number of satellites on order from six to four to save $100 million, estimated cost of the redesign. (WPost, July 2/78, Al)
NASA announced it had selected astronauts Dr. Owen Gar-riott and Dr. Robert Parker to be mission specialists on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the early 1980s. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in crew-activity planning, consumables usage, and Space Transportation Systems/payload interaction. The 7-day flight, a verification test of Spacelab systems and Spacelab/orbiter interfaces, would carry about 40 experiments. Garriott had flown on the second manned Skylab mission of 56da duration; Parker had been a mission scientist and spacecraft communicator during Apollo and Skylab. Ten European nations, under agreements with the European Space Agency, had developed and financed Spacelab to be carried in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter as a fully furnished laboratory adapted to the weightless environment of space and pressurized for working without space suits. Spacelab 1 would also carry two payload specialists (one European and one U.S. citizen) to operate the scientific instruments. (NASA Release 78-121; JSC Release 78-34; JSC Roundup, Aug 4/78, 1; Marshall Star. Aug 16/78, 3; DSFCX-Press, Aug 11/78, 3; Langley Researcher, Aug 11/78, 1)
NASA’s struggle to save 3 astronauts trapped in a foundering spaceship during the flight of Apollo 13 had begun the most harrowing 6 days in NASA’s history, NASA Activities reported in observing the 8th anniversary of the flight. The astronauts had heard a loud bang; when Fred Haise, Jr., scanned the instrument panel, he saw that one of the main electrical systems was deteriorating. The words Jack Swigert spoke to mission control long haunted NASA: “Houston, we’ve got a problem.” At the time of the explosion, Apollo 13 traveling at 2100mph was 205 OOOmi from earth and more than 50 OOOmi from the moon, with a dead mothership (Odyssey) that included the main propulsion engine. After moving the astronauts into the lunar module, NASA focused on getting the Apollo on course for home while conserving limited supplies of power, oxygen, and water. Not only had NASA employees worked round the clock, but also specialists and computers from North American Rockwell, the contractor; Grumman Aerospace Corp., manufacturer of the LM; TRW Systems, builder of the descent propulsion engine; and many others. NASA had decided to drop the service module and put the command module Aquarius into the correct attitude for earth-atmosphere reentry; when the latter entered earth’s gravity 216 277mi from home, it needed another course correction. The tnird descent-engine burn was successful, putting Aquarius into the proper reentry corridor. As the spacecraft drew closer to splashdown, one of the astronauts described to ground control what he was seeing: “There’s one whole side of that spacecraft missing . . . right by the high-gain antenna, the whole panel is blown out, almost from the base to the engine . . . it’s really a mess . . . man, that’s just unbelievable—looks like a lot of debris is just hanging out of the side near the S-band antenna.” The astronauts had returned safely to earth 142hr, 54min, 41sec after launch. As Jim Lovell said, “We do not realize what we have on earth until we leave it.” (NASA Actv, Apr 78, 14)
A detailed article on manned spaceflight in a recent Chinese technical journal had raised speculation that the People’s Republic of China might attempt to put a man in orbit, reported FBIS. Navigation Knowledge, published by the China Navigation Society, had printed a description of manned-flight problems such as weightlessness and satellite design, the effects of weightlessness on the body, and the growing of food in outer space. The article suggested that the PRC, having retrieved three unmanned satellites from orbit, was now ready to experiment with living in space. Much of the article concerned physical changes resulting from a space-capsule environment, and the food, clothes, and waste facilities appropriate for an astronaut, information apparently based on completed experiments. By using the direct rays of the sun, the article claimed, a space voyager could grow rice and wheat the size of a Chinese date tree and eggplant and peppers the size of watermelon. Observers believed Chinese space technology had developed considerably since the initial space launches and that the next (No. 8) launch might have an animal aboard. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb. 2/78)
Dr. Christopher Kraft, Jr., JSC director, had invited 31 former astronauts to take part in technical briefings and updates on the status of NASA programs at JSC Aug. 21-22, NASA announced. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch would address the group; John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, would review the Shuttle program. Others giving briefings would be Robert Thompson, manager of the Space Shuttle program; Aaron Cohen, manager of the Orbiter project; Glynn Lunney, manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program; Lt. Gen. Thomas Stafford, former astronaut now deputy chief of staff for research, development, and acquisition, on the USAF Shuttle program; John Young, chief of the astronaut office; and flight crews of the orbiter approach and landing tests (ALT). Those attending would take conducted tours of the crew systems area, remote manipulator system, full-scale orbiter mockup, and the orbiter aeroflight simulator/Shuttle mission simulator. Astronauts invited were Edwin Aldrin, Jr.; William Anders; Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; M. Scott Carpenter; Gerald Carr; Eugene Cernan; Michael Collins; Charles Conrad, Jr.; L. Gordon Cooper; Walter Cunningham; Charles Duke, Jr.; Donn Eisele; Anthony England; Ronald Evans; John Glenn; Richard Gordon, Jr.; James Irwin; James Lovell, Jr.; James McDivitt; Edgar Mitchell; William Pogue; Stuart Roosa; Walter Schirra, Jr.; Harrison Schmitt; Russell Schweickart; David Scott; Alan Shepard, Jr.; Thomas Stafford; John Swigert, Jr.; and Alfred Worden. (NASA Release 78-128; JSC Release 78-37)
If the flight of Soyuz 26 cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Georgy Grechko aboard Salyut 6 space station continued to go well, they would establish a new space-duration record in the early morning of March 13, announced the Natl. Aeronautic Association, the organization maintaining official aviation and space records. The cosmonauts would surpass the previous record of 84 days set by U.S. astronauts Carr, Gibson, and Pogue aboard Skylab 4 in 1973. The Soviets had not indicated when the mission would end. On Feb. 10 the Soyuz 26 team equalled the previous USSR manned-spacecraft record of 63 days set by Soyuz 18. (NAA Release Mar 10/78)
The Congressional Record reported that former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had introduced S. 3541, the NASA Solar-Power Satellite Program Act of 1978, authorizing research, development, and demonstration of obtaining electrical power from space through solar-power satellite systems or other energy sources. Successful demonstration of the technical and economic feasibility of this concept would supply an inexhaustible future energy both for domestic purposes and for export. “Either way,” said Sen. Schmitt, “such a demonstration could have a significant impact on our nation’s balance of trade.” The bill would instruct NASA to begin a program aimed at resolving economic and technical problems surrounding the concept, including systems definitions; health, safety, environmental and socioeconomic studies; and technology assessments of various space energy sources compared with terrestrial energy sources. Favorable evaluations “would accelerate the design of a program to make this promising concept operational at the earliest possible date,” Harrison concluded. (CR, Sept 30/78, S 16715) During September: NASA announced that scientists had confirmed detection by Pioneer Venus 1, on the first leg of its 7mo voyage to Venus, of a powerful gamma-ray burst from somewhere in the universe. So-called gamma-ray bursts, unknown until 1973, had enormous energies and occurred about once a month from random points in earth’s galaxy or even beyond. Discovery of their origin—black holes, brilliant supernova, neutron stars, or some totally unexpected source—would be a difficult task for astronomers. Pioneer Venus measurements of these bursts during its 482million-km mission should enable scientists for the first time to track the origins accurately. Two other American spacecraft (Vela, a DOE satellite orbiting the earth, and Helios B, a NASA-European scientific satellite orbiting the sun) had detected the gamma-ray burst; scientists would correlate observations of all the satellites to get a rough fix on the burst. Locating the origin of the burst would give scientists an idea of the extraordinary physical events that could produce such high-energy explosions; no current hypotheses could account for them. (NASA Actv, Sept/78, 19)
NASA announced it had made several personnel changes. Richard Smith, deputy director at MSFC, had been appointed deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Hq for a one-yr tour of duty beginning August 15. Smith had transferred to NASA in 1960 from the rocket research and development team at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal, when the development operations division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency had become the nucleus of MSFC. He had managed the Saturn program, and in January 1974 had become director of science and engineering, and later deputy director, of the center. Smith had received NASA’s exceptional service medal for contributions to the Apollo and Skylab programs as well as the medal for distinguished service. (NASA Release 78-112; NASA anno July 19/78) NASA had named Harry Sonnemann deputy chief engineer at Hq, responsible to the chief engineer for managing program assurance, safety and environmental health, and the systems engineering divisions. Sonnemann had come to NASA in October 1977 from the office of the assistant secretary of the Navy, where he was special assistant for electronics and special assistant for antisubmarine warfare and ocean control from 1968 to 1977. He had also worked on the development of large seismic arrays as assistant director for field engineering in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency’s nuclear test detection office from 1964 to 1968. (NASA anno July 20/78) Scientist-astronaut Dr. Joseph Allen had returned to active flight status at JSC’s astronaut office. From August 1, 1975, until his return to JSC, Allen had been director of the office of legislative affairs at NASA Hq; and he would continue those duties in addition to his astronaut duties until a replacement was named. He had returned to JSC as senior scientist-astronaut and was eligible for selection as a Space Shuttle crewman. NASA had selected Allen as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; he had completed the initial academic training and a 53-wk course in flight training at Vance AFB, Okla. Allen had been mission scientist as a member of the astronaut-support crew for Apollo 15, and was staff consultant on science and technology to the President’s Council on International Economic Policy. (NASA Release 78-33) NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Edward Ifft chief of international programs policy at Hq. Dr. Ifft had been a U.S. Foreign Service reserve officer, whose last assignment was director of the State Department’s office of disarmament and arms control. While a graduate student, Ifft spent a yr at Moscow State Univ. under a U.S.-USSR cultural exchange program doing research on low-temperature physics. He had joined the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1967; then moved to the State Department where he had been deputy chairman of the U.S. delegation that negotiated the threshold test-ban treaty in Moscow in 1974; and had participated in negotiations with the U.S. and USSR for a comprehensive test ban. (NASA Actv, July 78)
