Columbia, first Shuttle orbiter destined for launch into space, landed with its Boeing 747 carrier at 11:03 local time on & 15,000-foot runway built for this and future landings at KSC. Among the 3,000 persons awaiting the arrival were astronauts John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen, scheduled as crew on the maiden flight set for November 9. NASA officials said “a series of minor snafus” might delay the first launch until 1980. (W Star, Mar 25/79, A-3; W Post, Mar 25/79, A-6; NY Times, Mar 26/79)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
A United Airlines newsletter reported the first solar-powered flight of an aircraft: Larry Mauro’s Solar Riser, a homemade tailless biplane with about 600 solar cells in upper-wing panels, generating about 60 pounds of thrust to turn a 3-foot fiberglass propeller, enough to carry a 165-pound pilot and 125-pound craft aloft. Mauro flew his plane about a mile at a height of 40 feet during the annual experimental-aircraft convention in Oshkosh, Wise. Astronaut Neil Armstrong had watched assembly of the craft, now in a Wisconsin museum. (UA rept Dec 79)
JSC said that Columbia, first Shuttle orbiter, would undergo a first major simulated-flight all-systems test on or about December 15 at KSC. Astronauts and ground-support teams would conduct a 24-hour 5-day critical operations test including five launch-and-ascent flight profiles; on-orbit operations; and one entry simulation. John W. Young and Robert Crippen, crew members for the first flight, would take part in the test along with the backup crew, Joe Engle and Richard Truly. First actual launch was scheduled for June 30, 1980. (JSC Release 79-73; KSC Release 246-79)
NASA announced that it would accept on an annual basis applications to become Space Shuttle astronauts; the 1979 time for civilian applications would begin October 1 and end December 1. Successful applicants would report to JSC for a year’s astronaut training, after which NASA would choose pilot and mission-specialist candidates to be assigned by the Astronaut Office to jobs that would continue to train them in their scientific or technical field. NASA now had 27 selectees, including 11 scientists, available as Shuttle crew; 35 more candidates were in training to qualify for selection. The number of candidates to be selected in 1980 would depend on mission requirements. (NASA Release 79-101; JSC Release 79-50)
JSC reported on trials of a Buck Rogers-style maneuvering unit designed for moving about and working outside the Space Shuttle. Officially named Manned Maneuvering Unit (MMU), the device worn on the back of a spacesuited astronaut would allow movement in the weightlessness of space using nitrogen gas jets to control direction. Martin Marietta, the manufacturer, had submitted a prototype the previous week for three months of testing on different-sized astronauts (including female candidates) for fit and mechanical performance in use. Astronaut Dr. Bruce McCandless had successfully checked out the unit’s compatibility with the self-contained portable life-support system, wearing a spacesuit and backing into the maneuvering unit as it would be located in the orbiter cargo bay, “like backing into a phone booth with a large knapsack on your back,” KSC would get the first flight unit early in 1980. (JSC Release 79-55)
Astronauts interviewed in Las Vegas, Nev., on the eve of an Apollo 11 10th anniversary commemoration noted the lack of funding and support for the space program on the part of the U.S. government. James McDivitt, who commanded Apollo 9, said that he foresaw nothing like the Apollo program coming along. Ron Evans, command-module pilot for Apollo 17, said that spectacular space events were not in the cards for the next 20 years. Charles Duke, 10th man to walk on the Moon; Al Worden, Apollo 15 command-module pilot; and Dick Gordon, Apollo 12 command-module pilot, said the Shuttle system was not as safe as craft used in previous manned programs, as “Congress isn’t ready to give NASA the money it needs.” (Today, July 15/79, 20A; W Post, July 15/79, A-4; P Inq, July 17/79, 11)
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that the five “payload specialists” selected last July to operate experiments on the first Spacelab mission in 1981 would begin training January 9 at seven cities in the United States and two in Canada. Selection and training of non-NASA scientists to fly in space was a “famous first” for NASA; the scientists chosen by their colleagues having experiments aboard the Spacelab would be the first noncareer astronauts and would include the first Western Europeans and the first non-U.S. citizens to fly on a U.S. space mission. Three payload specialists were Europeans: Ulf Merbold of West Germany, representing Max-Planck Institute of Stuttgart; Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, representing Europe’s Space Technology Center (ESTEC); and Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, representing Groenigen University. U.S. selectees were Michael L.	Lampton of the University of California at Berkeley and Byron K. Lichtenberg of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Since October 1978, the five had been in Europe learning to operate experiments designed by European scientists. Two of the selectees would actually fly on Spacelab 1, and the other three would operate the experiment equipment on earth. Spacelab 1 would carry 40 instruments, about equally divided between NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) experiments in terms of weight, volume, and power requirements; fields of investigation would include solar physics, space plasma physics, stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, earth observation, materials processing, and technology areas, such as thermodynamics and lubrication. After leaving MSFC, the trainees would visit Redondo Beach (Calif.), the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Philadelphia, Boston, and Montreal (Quebec) and Toronto (Ontario) in Canada; return to JSC in Houston; visit Palo Alto, Calif; and be back at MSFC in Huntsville on March 22. (MSFC Releases 79-1, 79-4)
NASA announced that JSC was studying two ways to repair Space Shuttle tiles in orbit, both requiring crew members to go outside the Shuttle. JSC director Christopher Kraft called it “prudent” to be ready for in-orbit repairs, in case the tiles did not come up to specifications in actual fight: the thousands of heat-resistant blocks covering the underparts and sides of the orbiter might be damaged at launch and need patching before reentry. The first idea, using an extendable boom carrying television cameras and a platform, would relay images of a damaged area into the cockpit and sustain a spacesuited astronaut making external repairs. The other concept would use a jet backpack to maneuver an astronaut around the orbiter to inspect it and make repairs wherever necessary. JSC had three studies under way by General Electric, Martin Marietta, and McDonnell Douglas on repair materials and tools suitable for outer space. (NASA Release 79-120; JSC Release 79-58)
NASA reported it would speed up development of the MMU to be built by Martin Marietta for astronaut use in inspecting and repairing Space Shuttle insulating tiles while in orbit. The MMU, an improved version of a gas-jet backpack tested inside the orbiting Skylab in 1973-1974, should be fully developed by next August for the second Shuttle flight in October 1980. NASA would not consider further an alternate method of tile inspection (an extendable platform on a boom with a television camera). (NASA Release 79-125)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel W. Hinners, associate administrator for space science, had accepted appointment as director of the National Air and Space Museum, effective in April. He had joined NASA in 1972 as chief scientist and deputy director of Apollo lunar exploration in the Headquarters Office of Manned Space Flight and had held his present job since June 1974. (NASA Release 79-32) The scheduled takeoff for Florida might be delayed because of bad weather, NASA spokesmen warned, to lessen chances of an accident during the crosscountry flight; adverse conditions had developed along the route. The 15-minute test flight Friday of the orbiter-747 combination resulted in extensive damage to the protective-tile surface of the orbiter, said former astronaut Deke Slayton, NASA’s manager for orbiter flight tests. As the 747 took off down the runway at Edwards, parts of the dummy tiles, some as long as 2.5 feet began to fall off the spaceship. When the flight ended, Columbia had lost not only some of the plastic-foam dummy tiles attached by tape to the areas around the windows, fuselage sides, wings, and midtail, but also some of the 26,000 actual protective tiles bonded to the spaceship at the plant. “When the dummies began to fall off, the tape which was attached to them started to swirl around and damage some of the real tiles,” said Slayton, who flew one of two chase planes to keep an eye on the orbiter-747 test flight. NASA had decided to send Columbia to KSC without about 8,000 tiles that could be installed there; dummies had been used to cover areas where in-flight problems might arise, but after seeing the test results, engineers decided that not all the dummies were needed. Slayton said that the orbiter-747 assembly was now scheduled to depart for Florida on Monday, March 12. The 3,000-mile ferry flight had originally been set for Friday, March 9, but a problem arose in mounting the orbiter on the 747, caused by misalignment of the orbiter to the three struts atop the 747, and the test flight was delayed until Friday afternoon, after which the tile problem occurred. Although NASA engineers said March 10 that the combination could still fly cross-country March 12, a later report said that 34 dummy tiles were lost and 39 damaged; 7 real tiles were destroyed or lost and 100 damaged. Replacement of missing tiles would delay the trip at least to Saturday, March 17; NASA planned to complete the fix without removing the orbiter from its carrier aircraft. (NY Times, Mar 9/79, A-20; W Post, Mar 9/79, A-3; Mar 12/79, A-7; W Star, Mar 10/79, A-5; Mar 11/79, A-6; Mar 12/79, A-4; Today,, Mar 9/79, 1A, 16A; Mar 10/79, 1A, 8A; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Mar 13/79)
NASA reported that 35 candidates for Space Shuttle astronaut had completed classroom instruction and moved into engineering assignments at JSC. The courses had begun in July 1978, and the successful candidates would become astronauts in July 1980. NASA had brought in personnel from other NASA centers and from universities to conduct courses on subjects such as space physics, ascent and reentry aerodynamics, spaceflight physiology, and tracking techniques; veteran astronauts had lectured on the budget process, people, and requirements in the space program and on being a CAPCOM (capsule communicator). Videotapes of the classes would be available to all employees at JSC. The first crews selected for Shuttle flights had begun lessons in the mission simulator, and the astronaut candidates would be observers. Lessons would include tests of every sort of emergency the crews might encounter during a mission, supervised by instructors who had spent six months learning how to harass the astronauts in their simulator exercises. The lesson plan, scheduled to take nine months “not counting. . .problems,” would prepare the crews for nearly any emergency, NASA said. (NASA Release 79-34; JSC Release 79-20)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 32 from the Baykonur site at 2:54 p.m. local time, carrying a two-man crew to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 space station for the first time since November 1978, when the Soyuz 29 astronauts returned after a record 139 days in space. Soyuz 32 was manned by Lt. Col. Vladimir Lyakhov, 37, acting as commander on his first flight, and civilian flight engineer Valery Ryumin, 39, who was aboard Soyuz 25 when it failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and had to return to Earth 2 days later. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, head of the USSR’s space training program, said Salyut 6 had been “an effective platform for work in space,” having been occupied for 8 of the 16 months since its launch in September 1977. It had seen five successful manned dockings (three by international crews including cosmonauts from Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Poland as part of the Intercosmos program), as well as dockings by a number of unmanned supply vessels delivering food and fuel. (NY Times, Feb 26/79, A-14; W Post, Feb 26/79) During February: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported that the Federation Aeronautique International (FAI) had admitted the People’s Republic of China as an active member effective January 1. (NAA News, Jan-Feb 79)
