Press reports on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s launch noted the loss of some insulating tiles from engine-pod coverings visible, television viewers from an aft-facing cockpit window when astronaut Robert Crippen opened the payload-bay doors to dissipate heat into space as a way of cooling the orbiter. The areas lacking tiles, nine on the right-hand engine pod and four to six on the left-hand pod, had undergone the greatest stress during blastoff and ascent. Astronaut John Young relayed the view to Earth so flight directors could estimate the damage. The two astronauts evinced so little concern about the missing tiles that, during a six-minute telecast late on Monday, neither mentioned the subject. As flight directors wanted to know whether the underside of the fuselage was intact, Deputy Operations Director Eugene F. Kranz announced that supersecret U.S. Air Force cameras in Hawaii and Florida would photograph the orbiter in an attempt to discover further areas of damage. His statement hinted at the highly classified capability of DOD cameras: photographing areas lacking tiles of a moving craft 170 miles up would be like reading license plates in a Moscow parking lot from orbit, the Washington Post commented. The fuselage’s underside housed Shuttle electronics and hydraulics systems that would navigate the craft on its return; move the elevons, keeping it on course during the last 1,000 miles; and lower the landing gear. Should loss of tiles expose the surface to reentry heat that could burn through the fuselage and the underlying systems, the orbiter without its landing gear lowered would have to crash-land at more than 200 mph. If photography showed underside tiles missing, Kranz said the crew would handle the reentry “to avoid a possible catastrophe,” not specifying the alternatives. Officials said that the areas known to be missing tiles were not critical to reentry; all visible edges of tail and wings appeared intact, suggesting that tiles v/crc lost during the stress of launch only on the engine pods. (W Post, Apr 13/81, A-l, A-20, WSJ, Apr 13/81 3; NYTimes, Apr 13/81, 1; W Star, Apr 13/81, A-l)
NASA appointed Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, deputy chief of staff for systems at Air Force Systems Command headquarters, Andrews Air Force Base, as associate administrator for the Office of Space Transportation Systems. Abrahamson, former test pilot and manager of the development program for U.S. Air Force’s F-16 fighter, would succeed John F. Yardley, who left NASA in May to become president of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corporation. In 1979, Abrahamson was one of five on a special panel selected by NASA to assess STS management; he began his job at Andrews in July 1980. He had been an astronaut in the Air Forces’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program from August 1967 until the program was canceled in June 1969. He then served on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council in the Executive Office of the President. A command pilot with more than 3,000 flying hours in jet and conventional fighter aircraft, he was promoted to major general May 1, 1978. (NASA Release 81-159; NASA anno Oct 2/81; NY Times, Oct 3/81, 15)
LaRC said that it was studying a possible “assembly line in space” that would allow astronauts to build large platforms or antennas in Earth orbit from the shuttle. A mobile work station would position a pair of pressure-suited astronauts so that they could move horizontally and vertically within a prescribed area to set up structures too large or complex to fold up and transport inside the shuttle. The work station would be located inside the or-biter’s cargo bay or would be a free-flyer operating near the shuttle. LaRC was testing a large-scale model to detect possible problems in space and identify ways to improve astronaut productivity: foot restraints to leave hands free, for instance, and electrically operated work platforms. (LaRC Release 81-50; NASA Release 81-104; MSFC Release 81-93)
ARC reported the effects of weightlessness on physiological processes shown in 14 U.S. experiments carried on unmanned Soviet satellite Cosmos 1129 in 1979. This was the only U.S. opportunity for biological research in space since 1975. The Vostok spacecraft sent into elliptical orbit and recovered within the Soviet Union 18 Vi days later was like those of two previous Cosmos missions in which the United States had participated in 1975 and 1977. Use of Cosmos vehicles was inexpensive for the United States because the Soviet Union paid for spacecraft, launch, and support activities; 40 scientists from 18 U.S. universities and research organizations shared in the mission. The U.S. experimenters found changes in enzymes and in animal bone strength, growth rate, and mineral content, like the changes experienced by astronauts and cosmonauts; the results would help explain some of the problems of weightlessness. The Soviet Union provided 37 white rats and 60 fertile quail eggs, shared by the experimenters; U.S. scientists provided carrot-tissue cultures and plantlets and carrot slices inoculated with tumor-forming bacteria. One of two control groups of white rats kept in Moscow lived in ordinary cages and ate the flight diet; the other, called “synchronous control,” was housed in an identical spacecraft on the ground and subjected to vibration and gravity forces like those of launch and reentry, experiencing whatever changes in environment the orbiting Cosmos transmitted to earth. The only difference between the synchronous control group and the mammals in flight was the weightlessness. After the Cosmos flight, the animals were recovered immediately, before they could readapt to Earth gravity, and a recovery team set up a mobile lab at the landing site to autopsy about a fifth of the rats. The rest were flown to Moscow, where some were autopsied after 6 days of readaptation to gravity, and the rest after 29 days. The Cosmos rats showed a 20% deficiency in bone mineral content compared to the synchronous-control subjects. In the rats readapting to normal gravity, some changes reversed within a few days; others took longer to return to normal. Under normal conditions, the total amount of bone in an adult human or animal remains constant, with bone continually resorbed and replaced by newly formed bone. In spaceflight, production of new bone seems to slow down, but resorption continues, resulting in net loss of bone and a decrease in strength. The greatest change is in weight-bearing bones, but even those not bearing weight (as jaw bones) show changes in mineral content and the cells forming new bone. The experiments included the first attempt to breed animals in spacemating the rats and examining how embryos developed in a weightless state. This experiment did not succeed, however, and no litters were produced; the control group, to the surprise of Soviet and U.S. scientists, showed the same results. The scientists were still seeking a reason for the failure. The quail eggs provided no information on embryo development because the incubator failed on the 13th day of flight. The plants showed no ill effects; carrot embryos and plant tumors grew in space just as on the ground, suggesting that spaceflight had no effect on carrot tissue. (ARC Release 81-21)
ESA announced that Drs. Claude Nicollier and Wubbo Ockels, two ESA payload specialists in astronaut training at JSC since July 1980, had completed training and were now officially European mission specialists. Ockels would rejoin the crew readying the first Spacelab mission in Europe, at MSFC and at JSC; Nicollier would stay at JSC to continue training as mission specialist for future missions carrying European payloads. The third ESA representative, Dr. Ulf Merbold, had been working with the European experiments selected for first Spacelab flight and would remain as European payload specialist. The two U.S. candidates for the Spacelab crew, Drs. Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg, had been in a hiatus from training because of delays in the launch date. One each of the U.S. and ESA candidates would be chosen to fly; the others would provide ground support. (MSFC Release 81-119; FSA Info 20) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Mg.INTIMDQNALLE ffcANtav
DFRC reported on a dress rehearsal of Shuttle first-mission landing and postlanding activities on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. The crew that would act as recovery convoy used an orbiter mock-up, fitted with interfaces for ground connections, to practice postlanding safety and servicing procedures: simulated activities included testing for the presence of toxic or explosive vapors and gases and cooling the orbiter by circulating freon through its pipes and cool air through its ducts. To simulate the landing, a NASA .T-38 jet descended along the planned flight path from 40,000 feet up, while test manager Deke Slayton kept in touch with the recovery convoy and with the flight director, Don Puddy, at JSC. Meanwhile, astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen at JSC completed a full-scale flight rehearsal, going through the 54.5-hour mission in a computer-operated simulator. Flight directors monitored the mock mission as if it were the real thing. (DFRC Release 81-8; W Star, Feb 27/81, A-9) During February: Nature magazine reported that the Franco-Soviet mission to Halley’s comet in 1986 entailed “a substantial cutback” for a planned joint mission to Venus in 1984. Assignment of two of the original four Venus probes to Halley was a reminder that Soviet space-program resources, though vast, “are not infinite.” Pravda had published several articles aimed at putting the Soviet effort in a favorable light; the Communist party congress would be asked next week to approve another 5-year plan including space exploration. However, the Soviet Union had never revealed the costs of the program. Nature said hints of increasing financial constraints had appeared recently: no further Intercosmos flights were in view after those with Mongolia and Romania, and Bulgaria had been offered two unmanned probes instead of a manned flight to replace the failed trip of its cosmonaut to the orbiting Salyut 6. (Nature, Feb 26/81, 741)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
Columbia, flagship of U.S. Space Shuttles, “proved that at long last it is ready to carry astronauts into orbit,” said the Washington Star, describing “a successful and spectacular firing of its three powerful engines.” At the end of the practice countdown, 8:45 a.m. EST, the three engines at the base of the delta-wing spaceship “flashed to life, spewing torrents of almost invisible flame, steam, and smoke over the launch pad” and sending a thunderclap of sound across KSC. “All engines are up and running,” the control center announced. The world’s most sophisticated rocket machine had generated 1.1 million pounds of thrust for 20 seconds, while the 122-foot-tall orbiter with fuel tank and boosters remained fixed to the pad by eight 3-foot steel bolts. In actual launch, explosive charges would sever the bolts, releasing the orbiter, and the solid-fuel boosters would help lift it to orbit. During the final countdown, 526,000 gallons of fuel were pumped into the external fuel tank. Technical, weather, and procedural difficulties had postponed the firing, a first test of all shuttle systems combined, three times this week. Minor problems had delayed today’s test another hour. The Washington Post said that a labor walkout at KSC immediately after the 8:45 a.m. firing might threaten the April 7 date set for the actual launch of Columbia. About 800 aerospace workers, members of the International Association of Machinists employed by Boeing in spaceport support work, had struck in a pay dispute. Richard Smith, KSC director, said that the strike might jeopardize remaining operations; however, he noted that the union had a legal right to strike because its contract with Boeing had expired some time ago. Columbia crew members John Young and Robert Crippen, who had waited out 2Vi years of delays, viewed the test firing from the air; Young in a Shuttle training jet at 4,000-foot altitude, and Crippen in an identical craft about 1,900 feet higher. (W Star, Feb 20/81, A-l; W Post, Feb 21/81, A-7)
The Shuttle orbiter Columbia came to a “flawless” landing on a dry lake bed in the Mojave desert at Edwards Air Force Base, California, at 1:21 p.m. EST before a crowd that included NASA employees, 20,000 VIPs, and about 250,000 spectators who had camped out all night to watch Columbia’s return. Millions of people around the world also watched the return on television. The astronauts got a wakeup call from mission control about 4 a.m. on their 30th orbit, with a special message for Robert Crippen: “You’ve waited 12 years for this. If you don’t wake up, you’ll miss the whole thing.” Before eating breakfast, the crew took time to check flight systems, guidance and navigation instruments, and the 44 reaction-control thrusters used during reentry. On 36th orbit, the crew received “final go” for deorbit firing. Columbia’s payload-bay doors were closed four hours before the scheduled landing time, and the astronauts put on their pressurized space suits in case of emergency. Over the Indian Ocean at 12:22 p.m., an hour before landing and while out of contact with any tracking stations, Commander John Young turned Columbia tail-first and fired two on-board maneuvering rockets to brake the spacecraft; then, turned it nose-first again, tilting it slightly to permit full exposure of underside insulation. Reentry into the atmosphere at more than 17,000	mph took place at 12:48 p.m., 400,000 feet over the Pacific at Wake Island. The few tiles missing from tail areas after liftoff did not affect reentry at heats up to 2750°F. The 80-ton 122-foot long vehicle landed at 215 mph, twice the usual jet speed. As Columbia’s wheels touched down, flight-control chief Don Puddy at Houston told his jubilant team to “Prepare for exhilaration,” allowing them about 15 seconds of celebration before resuming their jobs. For the first time, a splashdown or landing did not immediately end a manned spaceflight. “Welcome home, Columbia,” Houston greeted the craft landing on the center line of the California runway. “Do you want us to take it up to the hangar, Joe?” Young radioed, and mission control responded “We’re going to dust it off first.” A NASA official said that Columbia would probably begin its return flight to Cape Canaveral in seven or eight days, riding piggyback on its Boeing 747 carrier. An “optimistic” estimate was that the orbiter would fly again under its own power in less than six months, on a four-day flight from which it might be able to “turn around” and be ready to fly again in four months. (NYTimes, Apr 15/81, 1, 21; W Post, Apr 15/81, A-l; W Star, Apr 15/81, A-l; WSJ, Apr 15/81, 2)
NASA said that astronaut Alan L. Bean, fourth man to set foot on the Moon, would resign effective June 26 to devote full time to his career as a painter. Bean, selected in the third group of astronauts in the fall of 1963, flew on the second moon-landing mission, Apollo 12, in November 1969, exploring the Ocean of Storms with Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., as Richard F. Gordon circled in the command module. He captained the second Skylab mission in July-September 1973 and was backup spacecraft commander for the 1975 U.S.-USSR Apolio-Soyuz mission. He noted that in his 18 years as astronaut he had seen sights no artist had ever viewed firsthand, and he hoped to record his experiences through his art. Bean’s time in space—1,671 hours 45 minutes—made him first among active U.S. astronauts and fourth of all in total spaceflight time. He was currently head of astronaut-candidate operations and training. His resignation would leave in the corps only one of the 12 U.S. astronauts who had walked on the Moon: John Young, chief of the astronaut office and commander of shuttle Columbia’s first flight last April. (NASA Release 81-87)
John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Columbia’s maiden flight, told of their experience at at 75-minute JSC press conference carried on closed-circuit television to NASA Headquarters and other centers. They said that the orbiter was an incomparable flying machine, surprisingly easy to control, and that the mission was “what NASA calls nominal, although I think you’re going to have to call it phenomenal,” Young reported. Neither crewman expressed concern over the loss of tiles from the aft end of the vehicle, detected shortly after launch. Young said that he was impressed by the fact that the metal under the tiles did not heat up during reentry as much as expected: he said “a lot” of the thermal tiles on the topside could probably be eliminated in future missions, lowering spacecraft weight and increasing the limit on payload weight, now set at 65,000 pounds. Young said that he went immediately upon landing to look at the underside of the orbiter, which had encountered the most heat. “People had been telling us it was impossible that some of these tiles wouldn’t fall off. Well, none of them fell off, and those tiles went through some of the roughest ascent and reentry you can imagine.” “Nothing failed. Statistically, I didn’t think that was possible,” Crippen added. “We’ve been working 3 years to learn how to handle catastrophes, and all we did the whole time was sit back and enjoy it.” The cruise was not perfect, the astronauts agreed: the craft was cold to the point of discomfort some of the time, and the toilet shut down near the end of the flight. The crew kept getting tangled in communications lines, and Columbia “landed long” instead of at its prescribed touchdown spot. Young said the chill could be avoided by putting interior temperature sensors nearer to the crew than to heat-emitting electronic gear. Cordless microphones would solve the problem of tangled cords, and engineers were already working on the toilet program. Young said that he had landed Columbia farther down the 7-mile long runway than he was asked in order to test the Shuttle’s wings and tail for lift; he said that the lift he got at landing was “remarkable.” “We hardly used our brakes. I tell you that was quite a performance, taking 99 tons out of orbit and getting it back down all in one piece.” A reporter asked Crippen if his pulse rate of 130 at liftoff, compared to Young’s 90, meant that he was more excited. “You betchum I was excited,” he replied. “What you don’t understand is, I was excited too,” Young added. “I just can’t make it go any faster.” (Young is 50, seven years older than Crippen.) The mission was so successful that Columbia might fly again as early as September 23, with a third test in December and a final test in April 1982. With that schedule, NASA might begin operational flights carrying cargo into space as early as September 1982. Young said they had been given 135 flight objectives and had completed all 135. “You really should be proud of this vehicle,” he told the JSC audience. (NASA Text, postflight brfg, Apr 23/81; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A—12; WPost, Apr 24/81, A-6; W Star, Apr 24/81, A—12; B Sun, Apr 24/81, A-6)
