NASA said that astronaut Jack R. Lousma would leave the agency and retire from the Marine Corps October 1. A NASA astronaut since April 1966, he was pilot on Skylab 3 in 1973 and commanded shuttle orbiter Columbia on its third test flight in March 1982. (NASA Release 83-151; WPost, Sept 30/83, A-4)
Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite. The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%. The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time. The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.” The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts. STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down. The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor. Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42) Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.” India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
A team of engineers from NASA and industry celebrated at GSFC their success, after 58 days of maneuvers, in putting the tracking and data-relay satellite into geosynchronous orbit. Using tiny one-pound thrusters with nozzles about the size of a thimble, the team boosted the 5,000-pound TDRS more than 8,600 miles further into space, a feat never before attempted. The TDRS was launched from the Shuttle Challenger during its first mission April 4; after a successful deployment from the Shuttle, some difficulty in the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket threw TDRS into a tumble from which ground control rescued it, stabilizing it far short of the altitude needed for geosynchronous orbit. A joint board representing NASA and the U.S. Air Force said later that the problem was loss of oil pressure in an engine seal, probably caused by excess engine heat. The board had viewed photographs taken by U.S. Air Force camera over New Mexico and had conducted “extensive tests.” Because of the importance of TDRS operation to space communications, NASA and the Air Force had rescheduled two shuttle missions that were to use the IUS. (NASA PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED IMTEflTi0WM.1T mm Releases 83-104, 83-114, 83-116; MSFC Releases 83-49, 83-50; W Post, July 13/83, A-l; July 28/83, A-4) —NASA announced that Charles D. Walker, an engineer at McDonnell Douglas, would be the First payload specialist representing a project designed for commercial purposes. He would fly on the 12th Shuttle mission set for March 1984, operating a materials-processing device developed by McDonnell-Douglas to separate large amounts of biological materials in space for new pharmaceutical uses. As chief engineer responsible for spaceflight tests and evaluation, Walker had worked with project support at KSC and JSC, training NASA astronauts who operated the device for electrophoresis research on earlier Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 83-105)
NASA published in the Federal Register a proposal on how it would select passengers to ride on the Space Shuttle, possibly as early as 1985. NASA emphasized in the proposal that it was not accepting applications. It had already received more than 2,000 written requests for rides since the 1960s, and it had received so many telephone calls about riding the Space Shuttle that it had to attach a recorded message to its telephone line to request that potential astronauts have patience. All requests that had been received by NASA would be disregarded, said NASA’s Sara Keegan. The proposed selection plan would use a multitiered process to choose Shuttle passengers. All requests would be screened by an outside review panel appointed separately by NASA for each flight and then reviewed by a panel of seven top space agency officials before NASA’s administrator made the final selection. Several months before liftoff of a flight, the agency would announce when it would accept applications and disclose specific requirements for the flight. Such requirements could change according to the Space Shuttle’s mission. There were, however, broad requirements for all passengers. Citizen observers/participants would have to be in good health and condition, pass a detailed background investigation, and be willing to undergo rigorous training. NASA was accepting comments from the public on its proposed selection process until mid-February. (NASA Release 83-190; Federal Register, Dec 23/83, Vol. 48 No. 248, pages 56770-71. Published in final form in Federal Register, Apr 25/84, Vol. 49 No. 81; NY Times, Dec 16/83, A-ll; WPost, Dec 23/83, A-3) During December: The large number of malfunctions that struck the Space Shuttle Columbia in its final hours of flight during STS-9 forced engineers to inaugurate the most extensive trouble-shooting operations since the Space Shuttles began flying in April 1981. They were not sure how long the undertaking would last, what they might find, or what effect their findings could have on future flight schedules. NASA officials did not rule out the possibility that the Columbia’s troubles could cause a delay in the next Space Shuttle mission scheduled for January 30, 1984. The malfunctions included two computer failures, a navigation instrument shutdown, and an explosive fire in the rear compartment. Early Space Shuttle flights had had troubles with computers and the heat-shielding tiles, but these were straight forward physical defects that were easily identified. The current problems were more perplexing and came when the Space Shuttle was assumed to be a fully tested, operational vehicle. NASA engineers and other aerospace observers had suggested that the Columbia’s problems stemmed from a phenomenon not uncommon in any new, complex technology : that is after the initial text phase, when extreme care and attention were given to every step in a project, it was human nature to relax a bit, and it was the nature of machines to misbehave occasionally in unexpected ways. International Business Machines (IBM), contractor for the computers, would examine the faulty computers; NASA engineers would closely examine data in search of clues to the cause of the two malfunctions, which did not seem to be related to any fundamental design flaw but could have been caused by loose circuitry resulting from vibrations. NASA would ship the inertial measurement unit to its manufacturer, the Singer Kearfott Company in Little Falls, N.J., for examination. (NY Times, Dec 15/83, A-l) —JPL announced that the IRAS had found a ring of planets being born around Fomalhaut, one of the most studied stars in the southern skies. Earlier in the year, the telescope had discovered a primitive solar system around the star Vega. The discovery that Vega and Fomalhaut appeared to have solar systems was the first evidence supporting the theory that Earth’s solar system was not the only such in existence. Vega and Fomalhaut might be undergoing the same kind of evolution that Earth’s solar system went through three to four billion years ago. “The discovery provides the second direct evidence that solid objects of substantial size exist around a star that is not our sun,” said Dr. Gerry Neugebhuer, IRAS program scientist at JPL. “These objects could be a solar system in a different stage of development and evolution than our own or the one that we found to be circling Vega,” he added. The IRAS detected the two extraterrestrial solar systems by measuring the temperature of the bodies circling the two stars. It found them much cooler than the stars but far too warm and far too large to be rings of interstellar dust. (JPL Release, Dec 16/83; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-3) —Lt. Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr., retired December 31 as deputy director, JPL. Following retirement from the Air Force in 1969, he joined JPL as deputy director, functioning as general manager responsible for the day-to-day management of the laboratory’s resources and the direction and coordination of its technical, administrative, and service activities. General Terhune received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in October 1982. He will be replaced as deputy director by Robert J. Parks, JPL associate director. (JPL Release, Dec 12/83)
The Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) landed at 3:47 p.m. PST at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., after 10 days in space and 167 orbits—the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The landing followed a delay necessitating 22 more orbits than planned when Columbia’s computers failed 3 hours and 49 minutes prior to the planned reentry bum. Six hours after the two computers went off line, Columbia also lost one of its three inertial measurement units that provided orbiter orientation information. The orbiter carried five IBM general purpose computers and three inertial measurement units. Today’s reentry was flown with one of each inoperative. A reentry could be flown with only a single computer and single measurement unit. Mission pilots John W. Young and Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., said at the time that they believed that the triggering of an upward firing 870-pound nose reaction control jet, which caused an unusually strong impact to the orbiter, was the likely cause of the computer failures. However, telemetry analysis showed that the thruster activity was coincidental to the computer malfunction. Instead, NASA came to the conclusion that it was a transient hardware internal problem. About 40 minutes after the problems occurred, the crew restored the second computer to operation. On December 5, President Reagan and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in Athens at the time, held a conference call with the five U.S. crew members and one German payload specialist on Columbia. The U.S. Information Agency (USIA) used five satellites and thousands of miles of land lines around the world to bounce the signals among Athens. Washington, and JSC to provide live television coverage of the call to seven European cities and the Cable News Network (CNN). Aside from the computer problems, the ninth Space Shuttle mission was almost flawless and was distinguished by some significant scientific discoveries. One discovery involved the workings of the inner ear, disproving a 77-year-old hypothesis that had won the 1914 Nobel Prize in medicine for Swedish professor, Robert Barany. Barany had said that nystagmus, a flickering of a person’s eyes when cold air is blown into one of his ears and hot air into the other, was caused by convection, the motion of fluids under uneven heating. But in space, the lack of gravity meant that convection did not occur. Nevertheless, the astronauts aboard Columbia showed the characteristic eye movements. The six-man crew completed work on all but one of the 70 scheduled experiments; only a microwave sensing device misfired. Scientists from 14 countries designed the experiments, and the experiments did not end with touchdown. The four scientists were in quarantine, where they would be required to remain motionless so that scientists could observe how their bodies acclimated to gravity. (ESA Release, Dec 9/83; WH annon, Dec 5/83; W Times, Dec 6/83, 3A; WPost, Dec 6/83, A-3, Dec 8/83, A-3, Dec 9/83, A-l; NY Times, Dec 9/83, A-l; P Inq, Dec/83, A-l; AvWk, Dec 12/83, 23)
Associated Press (AP) said that ESA launched Ariane 6 at 7:59 a.m. EDT from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites: the first ESA telecommunications craft, the British Aerospace-designed Ecs 1, and a smaller West German satellite to retransmit amateur radio broadcasts. This sixth attempt to get the three-stage Ariane off the ground was considered a “crucial boost” to Europe’s space program as a way to break th superpower monopoly on space. Ariane faced competition from the U.S. Space Shuttle and from private companies planning to buy conventional Thor, Atlas, and Titan vehicles from the U.S. government. ESA was counting on enough business for everyone, but admitted that Ariane would have had trouble getting any if this sixth launch had failed. (ESA Info 21; WPost (AP), June 17/83, A-2) Mission control stated that the group of five was “the largest human payload in the history of the space age.” The Soviet Union had maintained crews of five on its Salyut space station but had never carried that number on a single launch. First deployment of a payload was at 5:02 p.m. EDT when the crew launched from the cargo bay a seven-ton communications satellite, Anik C2, for Telesat (Canada’s governmental telecommunications organization). At 9:36 a.m. EDT the next day the crew launched a $40 million Palapa B communications satellites for the government of Indonesia. Two previous Palapas launched by the United States were providing communications to Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Palapa B, twice the size of the earlier communications satellite could increase television and telephone traffic in the area by 10% to 15% a year. The 147 million Indonesians living on islands extending more than 3,200 miles east to west had only 560,000 telephones: Palapa B could provide service for as many as a million new telephones in the next 10 years. After the second communications satellite was launched, the four rookie astronauts (Ride, Fabian, Hauck, and Thagard) appeared on the television screen assembled in the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white letters reading “TFNG: We Deliver.” TFNG stood for “thirty-five new guys,” the astronaut class, recruited in 1978, to which all four belonged. Crippen stayed out of camera range, but mission control said “That’s all right, Crip. We can tell you’re a steely-eyed veteran from here.” On June 19 mission control said that the families of the four fathers aboard Challenger had gathered “to wish you a happy Father’s Day.” The four male astronauts had a total of 10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and Fabian, 2 each. Major activities for the next three days would be the release of the mechanical arm and rehearsal for deployment and retrieval of the West German pallet. Ride and Fabian would drop the 15-foot, 5,000-pound package off the Shuttle and try to pick it up again. (This would be a first for an exercise that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June 22 the team released and retrieved the package five times, as television cameras on Shuttle and package sent spectacular shots of the procedure with a backdrop of Earth and black space. When the exercise concluded and the arm and the payload were back in the cargo bay, Crippen reminded mission control that some crews had announced “We deliver” (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when they launched two communications satellites from the shuttle last November): “Well, for flight 7, we pick up and deliver.” The USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova, first woman to make a flight in space 20 years ago, wired congratulations to Sally Ride. The telegram expressed pleasure “to know that a third representative of this planet’s women, now from the United States of America, is in outer space today.” Last year the Soviet Union sent a second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into space. Among more than 20 experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay and mid-deck was the colony of 150 carpenter ants sent into space by high-school students from Camden, N.J., to record their reactions to weightlessness. The ants were considered good space subjects, being hardy and naturally social creatures. Marginal weather at KSC raised a question whether Challenger would land near its launch point, as planned. Landing on the Florida runway was a way to reduce time in preparing Challenger for its next flight. STS-7 cbuld be extended, or landing could be shifted to Edwards Air Force Base in California; a shift to California would mean an eight-day delay in bringing Challenger back to KSC for a mid-August mission, adding pressure to the timetable for launching Spacelab between the end of September and mid-October. The next chance for a Florida runway landing would be early in 1985; the two intervening missions would be a night launch and landing and the heavyweight touchdown of the Shuttle carrying Spacelab. Also of concern was the effect of rainstorms on the Shuttle tile covering: planes carrying strips of the insulation had been flown through rainstorms with a uniform result of “significant erosion of the tile surfaces.” Mission control offered three landing times, 6:53 a.m. and 8:29 a.m. EDT at KSC and 9:56 a.m. EDT at Edwards Air Force Base. The crew appeared on television “stowing the cabin” in preparation for landing. A sign “The Doctor Is In” was held up as Thagard showed viewers the experiments he was conducting to find clues for the cause of space sickness. STS-7 had been the first shuttle mission to have no space-sick astronauts. The Challenger landed at Edwards Air Force Base June 24 at 9:57 EDT after a steady downpour began at KSC. In a congratulatory telephone call to the astronauts, President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling of the mechanical arm and said “You were there because you were the best person for the job.” Ride said that the flight was “the most fun I’ll ever have in my life.” When the astronauts attended a brief homecoming ceremony at Johnson Space Center June 24, Ride refused to accept a bouquet of flowers from a NASA official; she had said before the mission that she wanted to be treated no differently from her four male crewmates. Wives of the male astronauts each received a red rose; Ride’s husband, astronaut Dr. Steven Hawley, did not. (NASA MOR E-420-07-83-04 [prelaunch] June 9; NASA MOR M-989-83-07 [prelaunch] June 13/83; NY Times, June 20/83, A-l; June 23/83, A-l; June 25/83, 16; June 26/83, 4-8; WPost, June 17/83, A-2; June 20/83, A-l; June 21/83, A-6; June 22/83, A-3; June 23/83, A-l; June 24/83, A-3, C-4; June 25/83, A-l; June 26/83, A-2)
NASA launched at 11:00 a.m. EST the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) from KSC. Columbia carried the largest space crew ever, which consisted of John Young, commander; Brewster Shaw, pilot; Dr. Robert Parker and Dr. Owen Garriott, mission specialists; and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold, payload specialists. The crew would operate in two shifts to permit 24-hour operation of experiments. The mission was originally scheduled to get under way September 30 but was delayed to October 28 to give engineers additional time to check out a communications satellite needed to relay data to Earth from Spacelab, carried on Columbia. The flight was postponed again when an examination of the booster rockets used for the Space Shuttle mission in August revealed serious erosion of the insulation lining one of the rocket nozzles. The rocket was replaced. Columbia carried Spacelab, designed and built by ESA, which marked Europe’s first major entry into a manned space program. Other firsts associated with the flight was that it carried the heaviest payload on a Shuttle, the 33,584-pound Spacelab and pallet, and that it would include more experiments and spacecraft maneuvers than did any previous flight. Immediately after liftoff, Columbia rolled over and turned northward to put itself into an orbital path that would range from as far north as Scotland and Leningrad to as far south as Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America in order to take pictures of Europe. The orbit would also take Columbia over Moscow and many militarily sensitive areas of the Soviet Union, the first time a U.S. manned spacecraft had flown over the Soviet Union in daylight. No pictures or other sensing would be taken of the ground while Columbia passed over the Soviet Union. The $l-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long laboratory was sealed and pressurized so that the scientists/astronauts could work in shirtsleeves as they carried out more than 70 experiments on 38 sets of equipment. Operating Spacelab were Merbold and Lichtenberg, a new breed of astronaut—payload specialists—who were not career astronauts but scientists trained to operate the science instruments on the mission. Wired with sensors, the scientists were guinea pigs in a number of experiments designed to explore how the body adapted to space and how it performed in the absence of gravity. Blood samples were taken three times so that scientists could study how the ratio of red to white blood cells changed once the body was weightless. Several experiments were conducted to measure eye movements; in another experiment, Garriott was given mild electric shocks to see how the muscles in his body responded to a sudden jolt that was the bodily equivalent of a sudden movement in weightlessness (doctors believed that one of the causes of space sickness might be abrupt movements that disoriented the inner ear). In another experiment, the crew in shifts pushed two balls identical in shape and size, although of different weights, to determine how quickly humans would distinguish weight from size in weightlessness. Other Spacelab studies were concerned with the growth in space of sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes. Exotic metal mixes were melted, and crystals were grown in three Spacelab furnaces. There were experiments intended to determine the practicality of orbiting factories to produce products not possible in the gravity of Earth. During the flight, two antennas failed on the TDRS-1 that was used to relay data from Spacelab to Earth. The failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold had to share the voice link to Mission Control Center in Houston with the four astronauts in Columbia’s cockpit, and it meant that the two scientists got their instructions from the ground via a teleprinter aboard Spacelab. Columbia landed December 8 at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. (NASA MOR M-977-09-83-01 [prelaunch], Oct 83; NASA Releases 83-163, 83-176; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Nov 29/83; W Post, Nov 22/83, A-8, Nov 28/83, A-l, Nov 29/83, A-l, Nov 30/83, A-l; USA Today, Nov 29/83, 1A; W Times, Nov 22/83, C—1; B Sun, Nov 29/83, A-l)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
NASA began moving the TDRS to its permanent location over the Atlantic Ocean, from 67 W to 41W, said Charles M. Hunter, deputy TDRS project manager at GSFC. Using six tiny thrusters, the move began with a 19-minute bum at 8:57 p.m’. EDT, with a second burn for 17 minutes at 8:57 a.m. September 24. The craft would move to its permanent station at the rate of 1.2° per day, drifting until October 16, when the first of two burns to stop the drift would occur. Another burn on October 17 should put TDRS over the Atlantic just east of Brazil, Hunter said. The fuel to be used, about 8 pounds, would not affect operations over the planned 10-year life of TDRS. (NASA Release 83-145) During September: NASA announced that Richard H. Truly, commander of STS-8, was named the first commander of the Naval Space Command to be set up October 1 at Dahlgren, Va. Selected as a NASA astronaut in August 1969, Truly had been on one of the crews for Shuttle approach-and-landing test flights in 1977. His spacecraft was as pilot of STS-2 in November 1981. (NASA Release 83-133)
The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum said that it would build an adjunct facility at Dulles International Airport to house an expanding collection of aircraft, including the Shuttle Enterprise. Estimated to cost $40 million, the facility would replace the restoration site now at Silver Hill, Md., but would not be completed for another 7 to 15 years. Possibilities for Dulles included a group of four buildings to accommodate a Boeing 707, a Boeing B17 bomber, Boeing 727, a Boeing 747, and others; the design and funding were not yet settled. The collection had outgrown the Mall area, said Walter Boyne, director of the museum: “We are going to get the space shuttle and the Concorde,” which it would be physically impossible to move to the Mall area. “They are so complex, you can’t simply take a wing off and move them.” The present museum now has 10 million visitors a year, and Boyne said that people would be as interested in the Shuttle 100 years from now as they were in the Wright Brothers’ plane today. (W Post, Oct 13/83, D-1) A three-inch layer of the carbon-epoxy material was intended to protect the metal nozzles from flaming exhaust by charring, to dissipate heat; about half the layer would normally burn away during the two-minute firing of the booster. On the last mission, one nozzle’s lining came within 0.2 inches of burning away completely. Damage to a metal nozzle could send the Shuttle off course; had the flame burned through part of the engine in flight, “it could have caused a catastrophe,” said the Washington Post. A test firing October 11 at Thiokol’s Utah plant, where the rockets were built, showed that the liner had begun to “delaminate,” which would make the Shuttle aerodynamically unstable after two minutes of flight. If NASA decided to replace one of Columbia’s motors, it would have to move the entire vehicle off the pad. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, head of the Shuttle program, said that chances of staying on schedule for a Spacelab launch between October 28 and November 5 were “diminishing rapidly”; however, he would not set a launch date “with this type of uncertainty.” The next possible launch date after November 5 would be November 27: astronomy experiments to be carried on Spacelab had to orbited while the moon was dark. [Students at Camden, N.J., high schools said that the carpenter ants flown on Challenger in June had died from lack of moisture before leaving Earth.] The New York Times said that NASA might have to delay the next Shuttle mission for one to four months, possibly to next February 6, because of concern about reliability of the nozzles in the Shuttle boosters. Positions of stellar targets would again be favorable for Spacelab observations by next February. ESA and scientists from the United States and Europe were asked to suggest rescheduling that would have the least impact on their experiments. A later report said that engineers who examined one of the engines recovered from the Atlantic after the mission in August found that the three-inch coating inside the rocket nozzle had burned down to 0.2 inches. Astronaut Daniel C. Brandenstein, pilot of that flight, told CBS News that the lowest part of the engine would have burned through if the engines had fired 2.7	seconds more, which would have “spelled curtains for the crew.” A NASA official said that was conjecture, though the agency admitted that a burn-through might have occurred after 20 more seconds. NASA decided October 14 to postpone the first flight of Spacelab for “at least a month” but would announce a new launch date. Gen. Abrahamson said October 16 that the probable date would be late next February, but the decision would be made jointly by NASA and ESA. He said that NASA engineers still did not know what caused the near-failure of the engine on the eighth shuttle flight in August. Two test firings in the last 10 days had produced confusing results: one engine lining had almost burned through, the other less than halfway, as it was meant to do. NASA had changed the manufacturing process not long ago, he noted, and the change might have trapped gases in the lining instead of baking them out. With Columbia waiting for Spacelab, the next Shuttle flight would take place in January as planned. Challenger would deploy two communications satellites, and astronaut Bruce McCandless would demonstrate in space a self-propelled manned maneuvering unit that could go 500 to 600 feet from the Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 13/83, A-15; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 15/83, A-20; Oct 17/83, A-3; NY Times, Oct 13/83, A-16)
MSFC reported successful simulation of Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) spacecraft-repair procedures in its huge neutral-buoyancy tank as rehearsal for the actual task set for 1984 during the 13th shuttle mission. Solar Max, launched February 14, 1980, worked for 10 months until fuses blew on three of its four attitude-control momentum wheels. The repair mission would replace its 500-pound attitude-control subsystem and part of the coronagraph-polarimeter. Three of its seven instruments continued to work despite the malfunction. Dr. George Nelson, lead astronaut for the repair, and STS-13 pilot Francis Scobee wore space suits during the underwater simulation to experience the physical difficulty of working in the space environment. Dr. Nelson and Dr. James D. van Hoften would make the actual repairs. Dr. Ernie Hildner, coinvestigator on the polarimeter and MSFC’s solar physics branch chief, said that watching the simulation made him “more optimistic about the success of the endeavor.” (MSFC Release 83-30) Postponement of TDRS-B would keep the $1 billion Spacelab built by ESA and scheduled to fly in September on STS-9 from carrying out its full mission, as its 40 instruments were designed to work at such high speeds that they needed at least two tracking satellites to operate properly. However, ESA and NASA agreed to launch Spacelab on schedule and get a 60% to 70% return from its experiments. Even this, Aller said, would depend on NASA’s ability to move TDRS-A into a synchronous orbit. Two test firings had raised its perigee 350 miles, and Aller expressed “confidence we will have [TDRS] in geosynchronous orbit sometime in June.” Press reports said that firings May 10 and 11 raised the perigee more than 800 miles, still 7,000 miles short; it would take another three weeks of daily firings to achieve synchronous orbit. On May 27, NASA said that it removed TDRS-B from the cargo manifest for STS-8 and substituted the test article. By that time it had moved TDRS-A within 3,675 miles (5,915 kilometers) of proper perigee. {W Post, May 7/83, A-3, May 11/83, A-9; May 12/83; NASA Release 83-86; MSFC Release 83-38)
The press reported the death in North Carolina at the age of “about 26” of Ham, the chimpanzee sent on a Mercury capsule into suborbital flight January 21, 1961, to prepare for the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., first U.S. astronaut. Ham, named after the Holloman Aerospace Medical Center in New Mexico, retired from the space program in 1963 to live at the National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C., and after 1981 in the North Carolina Zoological Park. His trip in “a very primitive space capsule on an experimental suborbital run” was attended with “excitement and suspense,” even dread, because no one could predict whether he would survive the shocks of the trip or undergo emotional trauma. “Ham rose to the occasion and took it all in stride,” the report said. “Never mind that the capsule, through an error, had been shot 40 miles higher than planned or that it had landed 30 miles past the target area where a fleet awai ted it or that it had been traveling 5,000 miles an hour, 800 miles faster than planned. ... During the time radio signals were received the chimp pushed various levers and performed other behavior tasks assigned him.” (WPost, Jan 21/83, A-16; Jan 26/83, B-3; Jan 27/83, A-22)
Three new companies entering the “race to commercialize space” would launch Space America, a venture to provide remote-sensing satellite data services by 1986, the Washington Post reported. The companies were two in Washington, D.C.—American Science & Technology and AEROS Data Corporation—and Space Services Inc. (SSI) of Houston, which developed the first U.S. privately funded and operated launch vehicle. SSI would be managing partner. All three companies were less than three years old, privately owned, and “actively seeking capital,” according to Donald “Deke” Slayton, former astronaut and president of SSI. The group hoped to put into polar orbit a privately owned satellite built by Honeywell Inc. and Ball Aerospace Systems with sensors to collect data on Earth resources such as agriculture, mineral deposits, and water. (W Post, Sept 8/83, D-1)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
