Speaking to 262 winners of the Secondary School Recognition Program and their teachers, President Reagan said that he had directed NASA to carry an elementary- or secondary-school teacher in orbit aboard the Space Shuttle as the nation’s first space passenger. “When the shuttle lifts off, all of America will be reminded of the crucial role teachers and education play in the life of our nation,” Reagan said in the announcement. This would be the first spaceflight of an American who was neither a scientist nor a trained astronaut. The only physical limitations were that the candidate be free of debilitating disease, have good eyesight, and not have hearing loss or high blood pressure. No age limit was specified. NASA had thought about the possibility of flying private citizens aboard the Space Shuttle more than a decade ago. The idea was a natural outgrowth of its legislative mandate that called for “the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning NASA’s activities and the results thereof. ...” NASA officials told reporters that they would begin a search for the most qualified teacher candidate and described a program in which each of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and Guam would submit the names of two teachers. A peer-review panel would help pare the applicants to 10, to 5, and finally to a prime and backup candidate. “When we decide on our final two candidates, we will give them eight weeks of preflight training at Houston’s Johnson Space Center right along with the astronaut crew they fly with,” said NASA Administrator James M. Beggs. “When the candidate’s flight is over, we will insist that he or she give a year of their time to NASA, visiting schools, talking to workshops, lecturing, and appearing on television and radio,” he said. Beggs said that it was impossible to predict how many civilians would be able to fly on Space Shuttle, noting that it depended on how many Space Shuttle flights NASA could schedule. (NASA Release 84-122; NASA anno Aug 27/84; W Post, Aug 28/84, A-l)
An Arianespace Ariane I rocket lifted off at 9:33 a.m. EDT to orbit a U.S. communications satellite 22,300 miles above the equator in the world’s first strictly commercial space venture. Virginia-based GTE Spacenet Corporation built the satellite, which was intended to relay thousands of simultaneous television, telephone, and data transmission channels to U.S. domestic subscribers over the next 10 years. The corporation would launch other satellites later in the year and early in 1985. ESA had contracts for 28 launches worth more than $800 million, plus options for another 19. More than 40% of the orders came from outside Europe. (W Post, May 22/84, A-24) During May: NASA and Deere & Company, Moline, 111., signed a memorandum of understanding to cooperate on the design of metallurgical tests to be conducted aboard a future Space Shuttle flight. In 1981, Deere became the first private company to sign a Technical Exchange Agreement with NASA that permitted the company to perform cast iron solidification experiments on board conventional suborbital NASA aircraft, which simulated microgravity for 30 to 60 seconds. Deere was already working on the design of additional metallurgical tests, where engineers used data from the low-gravity tests conducted earlier. Based on this work, Deere and NASA engineers concluded that further experimentation would be productive. The Space Shuttle tests would permit experiments in space for longer periods, which could yield new information to aid in the search for stronger irons. These tests could also provide new data about the process for forming iron molecules, leading to improved foundry efficiencies. (NASA Release 84-56) —NASA announced that astronaut Terry Hart, who had operated the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to retrieve the Solar Maximum Satellite during the April 6-13, 1984, Space Shuttle flight, would leave NASA effective June 15 to work in an engineering management position for the newly formed Military and Government Systems Division of Bell Laboratories in Whippany, N.J. The division would produce large digital communications networks for government applications. Hart was also a member of the astronaut support crews for Shuttle missions 1, 2, 3, and 7, serving as capsule communicators in mission control for those flights. (NASA Release 84-59) —Officials at the U.S. Department of State blocked an offer by the Soviet Union to use its rockets to launch Western satellites, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The Soviets had offered to “sell” their rockets to INMARSAT, the International Maritime Satellite Organization based in London, for launching a new generation of satellites in the 1980s. INMARSAT was running a network of communications satellites that routed telephone calls and data among some 2,300 ships and their shore bases. However, it had not decided on the companies that would supply the new satellites, which could number up to nine and cost up to $500 million. Under the Soviet Union plan, satellites would have to travel to the Soviet rocket site prior to launch into space, and the satellites would undoubtedly contain a large proportion of U.S. parts. Such a transfer would be prohibited under the technology control regulations that sought to stop the channeling to unfriendly countries of hardware that could be used in weaponry. The State Department said that “under no circumstances” would it permit the transfer to the Soviet Union of American-made satellite components. Only two organizations had submitted tenders to INMARSAT to build the satellites: a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Corporation and British Aerospace and a consortium of Marconi of the United Kingdom, Aerospatiale of France, and Ford Aerospace of the United States. The Soviet Union had said that it would make available its Proton rockets for a fee of about $23 million a launch. That was roughly half the comparable charge for a satellite launch by either the Space Shuttle or the Ariane rocket sold by Arianespace, a semipublic company dominated by French interests. U.S. officials feared shipment to the Soviet Union’s main launch site at Baykonur in Central Asia of hardware containing electronic components that could be useful to the Soviet’s military buildup. (CSM, May 3/84, 1) —NASA announced that Dr. Hans M. Mark, deputy administrator of NASA since July 1981, would become chancellor of the University of Texas System, effective September 1, 1984. In announcing the appointment, Texas Board Chairman Jon Newton said of Mark: “With his Air Force and NASA background, he has demonstrated the management ability to administer effectively a complex organizational enterprise such as the U.T. System, which involves 119,000 students, 50,000 faculty and staff, and an operational budget for FY84-85 of $1.8 billion.” Mark was born in Mannheim, Germany, and in February 1969, after receiving his doctorate in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1954, became director of NASA’s ARC. He had also served as a consultant to government, industry, and business, including the Institute for Defense Analyses and the President’s Advisory Group on Science and Technology. (NASA Release 84-65) —Martin A. Knutson was named director of Flight Operations and Ames Dryden Site manager for ARC. In this position, Knutson would be responsible for the operation of more than 40 highly specialized research and support aircraft at ARC and its Ames Dryden Flight Research Center. He also would be responsible for site management of the Mojave Desert facility that conducted NASA’s high-speed flight research and served as one of the prime landing sites for Space Shuttle missions. Knutson joined NASA in 1971 as the ARC’s manager of the Airborne Instrumentation Research Project. He was instrumental in creating the project and in acquiring its U-2 aircraft and was a pilot with over 6,000 hours of flight time. (ARC Release 84-11)
The Washington Post reported that Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator, said that coded software instruction cards on both computers on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s last voyage (STS-9) were contaminated, delaying Columbia’s landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California by eight hours. The instruction cards were shaken from their printed circuits when the Shuttle pitched up and down just before reentry; however the up-and-down maneuvers would not ordinarily loosen the software cards unless there was something wrong with them. Abrahamson said that postflight analysis of the cards at IBM’s Owego, N.Y., plant, where the computers were built, showed that one card was contaminated with solder and the other had a carbon chip coated with gold that should not have been there. Abrahamson pointed out that “the most disturbing thing.. .is that both computers were contaminated. I do not like the idea that we flew 10 days in space with contaminated computer parts.” The six-man crew, commanded by astronaut John W. Young, was able to land the Shuttle and its $1 billion European Spacelab safely by relying for navigation on three standby computers. (W Post, Jan 6/84, A-8)
The NASA Army Rotor Systems Research Aircraft (RSRA), a helicopter/airplane testbed in a fixed-wing mode, returned to Ames-Moffett Flight Research Facility following the flight testing of a new helicopter rotor system in a flight environment. The purpose of the flight tests was to demonstrate the fixed-wing capability of the research helicopter/airplane hybrid and to expand its flight envelope in that configuration. The evaluation included taxi tests, acoustic tests, control power/stability tests, and rotor hub drag investigation as well as takeoff and landing technique investigation and envelope development. A total of 13 flights expanded the RSRAs fixed-wing envelope capability to 262 knots (about 300 miles per hour) and its altitude to 10,000 feet. (ARC Release 84-23) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED itN'TNTKIMAUg BLUB 509 C. Leestma; payload specialists Marc Garneau, a Canadian; and oceanographer Paul D. Scully-Power. It was the most crew members to fly on a Space Shuttle mission. During the first day of flight, crew members deployed NASA’s Earth Radiation Budget Satellite (ERBS); however, the two solar panels that supplied electricity to the 5,000-pound satellite refused to unfold. Ride corrected the ERBS problem by using the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to place the satellite’s solar panels in the sunlight to thaw the hinges. It took almost three hours to get the panels warm enough to respond to commands to unlock. The satellite was placed in orbit off the west coast of Mexico, instead of south of Bermuda. While trying to determine the source of the ERBS problem, Kathryn Sullivan deployed the Shuttle Imaging Radar-B (SIR-B), a 35-by-7-foot radar camera, which had difficulty stabilizing when only one of it two “leaves” was erected. The radar antenna would send out thousands of pulses every second, and the large number of echoes the radar antenna received allowed it to draw a photograph-like image of the part of Earth that its beams struck. During the flight, a storm of cosmic rays apparently caused by sunspots knocked out for about 13 hours NASA’s TDRS, which affected the imaging radar system. Among the parts of the world that the radar had planned to map but would probably lose were the entire Amazon River basin, the islands that made up Indonesia, and the seas off the Cape of Good Hope. The radar was also to track the progress of tropical storm Josephine, southeast of Florida in the Atlantic Ocean, which would force Challenger’s landing from Cape Canaveral to Edwards Air Force Base. An ice buildup on the exterior of the Space Shuttle’s water vents forced the crew to alter slightly the use of the ship’s water facilities. The buildup, caused by a slight malfunction of the backup cooling systems, posed only an inconvenience as the astronauts had to heat up the water vents to melt away the small accumulations of ice, raising the temperature inside the cabin to as high as 90°. Crippen corrected the craft’s air-conditioning system, and the temperature inside Challenger neared its norm of about 75 ° On October 11, Sullivan became the first American woman to walk in space when for 3 1/2 hours she performed tasks requiring a kind of patience, dexterity, stamina, and strength originally believed in the space program to be unique to men. She stepped into space at 11:44 a.m. EDT along with Leestma. With each held by a single tether, they worked in daylight and darkness to rehearse a critical fuel transfer, stow a troublesome antenna, and photograph their efforts for ground engineers. Challenger landed at 12:27 p.m. EDT at KSC in the second of four attempts to land there instead of at California’s Edwards Air Base and the first in three missions that Crippen was not waved off a Florida landing by bad weather. Dr. Shelby Tilford, NASA director of space science, said that the mission was successful despite disappointments with the imaging radar. Tilford said that all other Challenger experiments worked perfectly. The space-borne mapping camera, carried on a Space Shuttle flight for the first time, took 2,300 frames of film in mapping parts of every continent. Challenger apparently returned to Earth in good condition, except for minor damage to the two rear engine parts suffered during ascent. (NASA MOR E-420-41-G-09 [prelaunch], Sept 28/84, [postlaunch], Oct 5/84; NASA Release 84-132; NASA Fact Sheet, Sept 84; NASA Press Kit, Oct 84; W Times, Oct 9/84, 2A, Oct 10/84, 5A, Oct 12/84, 3A; WPost, Oct 5/84, A-2, Oct 9/84, A-4, Oct 11/84, A-17, Oct 12/84, A-6, Oct 13/84, A-3, Oct 14/84, A-5; NY Times, Oct 11/84, A-18)
MSFC announced that Morton Thiokol’s Wasatch Division near Brigham City, Utah; had successfully static-fired a new, lightweight version of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster at its northern Utah facility. Preliminary results from the two-minute firing indicated that all objectives were met and that the system operated as expected. The case of the new motor was made from a composite material of plastic reinforced with graphite fibers wound into a cylinder. Each of these filament-wound cases weighed about 30,000	pounds less than the current steel case that made up most of the length of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel focket booster. Use of the lighter cases could increase the Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity about 4,600 pounds. Two more of the filament-wound booster motors would be test fired by Motron Thiokol in the spring and summer of 1985. Also in the spring of 1985, flight motor segments containing filament-wound cylinders would be shipped to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for use by NASA and the U.S. Air Force in the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg planned for October The test was conducted under the direction of MSFC, Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 84-86; Marshall Star, Oct 31/84, 1) During October: The astronauts of western Europe formed an Association of European Astronauts (AEA), to which all European astronauts who had flown or been selected to train for a specific mission were eligible to join. The group would hold its first meeting on October 5 and 6. The purpose of the association was to encourage get-togethers for the exchange of views on training experiences and the projects concerned. The AEA had seven members: three ESA astronauts, Claude Nicollier, Ulf Merbold, and Wiibbo Ockels; two French astronauts, Patrick Baudry and Jean-Loup Chretien; and two German astronauts, Reinhard Furrer and Ernst Messerschmid. During meetings they planned to exchange experiences, compare USSR, U.S., and European approaches, and discuss future plans for Europe in manned spaceflight. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84) —Dan Germany, crew systems manager at JSC, observed that, after five years and $12 million, the Space Shuttle toilet still did not work, with failures on 10 out of 11 missions. “It’s very disappointing,” he said. On one mission, Robert Gibson had to use a crowbar to free the toilet mechanism; Sally Ride and Fred Hauck employed a camera bracket. NASA would test a new solution in August 1985 in which a bag would fit inside the commode and be removed after every flight. This reminded observers that NASA once spent $1 million to develop a pen to use in weightlessness. An engineer asked later, “Why didn’t you use a lead pencil?” (SF, Sept/Oct 84) —A commemorative envelope sold in the gift shop at JSC gave details and drawings of a U.S. Navy space program so secret that its name could not be used on the telephone, the Washington Post reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine as saying. The publication said that the envelopes, called postal cover, carried the words “Project Whitecloud,” accurate drawings of a mother satellite, and drawings of three smaller spacecraft. The envelopes said that the satellite disperses the smaller craft to cover more ocean surface and that it used radar-frequency antennae to detect shipboard radar and communications signals. The Navy had no immediate comment. (W Post, Oct 23/84, A-15) It was later revealed that the information had been taken from the May 1976 issue of Aviation Week & Space Technology.
NASA announced that the fifth group of applicants to be interviewed for possible selection as Space Shuttle astronaut candidates, including 15 mission specialists and 7 pilot applicants, reported to JSC today for a week of interviews and medical evaluations. A total of 4,934 men and women had applied for the approximately 12 positions open. The selected candidates would begin in July 1984 a year of training and evaluation at JSC and be selected as astronauts after satisfactory completion of the evaluation period. The selected candidates were: David T. Allen, Ph.D., employed by University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA); Maj. Larry D. Autry, U.S. Air Force; Lt. Commander Dennis N. Bostich, U.S. Navy; Capt. Joseph A. Car-retto, U.S. Air Force; Lt. Commander Keith E. Crawford, U.S. Navy; William M. Decampli, M.D., Ph.D., employed by Stanford Medical Center, Stanford, Calif., Jan D. Dozier, employed at MSFC; Lt. Col. William A. Flanagan, U.S. Air Force; Wendy S. Hale, Ph.D., stationed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.; Rosario M. Izquierdo, employed by National Security Agency (NSA); Lt. Fred D. Knox, Jr., U.S. Navy; G. David Low, employed by JPL; Lt. Commander Michael J. McCulley, U.S. Navy; Kenneth J. Myers, M.D., employed by the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.; William S. O’Keefe, employed by Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Mich.; Donald R. Pettit, Ph.D., employed by Los Alamos National Laboratory; Lt. Commander William F. Readdy, U.S. Navy; Lt. Commander Gregory J. Rose, U.S. Navy; Lonnie Sharpe, Jr., Ph.D., employed by North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro, N.C.; Kathryn C. Thornton, Ph.D., employed by the U.S. Army Foreign Science and Technology Center, Charlottesville, Va.; C. Lacy Veach, employed by JSC; and Lt. Commander James B. Waddell, U.S. Navy. (NASA Release 84-018)
The Washington Post reported that a secret military payload set for launch July 14 on the Space Shuttle had been canceled and that the mission would be scrubbed without it, according to Air Force and NASA officials. A Pentagon spokesman declined to identify the payload or say when it would be flown. Glynn Lunney, Shuttle program manager, said “if they remove the payload, we won’t fly.” The canceled mission left astronauts Thomas Mattingly, Loren Shriver, Ellison Onizuka, and James Buchli without a flight for the second time; they were to have flown the Shuttle in the fall of 1983 on a military mission canceled because of rocket problems. (W Post, Feb 14/84, A-l)
NASA announced the crew assignments for Space Shuttle flights 51-D, scheduled for launch in February 1985, and 61-D, set for January 1986. Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., would command 51-D. Shaw was pilot of the orbiter Columbia on STS-9, the first Spacelab mission flown in November and December 1983. His crew would consist of Bryan D. O’Connor as pilot and mission specialists Mary Cleave, Sherwood C. Spring, and Jerry L. Ross. Mission 51-D would be the 21st Space Shuttle flight and the 9th for the orbiter Challenger. The principal objectives of the six-day flight would be deployment of a SYNCOM communications satellite and retrieval of the free-flying Long Duration Exposure Facility. John M. Fabian, an Air Force pilot with more than 3,500 hours of flying time, would fly as one of the pilots on 61-D. He flew as mission specialist on STS-7 in July 1983 and was scheduled for 51-A in October as a mission specialist. Flight 61-D mission specialists would be James R Bagian, M.D., and Rhea Seddon, M.D., who is also scheduled to fly on mission 41-F in August. Mission 61-D would be the fourth Spacelab flight, focusing on experiments in life sciences during its seven days in space. It would be the ninth flight of the orbiter Columbia. A commander and another pilot for 61-D would be named at a later date. (NASA Release 84-11) —Donald J. Johnston, Canadian Minister of State for Science and Technology, announced that a Canadian would fly as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, set for launch in October, in addition to two earlier Canadians already scheduled for Shuttle flights. NASA offered Canada the opportunity to fly a payload specialist in keeping with President Reagan’s initiative to increase international cooperation. Shuttle flight 51-A would be a six-day flight, carrying Telesat Canada’s ANIK C-l satellite and a Getaway Special experiment designed by two Canadian high school students. The Canadian crew member and backup for the October flight would be announced in March. (NASA Release 84-12) Seven hours after launch, the astronauts pushed Westar VI, Western Union’s $30 million satellite, out of the cargo bay to join two identical satellites already serving North America. However, NASA officials said that the satellite could not be contacted by radio and was considered lost in space. Officials said that the satellite’s on-board rocket engine, which was to propel it into higher orbit, either misfired or never fired. Radars operated by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NAADC) later found the satellite in an erratic orbit above and behind Challenger. The radars found two large pieces in an orbit more than 800 miles high at its peak and just over 200 miles high at its lowest point above Earth. On February 5, a large balloon that the astronauts were to chase through space exploded just after it had begun to inflate. Plans called for the astronauts to back up to 120 miles away from the balloon, then move in over the next eight hours to contact it. Instead, the crew spent 90 minutes tracking pieces of the balloon and never got farther than 20 or 30 miles from the debris. The astronauts tracked the balloon’s largest piece with radar for almost 20 miles and used special binoculars and an optical sextant to follow the same piece more than 20 miles by watching sunlight reflected off the balloon’s aluminum surface. The Indonesian satellite Palapa-B2, launched February 6, went into a useless orbit, believed to be caused by the same technical problem that Westar VI suffered. The NAADC located Palapa-B2 about seven hours after its ejection from the Challenger’s cargo bay, but it was in an orbit so low that it “cannot perform its mission,” said Richard Brandes of Hughes Aircraft Company, builder of the satellite. He added that both satellites’ rocket motors apparently shut down 15 seconds early; they were intended to burn for 80 seconds. On February 7, astronauts Bruce McCandless and Robert Stewart left Challenger and flew unrestrained for the first time, adding another milepost to man’s conquest of space. They unhooked their lifelines and rose up more than 100 yards away from the Space Shuttle. Propelled by $10 million jet-powered backpacks, they traveled at 4.8 miles a second, although they had no sensation of speed. The two reentered Challenger after 5 hours and 55 minutes. The exercise was a rehearsal for the next Shuttle flight, when other astronauts would try to retrieve an ailing satellite, bring it into the cargo bay for repair, and release it to orbit again. On February 9 the two took a second walk in space, which lasted 6 hours and 17 minutes. The Space Shuttle made its first landing at KSC on February 11, when it touched down at 7:16 a.m. EST. The Florida landing had been a Shuttle program goal because it would save money and time by eliminating sending maintenance crews to California to prepare the vehicle for a return flight to Florida on the back of a Boeing 747. It was the first Florida landing in two attempts and the first of six planned for the year. Challenger was in relatively good shape following the landing, although its windshield, fuselage, and landing gear were damaged. The windows were hazed and pitted; and 31 of its 33,000	protective tiles, two brake assemblies, and all four tires on the main landing wheels would have to replaced. Repairs should not slow the preparation of Challenger for its next flight in April. (NASA MOR M-989-41-B [prelaunch] Jan 30/84; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 6/84; WPost, Feb 2/84, A-2, Feb 4/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 8/84, A-l, Feb 9/84, A-12, Feb 11/84, A-2, Feb 12/84, A-l, Feb 13/84, A-3; W Times, Feb 6/84, 2A, Feb 7/84, 1A, Feb 8/84, 1A; USA Today, Feb 6/84, A-l)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) spokesman Dave Alter said today that NASA had imposed a $131,250 penalty on contractor Hamilton Standard, Windsor Locks, Conn., for failure of two space suits that it had built for use on the fifth Space Shuttle mission in November 1982. Hamilton Standard was to be paid a $175,000 fee over costs for service from October 1982 through March 1983. However, the failures had prevented space walks by astronauts Joe Allen and Bill Lenoir on November 11-12, 1982. After a lengthy investigation, NASA blamed the contractor for the failure of a fan in Allen’s life support backpack and an oxygen pressure regulator on Lenoir’s suit. {WPost, Jan 28/84, A-7)
The Washington Post reported the death of April 4 of Oleg Antonov, 78, one of the Soviet Union’s leading aircraft designers. Antonov, whose obituary was signed by Communist Party leader Konstantin Chernenko and other dignitaries, became the head of that country’s aircraft design office in 1946. One of his first creations was the AN-2 transport and agricultural biplane, which soon became the national airline’s (Aeroflot) workhorse and still was in use. Under his leadership, the office also designed a range of Antonov aircraft, including passenger planes and the long-range AN-22 heavy-transport aircraft. (W Post, Apr 6/84, B-6) At 12:20 p.m. EST on April 7 the astronauts deployed the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), a 30-foot-long cylinder carrying 57 varieties of space-age materials. Following retrieval by other astronauts next February, scientists would examine the cargo to determine how it stoop up to the heat, cold, and cosmic rays of space. The Space Shuttle’s 50-foot-long robot arm pushed the cylinder out of Challenger’s cargo bay. The initial attempt on April 8 to retrieve the orbiting Solar Max satellite failed when astronaut George (Pinky) Nelson, propelled by a jet-powered backpack, tried unsuccessfully to attach himself to the crippled, slowly spinning observatory. He bounced away from the satellite each time, causing it to spin faster with each bounce. After running low on fuel, Nelson returned to Challenger. However, on April 9 radio commands from ground controllers at GFSC stabilized the satellite just before its batteries went dead. On April 10 Crippen inched Challenger’s robot arm up to one end of the 21-foot-tall Solar Max, and then Hart caught the slow-spinning satellite on the first try. They then moved it into flight support system, a berthing area in the back of the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay. The following day, Nelson and Van Hoften, wearing space suits, stepped out into the cargo bay and replaced a 500-pound fuse box and fixed a smaller electronics box supplying power to one of seven instruments. The work was completed in slightly less than the alloted six hours. The astronauts redeployed the observatory on April 12. The Washington Post reported that, because the repair job was done so well, the observatory would do better in its restored state than in the 10 months it had worked before breaking down almost four years previously. Challenger landed at 5:38 a.m. local time April 13 at California’s Edwards Air Force Base instead of the preferred site at KSC, due to poor weather in Florida. NASA officials pronounced the Space Shuttle to be in excellent condition. “Compared to 10 previous recoveries, the condition of the ship is much better,” Fritz Widick, operations manager for the recovery, commented at a news conference. “During the flight there were only something like 12 problems recorded in the ship, which is remarkable.” (NASA MOR M-989-41-C, Mar 19/84; WPost, Apr 8/84, A-3, Apr 6/84, A-2, Apr 9/84, A-l, Apr 10/84, A-l, Apr 11/84, A-l Apr 12/84, A-l, Apr 13/84, A-2; NY Times, Apr 15/84, 23)
NASA announced the delay of the 51-C Space Shuttle mission originally scheduled for launch from KSC on December 8, 1984. The agency had decided to replace up 2,800 thermal protection tiles on the underside of the orbiter Challenger due to the degradation of the bonding material. When Challenger returned from space on its last mission, a black tile from the left wing chine area just behind and below the crew door area was missing. About 100 tiles were removed from Challenger, and it was found that the adhesive substance known as “screed,” used to smooth irregularities in the surface of the orbiter, had softened. Screed was applied directly over the aluminum skin of the orbiter. All other areas were covered with a primer called red RTV-560 (room temperature vulcanizing), which was used as an adhesive for bonding the strain isolation pads (SIP) to the body and the tile to the SIP. The 51-C mission was the first completely dedicated DOD mission. The 51-A mission continued on schedule for launch November 7. (MSFC Release 84-91) During the flight, the crew recovered the satellites Palapa B2 and Westar VI, which had not operated properly following their earlier deployment from the Space Shuttle. The Palapa B2 recovery was the first retrieval ever of a satellite from space, although astronauts previously had caught and repaired the Solar Maximum satellite. Astronauts Allen and Gardner had to move Palapa B2 into the Discovery’s cargo bay themselves when an unforeseen obstacle prevented use of the spacecraft’s mechanical arm. This resulted in some damage to the power-generating solar cells surrounding the seven-footwide satellite, but the damage was not expected to interfere with a successful relaunching of the satellite. Later in the flight the same two astronauts took 5 hours and 42 minutes to retrieve Westar VI, a 2,300-pound communications satellite, and bolt it down next to Palapa B2—possibly the shortest $35 million salvage operation ever undertaken, the Washington Post reported. Insurance companies had to pay the owners of the two satellites, the government of Indonesia (Palapa B2), and Western Union Telegraph Company (Westar VI) $180 million. The insurance brokers paid NASA $5.5 million for the satellites’ retrieval and Hughes Aircraft Company $5 million for technical help in the retrieval operation. Stephen Merrett, chairman of Merrett Syndicates, an affiliate of Lloyds of London, that helped underwrite the insurance on the satellites, said “I’m proud to be a part of the crowd that put this mission together in just six months.” He added, “We expect Palapa to be resold for between $30 and $40 million and Westar for $30 million, and we expect those sales to be concluded very soon.” Merrett declined to identify potential buyers of the two satellites. In interviews later, Allen and Gardner noted that the task of retrieving the satellites was easier than dealing with small items such as tools and the tether wires that tied them to the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay. “As objects get smaller in space, they become more difficult to handle. It’s really extraordinary how much easier it is to move massive objects like satellites.” Allen pointed out that the only trouble they had in retrieving the satellites resulted from their tendency to grip the satellites too hard and move them too quickly in an effort to get them back and secured in the cargo bay in a limited amount of time. “Once you get over that difficult spot where you think you have to have the satellite in a death grip, things are a lot easier,” he said. In addition to the salvage missions, the crew during the flight deployed the Canadian Telesat-H and Hughes Syncom-IV-1 communications satellites. The Radiation Monitor Experiment and the Aggregation of Red Blood Cells experiments were carried out in the orbiter’s middeck. Discovery landed November 16 at 7 a.m. local time at KSC. “Two landings in a row at Kennedy, and this time with a cargo bay as full as it was when it took off,” said Jesse W. Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “It’s hard to believe those two satellites are sitting out there on the runway after being in space for more than eight months.” (NASA MOR EA20-51-A-11 [prelaunch] Nov 8/84; NASA Release 84-144; MSFC Release 84-90; JSC Release 84-051; W Post, Nov 13/84, A—11 and D-1, Nov 14/84, A-l, Nov 17/84, A-10, Nov 18/84, A-19, Nov 28/84, A-18; NY Times, Nov 18/84, 3A; H Chron, Nov 11/84, 24)
The Far Eastern Economic Review was quoted as saying that the People’s Republic of China had asked the United States to allow a Chinese astronaut to be included in the Space Shuttle program. The Hong Kong-based weekly magazine also said that Beijing had asked the United States to consider providing a launcher for a Chinese manned space vehicle. It was reported that the Reagan administration was giving both requests “sympathetic” consideration (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Aug 23/84)
NASA announced the start of the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE), a new astronomy satellite project that would be launched into Earth orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1988. The purpose of the explorer was to make the first all-sky map in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) band of the electromagnetic spectrum, a band between ultraviolet and X-ray light. The EUVE, managed by JPL, with scientific instruments supplied by the University of California, Berkeley, was a true explorer in that it would conduct the first in-depth investigation of that critical band and was expected to discover stars and other celestial objects with unexpected characteristics. The EUVE would orbit Earth at an attitude of 340 statute miles and from that point above the atmosphere would be able to scan the sky for emissions of extreme ultraviolet radiation. EUVE would use four 40-centimeter (15.7-inc.h) ultraviolet telescopes to conduct the all-sky survey and a spectrometer to carry out detailed observations of the new sources and stars expected to be discovered. JPL was responsible for overall EUVE project responsibility. The UCB would supply the 1,100-pound science payload, consisting of the extreme ultraviolet telescopes and the spectrometer; and the university’s Space Sciences Laboratory would design and fabricate the payload. JPL would control flight operations, and the science operations center would be at the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley. (NASA Release 84-125) Discovery was oriented with the port side in direct sunlight, so when the crew awoke the next morning they found about half of the large ice block had melted. Then, astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr., switched on heaters in the pipes leading to the nozzle and fired the orbiter’s thrusters to see if the vibrations would shake the ice free. Next, Hartsfield, assisted by Judith Resnik, took the controls of the mechanical arm and following procedures outlined by Sally K. Ride on the ground knocked off with little difficulty all but about 5 inches of the ice chunk. The remaining ice apparently then melted in the warmth of the sunlight. Discovery landed September 5 at Edwards Air Force Base, completing its six-day maiden flight. During the flight, crew deployed three communications satellites, LEASAT-1 (SYNCOM-1), Telestar-3, and SBS-D in the first three days of the flight; extended an experimental solar-powered array in a test for future Space Station construction; and processed a sample of a hormone that could lead to a commercial pharamaceutical product. Lt. Col. Richard M. Mullane, one of the astronauts on board, said that Discovery “performed superbly,” while NASA officials pointed out that all the mission’s objectives were accomplished. (W Post, Sept 4/84, A-6; NY Times, Sept 3/84, A-l, Sept 4/84, A-l, Sept 5/84, A-l; W Times, Sept 5/84, 4A)
President Reagan, in his State of the Union address, endorsed the development of the U.S.’s first permanently manned space station. “Wc can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic and scientific gain. Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade,” he said. “A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science, communications and in metals and life-saving medicines which can be manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these challenges and share in their benefits. .. .Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today,” he said. NASA presented the agency’s plans to the presidenl on the day that he spoke to astronauts in the Spacelab orbiting in the Space Shuttle in December 1983. NASA Administrator James N. Beggs had sought the space station as a science laboratory, astronomical observatory, space manufacturing center, servicing facility for spacecraft, and an assembly site for larger orbiting structures. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director William J. Casey had opposed any major commitment to space station funding because they feared it could draw money from their own space programs, government officials said. The officials added that military and intelligence agencies were concerned that they would have to share the space station with civilian agencies such as NASA and sometimes with astronauts of other countries. NASA also had found little enthusiasm when it turned for support from other agencies. When the National Academy of Sciences space science board was asked whether basic research in science would “require or be enhanced by the space station,” Thomas M. Donahue, chairman of the space board, said the answer was no. “I don’t think you could ever really justify $20 billion for a space station,” he said. At this early stage, there was no design for the space station, but officials of NASA had previously sketched the broad outlines of the most likely initial design. {Weekly Compilation of the Papers of Ronald Reagan, Jan 25/84, 87ff; NY Times, Jan 26/84, A-l; W Post, Jan 18/84, A-l, Jan 29/84, A-4)
A working meeting, in Paris, of astronauts from the Soviet Union, the United States, and France concluded after participants expressed concern for mankind’s future and the need for cooperation, and they emphasized their desire to use their unique experience to promote space exploration and the use of space technology for the good of all people. Participating in the meeting were Soviet cosmonauts A. A. Leonov (Voskhod-2 and Soyuz Apollo), O.G. Makarov (Soyuz 12, Soyuz 27, Soyu T-3), and Yu.V. Romanenko (Soyuz 26, Soyuz 38); U.S. astronauts R. Schweickart (Apollo 9), E. Mitchell (Apollo 14), and D. Eisele (Apollo 7); and French astronaut J.L. Chretien. The participants agreed to set up an organization of those who had traveled in space, with the aim of studying the potential and promoting the constructive use of space to improve living conditions on Earth, formulating positive prospects for future generations, and promoting the establishment of broad contacts among people who had been in space to identify opportunities for cooperation and issues of common concern. (FBIS, Moscow TRUD in Russian, Sept 12/84; FBIS Moscow Tass in English, Sept 11/84)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
NASA announced that Robert L. Crippen, commander of Space Shuttle mission 41-G earlier in the month, was named deputy director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC, Houston. He would serve as deputy to George W.S. Abbey and remain an active astronaut. Crippen was pilot on STS-1, the first Space Shuttle flight, and commanded STS-7 and 41-C, the Solar Maximum satellite rescue mission. He joined NASA in September 1969 after three-year assignment with the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program. (JSC Release 84-050)
