The Circumnavigators Club in New York City would present Sally Ride, the first American woman astronaut, with its Order of Magellan, the Washington Post reported, which was presented to individuals who were dedicated to advancing peace and understanding in all parts of the world and who had circumnavigated the globe. Ride was only the 17th person to receive the award. Other recipients were Gen. Douglas MacArthur, former President Hoover, Neil Armstrong, Sen. Barry Goldwater, Lowell Thomas, and Thor Heyerdahl. (W Post, Nov 11/85, C3)
NASA Administrator James Beggs stirred up a controversy when he reportedly told a Washington gathering of the American Stock Exchange that the Soviets had "turned us down, flat, with no explanation" on the proposal of a joint space mission, the Washington Times reported. Later NASA spokesman Miles Waggoner said the Soviets had not rejected the idea, but a joint manned space mission was not likely to happen within the next few years. President Reagan had offered the Soviets a chance to participate in a cooperative space venture about a year previously. The Soviets responded that they believed it was not the time to fly that kind of mission. "To us, that means the item is still open," Waggoner said. "This time, though, Mr. Beggs decided to look at it from the other perspective." Other NASA officials, indicating the agency hadn't received any new word from the Soviets about the proposal, speculated Beggs might have said what he did to provoke a reaction from them. Originally, NASA planners envisioned a joint practice rescue mission in which a U.S. astronaut would use a jet backpack called a manned maneuvering unit (MMU) to fly from a Space Shuttle to a Soviet Salyut space station. The astronaut might also use the MMU to push a cosmonaut back to the Space Shuttle for a brief time. (W Times, June 12/85, 4A)
During Space Shuttle mission 51-1 astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher spent seven hours and eight minutes, a new record for a spacewalk, in the first stage of repair of the Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. During the walk, they retrieved the 15,000-lb. satellite, fastened Discovery's mechanical arm onto it, disarmed its Minuteman rocket motor, and exposed its electronic connections. Later Fisher said he could see no evidence of what caused the satellite to go dead after astronauts deployed it in April. "There is no evidence of debris on anything that would cause a problem. It's clean as a whistle," He said. Van Hoften and Fisher were outside the Space Shuttle from about 8:00 a.m. to shortly after 3:00 p.m. EDT, breaking by one minute the spacewalk record set April 1984 by van Hoften and George Nelson when they repaired the scientific satellite Solar Max. Although the astronauts accomplished more than half of what was needed in the salvage mission, they were planning a four-hour spacewalk on September 1 to finish the job. They would put a "space blanket" over the engine bell that served as the Minuteman motor's rocket nozzle to trap more of the sun's heat to warm it, because Leasat-3 had been in the cold of space so long that its rocket motor was too cold to fire correctly. Then the astronauts would install a vertical bar along the 20-foot length of the satellite to serve as a handle for van Hoften to spin the satellite and push it away from Discovery into space. It would then be seven days before the satellite acquired enough power to thaw its liquid-fuel tanks and almost two months before the solid-fuel rocket motor was warm enough for ground controllers to command it to ignite. (W Post, Sept 1/85, A5)
The U.S. Air Force announced today that it had selected Air Force Undersecretary Edward "Pete" Aldridge to fly on the first Space Shuttle mission launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Arizona Daily Star reported. The Air Force said Aldridge and Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson would serve as payload specialists with five astronauts named by NASA for the Defense Department's mission set for launch March 20, 1986. Aldridge, 47, who had been Air Force undersecretary since 1981, said in a statement, "I'm thrilled at the opportunity and thrilled at the prospects that I will be able to apply what I have learned to expanding U.S. efforts in space." NASA and the U.S. Air Force were building the Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch facility primarily for military missions. Because the Space Shuttle could be launched from there directly south, it could go into a north-south orbit that covered the entire globe, passing over both poles and allowing Space Shuttle crews to observe Soviet military forces anywhere in the world. Space Shuttles launched from Kennedy Space Center could not go directly north or south because they would fly over inhabited areas during the initial minutes of flight, possibly endangering the population if something went wrong. Those Space Shuttles launched into east-west orbits did not fly any closer than about 2000 miles to the poles. (Ariz. Daily Star, Sept 12/85, A3)
"Space and Society—Progress and Promise" was the theme of the twenty-second Space Congress, a nonprofit technical symposium sponsored by the Canaveral Council of Technical Societies, April 23-26 in Cocoa Beach, Florida, Spaceport News reported. Speakers discussed new space initiatives, including operation and robotics in space, advanced missions and transportation, Space Station plans and development, and private sector investment and participation in space activities. Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, director of the Strategic Defense Office, would speak about the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). The traditional "Meet the Astronauts" session would be open to the public, as would be a one-man play entitled Leviathan 99 by Ray Bradbury, a noted science fiction writer. (Spaceport News, Apr 12/86, 8) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
"The Dream Is Alive," a new IMAX movie that was perhaps the most advanced film of its kind ever made, opened today at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Post reported. The $3.6 million production, narrated by Walter Cronkite, was the first ever shot almost completely on location in space and was an informal sequel to "Hail, Columbia," the story of the U.S.'s first Space Shuttle. Because the film was shot on three of the most dramatic and action-packed Space Shuttle flights of the previous year, it was essentially a video yearbook full of special happenings, the Washington Times reported. The film showed the rescue and repair of the Solar Max satellite, the deployment of the 100-foot-tall solar array that someday could help power the space station, launching of two communications satellites, and the first spacewalk by an American woman. Among what appeared to be special effects produced in Hollywood were the immensity of Hurricane Josephine as seen from 200 miles overhead and the silence of a satellite drifting noiselessly in the blackness of space. The astronauts who shot the footage said the IMAX format came as close to capturing the real view and the true feel of spaceflight as any format ever had. IMAX expert Graeme Ferguson, who produced and directed the film, said the next step was to modify an IMAX camera so it could be taken outside the Space Shuttle. (W Post, June 22/85, D1; W Times, June 20/85, 3B)
Americans on board were commander Henry Hartsfield, Jr.; Air Force Lt. Col. Steven Nagel, pilot; and mission specialists Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, a biomedical engineer, Marine Corps Col. James Buchli, and Air Force Col. Guion Bluford, Jr., who had a doctorate in aerospace engineering. The two West Germans in the crew were Dr. Ernst Messerschmid and Mr. Reinhard Furrer, both physicists. The eighth crew member, Dr. Wubbo Ockels, a physicist from the Netherlands, represented the European Space Agency (ESA), which provided several scientific instruments in the Spacelab. The Europeans had prime responsibility for conducting the experiments; Bluford and Dunbar would assist them. Spacelab D-1, designed, built, and checked out in Europe, was flown to KSC for installation in Challenger's cargo bay. The V\fest German space agency's center in Oberphaffenhofen, near Munich, controlled scientific operations during the flight; ground control for flying the Space Shuttle was in Houston, as usual. Spacelab D-1 carried 76 experiments on racks that lined its walls. German researchers designed most of the experiments, which were for German and other foreign universities, research institutes, and industrial enterprises as well as ESA and NASA; other experiments were from France, Spain, Italy, Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, and the U.S. All experiments were intended to take advantage of the weightlessness of space to study various processes that were normally affected by gravity. The Washington Post reported that West German officials said Spacelab was a major step toward what they hoped would be a larger laboratory module attached to the permanently manned space station that NASA envisioned for the 1990s. Most experiments were in materials processing. Along two sides of the Spacelab, the experiments were in racks containing small furnaces for heating metals and making alloys that were lighter and stronger than anything produced in full gravity of earth. Other materials processing experiments would study the flow of liquids in weightlessness; yet others would grow very pure and large crystals that could lead to improvements in electronic semiconductors. In a variety of life sciences experiments, the crew would study the growth of plants (corn and lentils) under microgravity conditions. Other studies were on how embryos of frogs and insects developed in weightlessness. Crew would use tadpoles for tests on how weightlessness might affect the development of vestibular, or balance, organs in vertebrates. ESA's vestibular sled ran down a pair of rails in Spacelab's center aisle. Experimenters would accelerate and tilt crew members riding in the chairlike device to test how the human balance system in the inner ear responded to weightlessness and a moderate gravity force, because it was thought the inner ear, which relied on gravity to function normally, might be the source of astronauts' motion sickness. Crew would use instruments in the cargo bay outside the Spacelab for navigation tests, such as synchronization of atomic clocks in space with those on the ground, checking for any discrepancies caused by weightlessness, and precise distance measurements by radio signals between the Space Shuttle and the ground. To accommodate the crew of eight, NASA installed an extra sleep station, bringing the total to four. Crew would conduct laboratory work in shifts around the clock. Despite early concern over the condition of the Space Shuttle's steering jets, mission control gave the Challenger the go-ahead for orbital operations. Later the mission control flight director said a valve malfunction prevented the flow of fuel through one line to Challenger's steering jets, but NASA considered an alternate line sufficient for regular operation to maneuver Challenger. Flight controllers also reported erratic temperature readings on one of the three fuel cells that generated electricity, but with crew supervision the affected unit was operating at full strength. (NASA Release 85-145; NASA MOR M-989-61-A [prelaunch] Oct 28/85; NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13; W Post, Oct 31/85, A30)
NASA launched at 7:29 p.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B to practice methods for building a space station and to launch three satellites, the Washington Post reported. People more than 400 miles away in South Carolina and Key West, Florida, saw the launch. There had been only two other previous U.S. night launches: in 1972 when the Apollo 17 crew left for the moon in the middle of the night and in 1983 when the Space Shuttle Challenger departed in early morning. Nine minutes after launch, mission control reported Atlantis was in a secure orbit about 200 miles high, and launch director Gene Thomas said the countdown was the smoothest yet in the Space Shuttle program. Crew onboard Atlantis were Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, commander; Lt. Col. Bryan O'Connor, pilot; mission specialists Dr. Mary Cleave, Maj. Jerry Ross, and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring; and payload specialists Rudolfo Neri Vela (Mexico's first astronaut) and McDonnell Douglas engineer Charles Walker. During the mission the crew would launch Mexico's Morelos B satellite, Australia's AUSSAT 2, and RCA's Satcom KU-2. Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring would also take two long spacewalks to assemble 93 aluminum struts into a 45-foot beam and six 12-foot beams into a 64-lb. inverted pyramid to test techniques that might be used to build the proposed permanently manned space station. Following each spacewalk, the mission specialists would disassemble and stow the beams. Cameras would record every move so that later a computer could reduce the photos to a motion study that engineers would use to determine how construction work could best be performed in the zero gravity of outer space. (NASA Release 85-153; W Post, Nov 27/85, A3)
Wesley Hymer, a biochemist at Pennsylvania State University and one of 20 researchers who analyzed tissue samples from 24 rats flown aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in April, said today the rats suffered significant reductions in the release of growth hormones, the NY Times reported. The findings could signal a problem for astronauts, in that weightlessness could affect the ability of special cells in their pituitary glands to produce growth hormones that govern development and maintenance of muscle and bone tissue. Richard Grindeland, a researcher at NASA's Ames Reseach Center, reported the previous month that the same rats lost bone and muscle strength. Grindeland said that they "were limp, like dishrags," and that dissection revealed "very drastic changes" in bone and muscle strength. However, researchers would need more test results before they could link growth hormone reduction to muscle and bone atrophy, Hymer said. But he added, "I think there's probably a good chance that there is a relationship." After a battery of tests that included implanting normal rats with growth hormone cells from the space rats, Hymer noted a reduction of up to 50% in release of the hormone. "Something is radically changed in those pituitary glands as a result of the space flight," Hymer said. And he added, "I think the surprising thing was these changes occurred so quickly. They happened in seven days in flight." However, Hymer said researchers did not know if astronauts suffered the same kind of changes. "I can tell you that there are data that show that the blood levels of growth hormones in the astronauts from Skylab were reduced by a significant amount," Hymer said. Hymer planned to send growth hormone cells, some of which would contain inhibitory and stimulatory chemicals, on a Space Shuttle flight the following September. He said he also would like to see similar experiments on primates. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C8)
NASA deputy associate administrator for space science and applications Samuel Keller, speaking at a weekly staff meeting, said "We expect 1986 will be the most demanding year we've ever had,'' the Washington Post reported. In January Voyager would encounter the planet Uranus. In March the Space Shuttle would fly a mission dedicated to observing Halley's comet. In May NASA would launch Ulysses, which would fly to Jupiter and use the planet's gravity to "slingshot" itself around the sun, and Galileo, which would orbit Jupiter. In August the Space Shuttle would carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit. The three spacecraft cost $2 billion not including launch costs. Keller's toughest time would occur in May, the Post said, when Ulysses and Galileo at the same time would be in the cargo bays of two Space Shuttles on their launch pads. NASA would try May 15 to launch Ulysses and then Galileo four days later. If anything delayed the May 15 launch, NASA had 24 days to get the Space Shuttle into space, a launch window that allowed the two spacecraft to fly to Jupiter using the least amount of fuel. "I'll be glad when 1986 is over," Keller said. (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21) October24: NASA announced that an October 29 conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies would provide a forum for government executives to discuss the Reagan Administration's program to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. Following welcoming remarks by Dennis Whitfield, chief of staff to the Secretary of Labor, and David Braunstein, director of NASA's productivity programs, conference participants would be briefed on several perspectives on the President's productivity improvement program. Stephen Scholossberg, deputy under secretary for labor-management relations, Department of Labor, would then provide a labor-management view of quality and productivity. In the afternoon, NASA astronaut Bruce McCandless, first human to freely maneuver in space without a tether, would speak on the importance of quality and productivity in the space program. John Franke Jr., assistant secretary for administration, Department of Agriculture, would then give case examples of management's commitment to quality; and Commodore John Kirkpatrick, commander, Naval Aviation Logistics Center, would discuss quality improvement through total quality management. (NASA Release 85-146)
At the halfway point in Space Shuttle mission 61-A in which the orbiter Challenger carried Spacelab D-1 [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Missions, Oct. 30], a slow air leak in one of Spacelab's vacuum chambers developed, but flight controllers in Houston did not consider it serious, the NY Times reported. Terry White, a public affairs officer at Mission Control, said the oxygen leak was so slight that, "provided there are no additional fluctuations, we have enough gases to go to the end of the mission." After encountering some Spacelab equipment malfunctions during the mission's first two days, Challenger's crew indicated they had achieved encouraging success with nearly all of the Spacelab's 76 scientific experiments on the effects of microgravity on metals, biological growth, and human physiology. Mission planners in Houston and scientists at the West German science control center near Munich were studying the possibility of extending the flight by a day to permit more time for experimentation. The crew reported preliminary results showing that, as expected, seedlings growing in the virtual absence of gravity developed roots that curved in odd directions. "The roots, lacking gravity, do not seem to know which way to go," a crew member commented. In another experiment, the Bacillus subtilis bacteria showed a higher rate of growth than anticipated. Mission control scientists said this "may be taken as an indication that bacteria do react differently in space." Most of the studies in processing metal alloys and growing crystals for electronics were still underway, so results were unavailable until completion of the mission. Earlier in the mission, crew member Dr. Ernst Messerschmid, a West German physicist, reported being "disoriented" when he awoke, a symptom of the space motion sickness that had plagued nearly half of all Space Shuttle astronauts. (NYT, Nov 3/85, A27)
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)
In assessing the status of the Syncom IV-3 (Leasat 3) satellite that was drifting in low-earth orbit after its apogee kick motor failed to push it into proper orbit [see Apr. 18], aerospace engineers said astronauts might be able to salvage the satellite, the Washington Times reported. Payload specialists originally believed it would be too dangerous to return the satellite to earth on the Space Shuttle because of the nearly six tons of highly volatile rocket fuel it carried. Jerome Hammack, a spacecraft safety operations expert, said deactivating the satellite's electronic systems would significantly reduce the chance of stray sparks igniting the fuel, most of which would turn to gas upon descent. To ensure that there was no power going to any of the electrical circuits, a spacewalking astronaut would have to cut power circuits running to the satellite's batteries and solar power cells. However, NASA would mount a rescue attempt only if Hughes Communications Inc., Leasat 3's manufacturer, and Hughes' insurance underwriters agreed to a salvage contract. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
The National Space Institute (NSI) announced establishment of "Space Outreach '85," a program to acquire original ideas from the public as to potential uses of space for social and economic benefit. The program was intended to broaden what appeared to be a too narrow debate on a new and clarified set of long-term civilian space goals. Rules for the program were that ideas could not exceed 750 words; submissions could not include projects already under review by the federal government; and proposals must be creative, innovative, and feasible. The NSI would present all ideas received during the program to Congress, NASA, and, in particular, the newly created National Commission on Space [see Mar. 30]. Judges for the program, which had the support of the Sophron Foundation of McLean, Virginia, were Walter Boyne, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum; Evert Clark, technology editor, Business Week, former astronaut Michael Collins; and Robert Cowen, science writer for the The Christian Science Monitor. The NSI would present awards for the outstanding entries, with the writer of the most innovative suggestion receiving an all-expense-paid trip to see a Space Shuttle launch. (NSI Release, May 13/85) August 9; World amateur radio operators participated in the shuttle amateur radio experiment (SAREX) on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, the Lewis News reported. SAREX allowed people connected with amateur radio to talk with Challenger's crew and watch TV transmissions from the flight deck. The SAREX test, conducted during off-duty hours in cooperation with onboard mission specialists/ham operators Tony England and John-David Bartoe and mission commander Gordon Fullerton, allowed world amateur radio operators access to the Space Shuttle's voice and video transmissions to earth on amateur 2-m band. A video buffer circuit designed, built, and tested by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ham operators was key to SAREX's success. The SAREX system worked in two primary modes, one mode at a time. The first allowed voice communications back and forth between radio operators on the ground and spacecraft crew. The second primary mode was amateur TV. Using a set-up similar to the ham radio system, amateur TV operators and the Space Shuttle crew sent images to one another—the first such use of two-way video in space. Users transmitted color TV pictures in a slow-scan-mode—one picture every 8 to 36 seconds. SAREX, closely connected to the Young Astronaut Program, was a joint effort of the American Relay League and NASA. A ham radio experiment with mission specialist Owen Garriot conducted in 1983 on STS-9 was generally credited as the genesis for the current SAREX. (Lewis News, Aug 9/85, 1)
Researchers in the Workload and Ergonomics Branch of the Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory were working to adapt machines to pilots rather than the traditional other way around, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "The success or failure of a modern Air Force aircraft and mission depends on whether the pilot has the ability to handle the unpredictable situations typical in a wartime environment," said Maris Vikmanis, supervisory industrial engineer for the lab. He explained that laboratory researchers studied how pilots performed in different environments, including combat, to provide information to aircraft designers so that future aircraft would be better adapted to pilots. But he pointed out there was more to it than simply assessing new aircrafts' cockpit designs. "Not only do we have to observe how the pilot performs in the aircraft cockpit, we also have to tap into the pilot himself," Vikmanis explained. "We must know how much effort the pilot is expending, his mental capability, and his workload limitation." In analyzing cockpit design, researchers checked into how well a pilot could see and reach cockpit controls and displays. Only in existence as an aerospace research field since 1979, workload research measured both the pilot's performance and his internal state of wellbeing. By combining experiments in the laboratory and in flight, lab researchers measured human performance/workload using three different methods. First, researchers used a computer-based performance test to measure a pilot's physical and mental action. By having the pilot perform up to 11 different tasks, researchers could characterize various aspects of human behavior. Second, pilots answered, after flying a simulator or an actual aircraft, subjective questions about their experience. A third method measured human performance/workload from a physiological viewpoint by collecting and analyzing variable responses of the human brain, heart, muscles, and visual system. Lab scientists and engineers used the test data to prepare a workload scale, which focused on problems the pilot, aircrew, and the aircraft itself might encounter in the future. NASA was applying similar methodology to the Space Shuttle and its crew, particularly to examine the effects on astronauts of microgravity as an element of stress. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 7)
30 p.m. they had done in four hours a job given them to complete in five. NASA referred to the first activity as ACCESS (assembly concept for construction of erectable space structures), researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center explained, and the second as EASE (experimental assembly of structures in extravehicular activity). Together they were the first flight demonstration of construction of large space structures, so called because they were distinguished by different assembly methods and physical characteristics. The astronauts used no tools in the construction, rather they snapped together prefabricated components to form the EASE/ACCESS structures. EASE/ACCESS should provide NASA with valuable on-orbit construction experience as well as a comparison of assembly rates and techniques used in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tank tests. The activity should also help evaluate potential assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques for the proposed space station and identify ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. TV views at NASA Headquarters showed the astronauts trading places twice during their work and appearing in almost complete control of a job that had never been done before in space. Ross had the only complaint, saying his gloved hands were sweating and that he was using too much oxygen. When the two had finished assembling the six required pyramids, astronaut David Leetsma at mission control told them to take a break. "I'd be willing to do at least one more," Ross replied. "It feels good to do some good hard work." The two then proceeded to begin work again. Spring once hit his feet against the tower, and Ross by mistake hit a switch with his hand that turned on an outside light, the only "accidents" that occurred during the exercise, although they triggered a warning from Atlantis's commander Brewster Shaw, Jr. "You guys are going great but just remember to be careful. The way that thing shakes up there, it's not going to be easy to chase anything down if it breaks loose," he cautioned. (WPost, Nov 30/85, A1; Marshall Space Flight Center Release 85-60)
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
NASA launched at 11:15 a.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis, the maiden voyage of the orbiter and the 21st mission in the Space Shuttle program, on mission 51 -J, a secret flight for the Department of Defense (DOD), the NY Times reported. The secrecy was part of DOD's efforts to make it difficult for the Soviet military to monitor the Space Shuttle takeoff and find out the identity and mission of the payload. Despite these precautions, it was widely reported that a primary goal of the flight was to launch a pair of $100-million military communication satellites. DOD apparently planned to station the satellites, designated DSCS III for Defense Satellite Communications System, 22,300 miles above earth, where they would relay messages to U.S. military forces around the world. The commander of Atlantis was Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, flying his third Space Shuttle mission; the pilot was Air Force Lt. Col. Ronald Grabe. Other crew members were Maj. David Hilmers of the Marine Corps, Army Lt. Col. Robert Stewart, and Air Force Maj. William Pailes. The first four were members of NASA's astronaut corps; Pailes was an Air Force pilot assigned to the mission to assist in deploying its secret payload. In accordance with security rules, NASA gave out little information about the flight. There were no space-to-ground communications released to the public and no postlaunch news conference. Nearly five hours after the launch, mission control in Houston said, "On the maiden voyage of Atlantis, the crew is doing well and all systems on board the orbiter are performing satisfactorily." NASA officials said it would issue no other status reports during the mission, which might last a week or more. Atlantis was the lightest and most advanced of the four orbiters. In its planning and construction, engineers removed minor design flaws found in earlier versions and incorporated the latest in electronic technology and light-weight, high-strength structural materials. NASA strengthened Atlantis mainly so it could withstand more vigorous launchings from the Air Force's facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base. These launches, which would take the Space Shuttle into orbits around the earth's poles, required greater thrust from the Space Shuttle's engines. Although the mission was devoted to the military, NASA officials said there was a civilian experiment on board to study exposure of the orbiter and its crew to cosmic rays, which were extremely high-energy particles from space that bombarded the earth and the orbiting Space Shuttles. (NY Times, Oct 3/ 85, A18, Oct 4/85, B5)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that Warren North, JSC specialist in astronaut selection and training, retired February 1 after 38 years with NASA. North had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA's predecessor agency) in 1947 as a test-pilot engineer at LeRC. In 1959 North had transferred to NASA Headquarters, where he participated in early planning for Project Mercury, including selection and training of the seven original Mercury astronauts; in 1962 North assumed leadership of the JSC division responsible for training astronauts for Gemini rendezvous and docking development flights and for the Apollo lunar landing program. North was currently special assistant to the JSC flight-operations director for planning Space Shuttle crew training and flight-simulation equipment and techniques. North received a bachelor's degree from Purdue University and master's degrees from Case Institute of Technology and Princeton University. (JSC Release 85-7)
NASA launched today at 2:50 p.m. EST the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-C with its five-man military crew to carry out secret military objectives, the NY Times reported. NASA, which had delayed launch due to subfreezing temperatures [see STS/Launch Schedules, Jan. 23], did not announce liftoff time until nine minutes before launch. One and a half hours after launch, Houston Mission Control reported the Space Shuttle had reached its intended orbit, the altitude and position of which were secret. How long the astronauts would remain in orbit was unknown; although most Space Shuttle flights lasted five to eight days, the apparent Discovery mission to launch a single satellite might limit it to three or four days. Discovery carried a 32,000-lb. propulsion, inertial upper stage capable of boosting a large satellite to 22,300 miles above the equator south of the USSR. This was the first test of the rocket system since a predecessor had misfired on a Space Shuttle mission in April 1983. Many newspapers had already published reports, based on information in the aerospace trade press and other unclassified documents, that the secret payload was an electronic spy satellite. Both the U.S. and USSR had engaged in electronic eavesdropping from orbit for several years, and the USSR had obtained many of the plans and engineering information for the earlier U.S. electronic reconnaissance satellite Rhyolite. The Carter administration had cancelled an advanced version of Rhyolite, the Argus, but the Reagan administration had revived the project. Most reports described the Discovery's payload as the most advanced and sensitive form of orbital electronic spying. The Air Force began an investigation to find the officials or contractor employees who had provided information about the secret payload aboard Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Inquiries were not aimed at news organizations, Michael Burch, a Department of Defense (DOD) spokesman, had said. When questioned about a photo of an early-warning satellite published on the cover of Aviation Week, Burch said the picture should not have appeared. However, the Pentagon later acknowledged that the Air Force had given the photo to the magazine after determining it was unclassified. Burch refused to say what action the government would take if it could identify those who leaked information on the Space Shuttle mission. Brig. Gen. Richard Abel had previously warned reporters not to speculate about the Space Shuttle's cargo. After the Washington Post had reported it was an intelligence satellite intended to eavesdrop on the USSR, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the story might have given "aid and comfort to the enemy." Abel later had told a Univ. of Georgia journalism class that little or nothing in the Post story was not available from public sources. Aviation Week's January 21 issue had described the Pentagon's next generation of early-warning surveillance satellites, which would monitor missile and spacecraft launches from Soviet territory and be protected against Soviet laser weapons. {NYT, Jan 25/85, A1; W Post, Jan 25/85, A3)
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-F made major progress in fixing the instrument pointing system (IPS) for a $60 million solar telescope, the Washington Post reported; and flight planners moved closer to extending the mission one day to make up for lost sunwatching time. The extension would have Challenger landing in California after eight days in orbit. The IPS's improved operation enabled the astronauts to increase the pace of their observations of the sun, the only star close enough for detailed study. Although the balky telescope mount late in the evening again failed to work properly, the Space Shuttle scientists manually locked the telescope on target. New computer commands radioed earlier from earth had helped solve some initial problems with the IPS, and it aimed its three solar telescopes precisely at specific spots on the sun, holding them there for a few minutes each time. However, the steadiness did not last. During one long sun-sighting period, astronaut-physicist Loren Acton said the solar chronosphere, a layer of gas that resembled a flaming forest, appeared more active than he had suspected. The phenomenon was dubbed the "Acton effect." A decision to extend Challengers's mission depended largely on the orbiter's supply of hydrogen for generating electricity. {W Post, Aug 3/85, A10)
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
NASA announced it would alter its process of soliciting astronaut applications for pilot and mission specialist positions to one where it would accept applications from civilians on a continuing basis beginning August 1, 1985, and nominees from the military on an annual basis. NASA would make selections in the spring of each year with successful candidates reporting in the summer. Mission requirements and attrition rate of the current astronaut corps would determine number of candidates selected. (NASA Release 8589)
NASA announced that John Young would command Space Shuttle flight 61-J scheduled for launch August 1986, Vance Brand mission 61-K scheduled for September 1986, and Donald Williams mission 61—I. Other crew for the 61-J mission, during which astronauts would deploy the Hubble Space Telescope, were pilot Charles Bolden Jr. and previously named mission specialists Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce Mc-Candless. S. David Griggs would pilot mission 61—K, and other crew would be mission specialists Robert Steward, Owen Garriott, and European Space Agency astronaut Claude Nicollier. NASA previously assigned payload specialists Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg to the mission. Remaining mission 61-1 crew would be pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists James Bagian, Bonnie Dunbar and Manley "Sonny" Carter. NASA also announced that Norman Thagard would replace John Fabian on mission 61-G scheduled for May 1986 during which crew would deploy the Galileo interplanetary spacecraft. Fabian was leaving NASA; he had not announced his plans. James Buchli would replace Thagard on mission 61-H in June 1986. (NASA Release 85-131)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
NASA announced it had signed a memorandum of understanding for its materials processing in space research program with Grumman Corp. to experiment with directional solidification of gallium arsenide and other semiconductor materials and various metals and alloys. The process would apply to production of semiconductor crystals and magnets for electrical motors, with initial emphasis on semiconductor materials. Directional solidification would use precisely controlled temperatures to melt and solidify a material, during which the material's crystalline structure would align in a fashion that should virtually eliminate any compound imperfections. Flawless semiconductor crystals would yield a greater quantity and quality of microcircuit chips, leading to higher-speed electronic devices that would consume less power and to greater miniaturization. The agreement called for an information exchange, with NASA and Grumman Corp. designating personnel for the program. NASA would put up no funds for the program; Grumman expected to spend $6 million in the first three years. (NASA Release 85-23; W Times, Feb 13/85, 8B) NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION During October: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) announced that its university programs, primarily involving undergraduate students, combined futuristic space concepts with realistic engineering design challenges. The first program, cosponsored by NASA Headquarters and Ames Research Center (ARC) and Johnson Space Center (JSC), required students to design a spacesuit glove that would allow astronauts maximum flexibility at eight lb.-per-sq-in., the pressure planned for future extravehicular activity. Ten universities responded to a request for proposals, and a team from Kansas State University won the design competition. The second broader program, entering its second phase of a two-year pilot effort, required universities to adopt NASA advanced space design projects for senior design classes. Each university received a grant and was aligned with a NASA center that provided guidance, data, and lecturers during the academic year and 10-week summer work assignments for three students. The initial group of centers, schools, and projects were: ARC/University of Wisconsin/manned Mars habitat; ARC/University of Colorado/geosynchro-nous space station; Langley Research Center; (LaRC)/Virginia Polytechnic Institute/orbital servicing center; LaRC/Massachusetts Institute of Technology/ lunar base-manned Mars mission; Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)/ Georgia Institute of Technology/lunar site preparation; Lewis Research Center (LeRC)/University of Washington/space manufacturing facility; LeRC/Univer-sity of Michigan/lunar space transportation system; and JSC/University of Texas and Texas A & M/manned Mars mission. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 10)
Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah) today joined five astronauts and a French pilot for the final two-hour practice aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger, which they would fly in two weeks, the Washington Post reported. They had run through launch procedures and checked all spacecraft systems to avoid any surprises at liftoff, ending with a simulated liftoff at 4 p.m. Garn, who would fly on Challenger as a congressional observer, was chairman of a subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding. The other non-NASA spaceman was French Air Force Lt. Col. Patrick Baudry, who would serve as a payload specialist. (WPost, Feb 18/85, A14)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
I. V. Franklin, manager of future projects at British Aerospace Dynamics Group's Space and Communications Division, said at a recent international space meeting in Italy that British Aerospace had completed preliminary definition of a 50- by 60-foot-long, 24,250-lb. unmanned platform that Europe could develop as part of its Columbus space station program, Aviation Week reported. The platform would use a long beam as a common backbone that would contain docking ports for standardized plugin payload and resources modules. A single Space Shuttle flight would carry the basic platform into orbit, and the company envisioned that astronauts could assemble it in six hours of extravehicular activity. Franklin said the company would submit the platform proposal to the European Space Agency as one of the work packages in Europe's Columbus program. "The space platform is of particular interest to Europe, following President Reagan's invitation for international participation in the space station program," Franklin continued, "because it represents an element with relatively few direct interfaces to the rest of the program. Although it is not a 'core' component, it would be an important component of the space station complex and [a component] in which there would be substantial European user interest. The platform provides a point for reducing space operation costs at a price that Europe could afford." In addition to evaluating the platform in low earth orbit in conjunction with the U.S. manned Space Station, British Aerospace also considered the platform in a polar, sun synchronous orbit. The polar-orbiting platform offered possibilities for earth observation and earth resources missions. U.S. officials had encouraged European development of the polar platform to supplement low earth orbit activities performed on board the manned Space Station and its associated free-flying elements. "The polar platform does not need to work with a manned space station— and indeed, it cannot until a station facility is available in polar orbit," Franklin said. "The platform can be man-tended by a polar orbiting shuttle, although the shuttle's altitude is well below that of the platform." This problem could be overcome by using the platform's on-board propulsion to deorbit and dock with the Space Shuttle for payload replacement, repair, and maintenance and then return to the operational altitude. Franklin concluded that the concept of a polar space platform was justified by the level of user interest in both Europe and the U.S. and by the relatively favorable economics when compared with other systems. "The polar platform does not require use of a manned space station, and it therefore is not paced by development of the space station," he noted. (AvWk, Apr 8/85, 60)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with Space Industries, Inc. (Sll) for the company to construct and operate an industrial space facility (ISF), the first habitable privately owned commercial platform in space, which NASA would deploy from the Space Shuttle. Sll also signed a separate agreement with NASA's space station office that would provide for exchange of information during the definition and preliminary design phase of the space station. The agreement laid the groundwork for subsequent discussions and negotiations during the space station development period to begin in mid-1987. Sll was the first private company to sign an agreement with NASA's space station office to share information that could result in a commercial facility capable of compatible operations with the space station. The modular ISF would initially measure 35 by 14.5 feet. Although not intended to be permanently manned, it would be habitable and provide a shirt sleeve work environment for astronauts when docked with either the Space Shuttle or space station. NASA Administrator James Beggs said, "We hope the ISF will be the first of many such platforms to be funded and built by private industry that will complement the permanently manned space station and lead eventually to an industrial park in space." Max Faget, president of Sll, said, "The facility is scheduled to be deployed in 1989 and will respond to a variety of private research and manufacturing needs. Industry could take advantage of the unique gravity-free environment of space to conduct experiments that cannot be effectively duplicated here on earth." Sll considered the cost of building the ISF to be proprietary. Under the novel agreement, a provision stipulated that Sll would reimburse NASA for all costs incurred by the government associated with the deployment of the ISF when it became operational and was revenue generating. (NASA Release 85119)
Astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today completed repair of the Leasat 1 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Steven Dorfman, president of Hughes Communications Corp., satellite owner, referred to the effort as the "most remarkable salvage mission" tried in space. During the second day of the salvage mission [see Satellites, Aug. 31], astronaut John Lounge, using the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm, raised the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay and placed its center of gravity on a straight line with that of the orbiter Discovery. Outside, van Hoften stepped into foot restraints on the end of the arm, and Lounge lifted him to the satellite. Reaching up, van Hoften placed gloved hands on the bar he had earlier attached to the satellite and pushed down as hard as he could to start the satellite spinning. Three more pushes sent the satellite spinning evenly into space over the equator near the west coast of South America where officials planned to operate it as a Navy radio relay. Although Hughes was still concerned that very cold temperatures might have permanently damaged the satellite, it did beam to earth its first signals since deployment on April 13. The signals indicated that temperatures in the satellite's outer shell were normal, suggesting that the inner drum holding the two onboard rocket engines and more than 7,500 lb. of rocket fuel might have survived the varying temperatures of space and be ready to carry the satellite into permanent position 22,300 miles above earth. (IV Post, Sept 2/ 85, A3)
Jacques Louis Lions, president of the French National Center for Space Studies, announced today that Aerospatiale and the Dassault-Breguet Aviation Company under the center's auspices would work together over the next several years to build two models for the European space shuttle Hermes, FBIS Hong Kong AFP in English reported. The European Space Agency (ESA) would likely also sponsor the project, and the center would undertake negotiations with European partners who would develop the main Hermes subsystems. Aerospatiale would lead the project and assemble Hermes components in its Toulouse factories; Dassault would be in charge of aeronautical aspects. Hermes, about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle, would carry two to six astronauts and cargo up to 4.5 tons into low earth orbits. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Oct 19/85) During April: In response to a request from the Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory to acquire more information on how to predict ocean wave behavior, the Wallops Flight Facility's P-3 aircraft participated October 1984 in NASA's Seasat Imaging Radar B (SIR-B) experiment to monitor ocean waves while, 140 miles above it, the Space Shuttle Challenger produced images of the same waves with its radar. Scientists knew what caused waves to swell, but found it difficult to predict exactly how they would behave. Researchers hoped they might be able to predict through the use of satellite data the occurrence of dangerous waves before they caused serious damage to ships and coastal towns. Analysis of previous data from the SIR had indicated that a synthetic aperture radar could observe ocean waves from space, but the lack of information on the actual directional wave spectrum on the ocean at the time of the SIR observations made it difficult to obtain an accurate assessment of the radar's performance. During Challenger's eight-day flight, the P-3 underflew the spacecraft for five nights off the coast of Chile to obtain sea surface observations. Each night the aircraft flew along several hundred kilometers of the Space Shuttle's imaging radar taking sea-surface observations with its complement of remote sensing instruments. The P-3's airborne oceanographic lidar provided laser elevation profiles of the wave field and the radars (surface contour radar, radar ocean wave spectrometer, and advanced applications flight experiment altimeter) measured significant wave height and provided information on the directional wave spectrum. Because state of the sea varied over the series of flights from low seas to waves with 6-m height and 400-m wavelengths, the data sets collected should become classic and provide a basis for the quantitative evaluation of synthetic aperture radars in space. (Inside Wallops, Apr 85, 1)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
NASA announced that astronauts Paul Weitz, Dr. Kathryn Sullivan, and Dale Gardner would support NASA activities at the 36th Paris Air Show at Le Bourget from May 31 through June 9 [see Space Station Program, Mar. 22], Weitz, then chief of astronaut appearances at Johnson Space Center, was a member of the first Skylab crew in 1973 and later commanded the first flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger in April 1983. He had logged 793 hours in space. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED i m ..JNWiTIOlunj Sullivan, an astronaut since 1978 with 197.5 hours in space, served as a mission specialist on the October 1984 Space Shuttle mission 41-G and was the first American woman to perform an extravehicular activity or space walk, during which she and astronaut David Leestma conducted a 2.5-hour demonstration of the potential of refueling satellites in space. Gardner, an astronaut since 1978 with 337 hours in space, had flown on the August 1983 Space Shuttle mission STS-8, the first night launch and landing using the orbiter Challenger, and in November 1984 on the 51-A mission, during which the crew retrieved two communications satellites that had failed to achieve proper orbits after launch from an earlier Space Shuttle flight. NASA refurbished the satellites for reflight. During the Air Show, the astronauts would make numerous public appearances, participate in media interviews, and assist NASA's marketing efforts at its exhibit in the U.S. pavilion. (NASA Release 85-72)
NASA launched Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today through the worst weather of the Space Shuttle program, the NY Times reported. After two postponements in three days because of bad weather and a computer failure, Discovery barely got off the ground before the darkening clouds moved over the launch pad and the rain descended in torrents. "We could see large holes in the system 50 or 100 miles across so we prayed for the breaks that would let us thread the needle when the time came," launch director Robert Sieck said later. "We had two things in our favor: There was no lightning in the cloud cover, and most of the rain was south of the launch pad, not right over it." Launch directors gambled that rain would not be falling on the pad at liftoff time, which was delayed three minutes to make sure the gamble was the right one. As heavy rain fell on the press site three miles to the west, Discovery roared away from the pad through a hole in the clouds and sped into the air 10 minutes before the pad was pelted with rain. Commanding the flight was Air Force Col. Joe Engle, who commanded the second Space Shuttle test flight in 1981 and on August 26 turned 53. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Covey was pilot; mission specialists were John Lounge, Dr. James van Hoften, and Dr. William Fisher. A malfunction encountered two hours into the flight forced the astronauts to deploy a day early one of the three satellites in the orbiter's cargo bay. During a cargo inspection by remotely controlled cameras, a shield that was to protect Australia's AUSSAT 1 from direct exposure to sunlight stuck in a partly open position. An astronaut then used the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm to nudge the sunshade completely open so they could release the spring-loaded satellite. Any delay of more than six hours could have resulted in radiation damage to the exposed satellite's electronics. Less than five hours after deploying the Australian satellite, Discovery's crew deployed ASC 1 for the American Satellite Co. The second deployment marked the first time a Space Shuttle crew deployed two satellites in one day. (NYT, Aug 28/85, D18)
Astronauts aboard the Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F spent an extra day in space gazing at the sun after the instrument pointing system was back in order, the Washington Post reported. The sudden recovery on August 4, as a result of a lucky radio command transmitted on a whim after a jolting rocket firing, of a fourth solar telescope called a solar optical universal polarimeter added to the science data. Most of the August 5 sun observations used that telescope after NASA had considered it a failure. The telescope initially recorded images of sunspots, dark splotches that erupted through the visible surface of the sun when underlying magnetic fields became convoluted, the Washington Times reported. The astronauts turned the telescope on the sunspot again on August 5, and the TV image was so clear scientists on the ground reported that they could see changes in its penumbra, a surrounding halo-like feature made up of jets of gas streaming out from the dark central area. (W Post, Aug 6/85, A5; W Times, Aug 6/ 85, 2A)
NASA announced the astronaut crews for two upcoming Department of Defense (DOD) Space Shuttle missions, including the 1st from Vandenberg AFB. Robert Crippen (Capt., USN) would command mission 62-A, scheduled for launch no earlier than Jan. 29, 1986, from Vandenberg. Other crew members named were Guy Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), pilot; and mission specialists Dale Gardner (Commander, USN), Jerry Ross (Maj., USAF), and R. Michael Mullane (Lt. Col., USAF). Crippen had flown with John Young on the orbiter Columbia's maiden flight in April 1981 and was commander of STS-7, 41-C, and 41-G. Dale Gardner had served as a mission specialist on STS-8 and 51-A; Mullane on 41-D. Karol Bobko (Col., USAF) would command mission 51-J, scheduled for launch September 1985 from KSC. Ronald Grabe (Lt. Col., USAF) would serve as pilot; David Hilmers (Maj., USMC) and Robert Stewart (Col., USA) as mission specialists. Bobko had served as pilot on STS-6 and would command 51-E scheduled for launch in March; Stewart had flown as mission specialist on 41-B and had been the 2nd person to fly the manned maneuvering unit on that flight. (NASA Release 85-25)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that NASA would sponsor an exhibition July 22 through July 30 at the 1985 National Scout Jamboree at Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia. The jamboree, celebrating scouting's 75th anniversary, was expected to draw more than 35,000 U.S. and international scouts and leaders and many thousands of general public participants. The NASA exhibit, for which LaRC was serving as lead coordinator, would include information on subjects ranging from current aeronautics research to the Space Shuttle and man's future in space. A 100-seat theater would have video presentations and live programs throughout each day. Astronaut Frederick Gregory, a former scout and long-time scouting enthusiast, would participate in the jamboree's opening program on July 24 and would talk with scouts in the NASA exhibition area on that day. NASA would sponsor July 24 through 28 model rocket launch demonstrations and presentations on earning the Space Exploration merit badge. (LaRC Release 85-38)
Japan nominated three astronaut candidates, one a woman, to fly in January 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, a UPI bulletin in NASA Current News said. The one selected to fly would become the first Japanese in space. Those selected were Takao Doi, a researcher at a NASA center; Mamoru Mori, assistant professor of nucleonics at Hokkaido University; and Chiaki Naito, an assistant at Keio University's Medical School in Tokyo. Japan's National Space Development Agency selected them from among 533 applicants. The Japanese astronaut would conduct a 12-minute experiment during Columbia's one-week mission. The other two candidates would serve as backups. The three would take further medical and space simulation tests at Johnson Space Center and then undergo training before selection in May 1987 of the astronaut to fly on the mission. (UPI bulletin in NASA Current News, Aug 7/ 85) Launch Vehicles
The Johnson Space Center's (JSC) Space News Roundup conducted an interview with Christa McAuliffe, selected by NASA to be the teacher in space, and her backup, Barbara Morgan. When asked to give her impressions of JSC, McAuliffe said, "Big. Wry big . . . But that's one of the messages we want to get across. There are, what, 100 astronauts in the program, but thousands of employees here . . . And we've gotten so much information. When I'm 62, I'll finally read the last piece of paper that I bring back from here." The Roundup reporter questioned the two teachers about the national attention they had received, the effect it had on them, and the possibility of moving into different careers after the flight. McAuliffe commented, "Oh, but you're talking to a teacher. I didn't choose my career so I could get monetary rewards. My God, I never would have gone into teaching ... A year of this is going to be fun and I'm enjoying what I'm doing. I see it as an extraordinary year out of my life . . . We don't see this as a stepping stone to something else. When I go into a radio or TV station, I am looking at everything that is happening and I can't wait to tell my kids what happens in a TV studio, because I have never been in one before." Morgan then said that one of the funny things that had happened since beginning their training was that, "all of a sudden we are being asked questions as if we are the experts on the Space Shuttle." McAuliffe agreed, noting that she received a phone call from a reporter asking her what she believed was the cause of a problem the previous summer with the orbiter Challenger. In answer to the question, "What message will you take to people after this experience?" McAuliffe said, "That space is for everybody. It's not just for a few people in science or math, or for a select group of astronauts. That's our new frontier out there, and it's everybody's business to know about space." (JSC Roundup, Dec 6/85, 3)
The Indian Department of Space announced today the selection of two Indian astronaut candidates, one of whom would fly aboard the Space Shuttle carrying India's INSAT-1C satellite, FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English reported. The candidates were N.C. Bhatt of the Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore, and P. Radhakrishmam of Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, Trivandrum. The chairman of India's Space Commission, Professor U. R. Rao, said the commission would select one of them to fly on the mission scheduled for July 1986. (FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English, Nov 8/85) "There has to be a difference between some senator or Arab prince and the qualified scientists who fly aboard the shuttle," said Ulf Merbold, crew interface coordinator for the D-1 mission. "We demand that the science astronaut concept be developed so that these proficient crew members can be designated for such a flight," said Hans-Ulrich Steimle, Spacelab D-1 mission manager at the German aerospace research establishment. "Instead, NASA now has become involved in running a travel office for visiting dignitaries, and this is counterproductive when you want to perform a serious science mission." German officials said they might raise the issue again when planning was finalized for a follow-on Spacelab D-2 mission targeted for 1988. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 24)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
NASA indicated it might remove squirrel monkeys from an April 30 Space Shuttle flight because the species carried a herpes virus known to cause cancer in some subhuman primates, the NY Times reported. Research had shown the virus could not survive in high-order primates, including humans, and NASA officials emphasized it was not one of the forms known to cause a variety of ailments in humans. The agency had spent more than a year trying to assess the risk possibilities to astronauts. (NYT, Feb 14/85, B8)
In reporting on NASA's concerns over the effects of vibrations and noise on the Space Shuttle's passengers and cargo, the Washington Post quoted astronaut Air Force Col. Frederick Gregory saying that after his return from a Space Shuttle mission that "Nothing prepared me for the sensation of those main engines starting and those solids lighting up underneath us. That son-of-a-gun really rattles and rolls when it takes off." Although NASA maintained that the Space Shuttle was no rougher a ride than the Titan launch vehicle, doubts were creeping into the minds of some people planning the Space Shuttle program, the Post said. Troubles arose on Gregory's flight when astronauts discovered the latch that released the airlock holding the Spacelab wide-field camera was badly bent—possibly because of the rough ride. In another Spacelab incident, all pressure was lost after four days in the laser spectrometer at the heart of an experiment to measure molecules of synthetic chemicals that could be attacking the earth's protective ozone layer. Space Shuttle managers were quick to defend the spacecraft, the Post reported. Columbia, Challenger, and Discovery had flown 17 times in four years without a serious incident. At least two of the three satellites that failed in space did so because of onboard rocket engine difficulties, not because the Space Shuttle was too rough. Johnson Space Center Director Gerald Griffin said in an interview with the Post that "occasional" mistakes had led to mishaps, but he insisted that "we are not repeating our mistakes." He used as an example the Syncom (Leasat-3) satellite deployed in April with no power to raise it to a higher orbit. He said that NASA would not have deployed the Syncom without any power if NASA had insisted that Hughes Communications Corp install a device that flashed a warning to the Space Shuttle's cockpit that the satellite had no power. "We've always insisted our customers adhere to our safety standards to protect the crew and the shuttle, but we've never insisted they do anything else," Griffin said. "We don't want to be 'Big Brother' but we're beginning to think that some of the [the customers] design features are not good for us. I'd like to see more data for the crew in the cockpit." (W Post, May 24/85, A1)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
Astronauts aboard the orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F released today a six-and-a-half-foot-long drum-shaped satellite, the Plasma Diagnostics Package, from the orbiter's payload bay, shot it with a looping beam from an electron gun, and then retrieved it with the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm, the NY Times reported. One purpose of the demonstration was to study the electrical effects the Space Shuttle had as it moved through the electrically charged gases of the ionosphere, effects which occasionally caused the Space Shuttle to emit a soft golden glow. Researchers considered solving that riddle important to the success of future mission, which would carry sensitive instruments that the aura might disturb. Another goal was to achieve a better understanding of the aurora, known in the northern hemisphere as the northern lights, which was a disturbance in the atmosphere that created bright lights in the night sky over polar regions. The astronauts reported seeing flashes of light as the beam followed natural magnetic lines to the satellite, the Washington Post reported; the newspaper said scientists on the ground called the demonstration "a fabulous success." (NYT, Aug 2/85, D14; W Post, Aug 2/85, A4)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) was developing a liquid droplet radiator intended to solve the problem of dissipating heat that builds up inside a spacecraft, allowing a livable temperature for astronauts. Heat removal was currently accomplished through a heavy, bulky, rigid metal heat transfer system, which added considerable weight to the spacecraft. The LeRC system would use the surface of a liquid coolant to radiate away excess heat and save as much as 90% of the current hardware weight. The system entailed exposing a moving stream of hot droplets, the diameter of a human hair, directly into space, allowing the heat to radiate from the droplets' surface. In the process, a generator would eject the droplets into a collector where they would rejoin to form a liquid; the system would then recirculate and reuse this coolant. Selection or development of a heat transfer fluid with proper vapor pressure and a sufficiently long life was essential to the project. Also crucial to system feasibility was development of a micromachining capability to produce holes with 0.002-in. diameters for use in the liquid droplet generator. "This is a very advanced concept," Alden Presler, LeRC program manager, said. "The technology we're developing here at Lewis will result in a very lightweight and compact piece of hardware." (NASA Release 85-53)
NASA had scratched four squirrel monkeys scheduled to be carried into orbit by the Space Shuttle Challenger in April because NASA found they had a form of herpes that could be transmitted to the astronaut crew, the Washington Post reported. The monkeys' herpes, called Herpes Samirii, was not the virus transmitted sexually by humans, but was unique to New World primates whose natural habitat was the rain forests of South America. Researchers suspected the virus of causing cancer in lower mammals such as rats and therefore classified it as potentially cancerous in humans. NASA replaced the monkeys with those from colonies bred to be virus-free. Four monkeys recruited from the National Institutes of Health and one from Harvard University had been in training since January for their flight on the second mission of Spacelab, scheduled for April 29 at the earliest. Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian, NASA's chief of space medicine, said they were looking for a sixth monkey even though only three might be flown. "One of the monkeys in training is too small and will have to be replaced, and it will be nice to have a backup when the time comes for them to go into orbit," he said. In space the monkeys' cages would have their own oxygen and food and water supplies in the Spacelab portion of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, which was shut off from Challenger's cabin by an airlock. The upcoming flight was a shakedown cruise for the monkeys to ascertain that their cages functioned properly and to make sure the monkeys wouldn't get frightened or injured during launch or return to earth. (Washington Post, Mar 27/85, A20)
The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) approved plans of a Florida-based undertakers and engineers' consortium to orbit in 1986 or early 1987 a mausoleum [see U.S. Space Policy/Commercialization, Jan. 25] with the announcement that the plan represented "a creative response to the president's initiative to encourage the commercial use of space," the Washington fast reported. The approval was the first granted by the DOT'S new licensing authority for commercial space activities and followed checks with the Department of Defense, the State Department, and NASA. The mausoleum's 1,900 mile-high orbit would place the spacecraft in the Van Allen radiation belts, a region of space rarely used by other spacecraft. The mausoleum would be in the nose cone of a rocket, Conestoga 2, designed and built by Space Service Inc. (SSI), a Houston firm headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original Project Mercury astronauts. Conestoga 1, a one-stage rocket, had made a successful test flight in 1982. The Celestis Group, Melbourne, Florida, would pay SSI $14 million to put the 300 lb. cargo into orbit and charge $3,900 per cremated body. A Celestis spokesman said that since announcement of its plans, the group had received hundreds of calls from people wanting to sign up. Slayton said seven or eight other companies had approached him about setting up similar businesses. (WPost, Feb 13/85, A2)
NASA announced today the selection of Dr. Samuel Durrance, associate research scientist in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Johns Hopkins University, and Dr. Ronald Parise, manager of Advanced Astronomy Programs at Computer Sciences Corp., to serve as payload specialists on Space Shuttle mission 61—E, for an ultraviolet astronomy mission known as Astro-1 scheduled for launch March 6, 1986. Dr. Kenneth Nord-sieck, associate professor at Washburn Observatory, University of Wisconsin, would serve as the backup. The Astro-1 mission would study Halley's Comet and other celestial objects through three ultraviolet astronomical instruments. In addition, a special visible-light, wide-field camera was incorporated into the payload to augment the Halley's Comet studies. The payload specialists, all experienced astronomers, would make decisions during the mission to ensure the best possible scientific return. The payload specialists were each members of one of three science teams that developed the ultraviolet instruments. Durrance and Parise would operate the ultraviolet instruments; astronaut mission specialists would operate the instrument pointing system (IPS), developed by the European Space Agency (ESA) for precise aiming at celestial targets and first flown in early August 1985 on Spacelab 2, on which the three instruments were mounted. NASA scheduled the Astro-1 flight to coincide with the Halley encounter missions by ESA, the USSR, and Japan. Dr. Burton Edelson, NASA associate administrator for space science and applications, said, "The opportunities for science synergism between Astro-1 and the armada of Halley encounter spacecraft are significant. The scientific study of Halley's Comet will be an internationally coordinated effort." In addition to the Halley's observations, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope on Astro-1 would study faint astronomical objects such as quasars, active galactic nuclei, and normal galaxies in the far ultraviolet range; the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope would record image-intensified photos of faint objects such as hot stars and galaxies in broad ultraviolet wavelengths and with a wide field of view; and the Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photopolarimetry Experiment would study the polarization of hot stars, galactic nuclei, and quasars. The instruments would make a total of 200 to 300 observations during the mission, the first of three in a series scheduled for launch within the next two years. (NASA Release 85-137)
President Reagan and USSR Chairman Konstantin Chernenko had approved the idea of establishing ties between the U.S.'s Young Astronauts and the Soviet's Young Cosmonauts, the Washington Post reported, as a step toward better U.S.-Soviet relations and peaceful cooperation in space. The program would begin with a Young Cosmonauts' delegation visiting the U.S. to view a space launch and tour space facilities. Young Astronauts would then write to Young Cosmonauts, explaining their interest in space and what the groups might accomplish together. Those writing the best letters would visit, all expenses paid, their letters' recipients. In addition, the International Aeronautical Federation had adopted the Young Astronaut program and planned to offer it to other nations to establish ties between Young Astronauts and Cosmonauts around the world. In his Washington Post column, Jack Anderson wrote that the Young Astronaut Council was recruiting 6-to-16-yr-olds for future space exploration and that those joining would be eligible to participate in the "Letter to a Young Cosmonaut" contest. (WPost, Feb 6/85, FIT)
The Soyuz T-14 spacecraft carrying three Soviet cosmonauts made an unscheduled return to earth today because its commander, Vladimir Vasyutin, was ill and needed hospital treatment, the Washington Post quoted the official news agency Tass as saying. The illness forced the crew to leave the Salyut 7 orbiting laboratory, the first time in either the Soviet or U.S. programs that a spaceflight was curtailed because a crew member became sick in orbit, the Washington Times said. Vasyutin, who was making his first flight, landed after spending 65 days in space. He, Viktor Savinykh, and Alexander Volkov, who were both reported feeling well, had been conducting scientific experiments aboard Salyut 7. Tass gave no details of Vasyutin's illness, but western space experts said it was unlikely he was suffering from a simple case of space sickness—the inability to acclimatize properly to conditions in space. The Tass report quoted doctors who performed a preliminary examination on Vasyutin as saying his condition was satisfactory. The unscheduled return of the cosmonauts left the Salyut 7, which had been in orbit since April 1982, unmanned for the first time since June. Almost a week later, the Post reported that officials at Johnson Space Center said that cosmonauts who stayed in touch with U.S. astronauts had said Vasyutin caught a cold that grew worse and spread to his sinus cavity and lungs. The sources said Vasyutin had a fever that refused to break and may have come down with viral pneumonia, which was untreatable with the antibiotics the cosmonauts carried. (IV Post, Nov 22/85, A26, 27/85, A3; W Times, Nov 22/85, 2A)
NASA announced it would transfer on December 6, 1985, the title to the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum. The NASA Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, on November 16 would deliver Enterprise to Washington Dulles International Airport, where cranes would remove Enterprise from the top of the 747 and lower it to Dulles's tarmac. Rockwell Internatl., NASA's Space Shuttle prime contractor, constructed Enterprise, which was the first orbiter built. NASA used Enterprise, Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle 101 (OV 101), to test airframe loads, flight dynamics characteristics, and other aspects of the orbiter as it flew through earth's atmosphere. NASA also used Enterprise as a test bed for manufacturing techniques, aerodynamics, and flight control tests, and mating and fit checks for the remainder of the Space Shuttle components—the external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and mobile launch platforms at both Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base. On September 17, 1976, Enterprise rolled out from Rockwell's assembly facility at Palmdale, California, and was first flown on February 15, 1977, aboard the modified 747 in taxi tests at Edwards Air Force Base. There were then five approach and landing tests, commanded and piloted alternately by astronaut teams of Fred Haise, Jr. (commander) and C. Gordon Fullerton (pilot) and Joe Engie (commander) and Richard Truly (pilot). After ground vibration tests, engineers at Kennedy Space Center used Enterprise for fit checks with the other Space Shuttle components and the mobile launch systems. More recently, engineers used Enterprise for fit checks at the Space Shuttle launch complex at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 85-150)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51 —J landed just after 10 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, ending a four-day flight operated under secrecy rules imposed by the Department of Defense (DOD), the Washington Post reported. "Of course, I can't say anything about our mission," said flight commander Karol Bobko, an Air Force colonel and one of five military men on the mission, "but I can say Atlantis performed superbly its first time in space. I've flown Challenger, Atlantis, and Discovery now, and I think that NASA really has quite a fleet of orbiters and that we have a great national asset here," he added. NASA ground operations manager Fritz Widick said Atlantis was in "excellent condition" at the end of the 1.7 million-mile flight, although engineers were inspecting an underside area of the left wing to see if tile-insulation damage might have exposed its aluminum mainframe to reentry heat. Such heat might have discolored a region along the portside engine pod under the Space Shuttle's tail. Widick said Atlantis's brakes came through the 190 mph landing on the lake-bed with only "minor damage" to one of four brake assemblies on the main landing gear. Bobko appeared to apply minimum braking after landing into a stiff headwind that brought Atlantis to a stop on the center line halfway down the 15,000-foot desert runway. Fewer than a dozen reporters and about two dozen NASA employees were present for the landing, an event that usually drew hundreds of spectators, the NY Times reported. The military gave just 24 hours notice of when the mission would end and had barred members of the public from watching. (W Post, Oct 8/85, A3; NYT, Oct 8/85, C3) Air Force Maj. Ronald Rand said the Department of Defense (DOD) approved dissemination of information about the payload because it was experimental and not designed to carry out an operational mission. He said there were two payloads: an assembly of six space physics experiments that would remain in the Space Shuttle's open cargo bay and an experimental airplanedetecting experiment. "In light of the mounting Congressional and public interest in this historic first manned polar orbit and first west coast shuttle mission, we've made an exception to our policy with the understanding that we'll continue to protect performance data and results of these two experiments," Rand said. "This doesn't mean we've changed our policy of classifying DOD payloads." Flying aboard Discovery, which was scheduled for launch March 20, 1986, would be Comdr. Robert Crippen of the Navy; pilot Guy Gardner; astronauts Jerry Ross, Dale Gardner, and Richard Mullane; Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward Aldridge; Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson; and a DOD specialist to tend the cargo. (NYT, Oct 11/85, A6)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-1 took time August 29 to observe Hurricane Elena, the Washington Post reported. Commander Joe Engle took photos of the storm, a dense white circular mass that stretched across almost half of the Gulf of Mexico, and noted a second storm in the western part of Gulf. Among the contingencies NASA faced was the possibility that the storm could strike the Houston area and knock out communications with the Johnson Space Center. A NASA spokesman said they could quickly switch operation to the Goddard Space Flight Center. The crew also that day launched the Syncom IV-4 satellite, which was almost identical to the satellite the crew would attempt August 30 to salvage. (IV Post, Aug 30/85, A3)
Ministers from Belgium, Denmark, France, W. Germany, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., Austria, Norway, and Canada would meet in Rome January 30 and 31 to consider proposed space projects and set the agenda for European Space Agency (ESA) through the remainder of the century, the JSC Roundup reported. Ministers would consider proposals ranging from development of a space station program, possibly in conjunction with the U.S., to eventual pursuit of manned spaceflight. ESA said it would propose a substantial increase in its activities, particularly scientific and technological programs; developments in earth observations, telecommunications, microgravity processing, and technology; and construction of a new version of Ariane 5. ESA's efforts with Spacelab and Ariane and in a wide range of other activities such as the Giotto probe to intercept Halley's Comet had required the new decisions. With Ariane 3 operational, ESA said it expected to introduce an upgraded version, Ariane 4, in March 1986, followed by the proposed Ariane 5, which would be capable of generating up to 220,000 lb. of thrust, that could be used to launch European astronauts into orbit. The ministers had to decide whether to authorize development of the large cryogenic engine to power the launcher. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 1; ESA release Jan 17/85)
Engineers with Hughes Communications Inc., owner of the Syncom 3 communications satellite, sent at 11:53 a.m. today from the company's Guam ground station a radio command to fire the marooned satellite's rocket booster, causing the satellite's ICBM-type rocket motor to fire for 64 seconds as planned, the Washington Times reported. The undertaking capped the most ambitious space salvage effort ever attempted, the Times said, a two-day effort in August by two astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery (see Satellites Apr 22 and Aug 31). The engineers fired the rocket without knowing whether it would blow up or work properly after months exposed to freezing temperatures. "We really nailed it," said Albert Wheelon, president of the Hughes space communications group. "We'll have it in synchronous orbit round about the first of November and then we still have 30 days of checking out the radio equipment and all the systems." Insurance underwriters stood to recoup 85% of the insured cost of the satellite, a boost for an industry that had lost more than $600 million in the past 20 months because of seven satellite failures including Syncom 3. (W Times, Oct 28/85, 3A)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
NASA announced that it signed a 21-month agreement with Scott Science and Technology, Inc. (SST) to provide technical expertise to SST in the development of a commercial liquid-fuel upper stage for boosting Space Shuttle-deployed satellites to geosynchrous orbit. SST, whose president was former astronaut David Scott, had worked for two years on developing the upper stage, called the Satellite Transfer Vehicle, which would be able to boost satellites ranging from 2,000 to 19,000 lb. On some missions, the stage would be recoverable. Engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center would monitor the stage's development and consult with SST staff on technical problems. SST would reimburse NASA for the use of any test facilities and the salaries and travel of JSC personnel working on the project. (NASA Release 85-143)
Already far ahead of their work schedule, astronauts aboard Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 began preparing tools they would use in an attempt to revive the U.S. Navy Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Mission planners had hoped the satellite repairs could be made during an August 30 spacewalk, but they added another spacewalk for August 31 because ground tests showed that the Space Shuttle crippled robot arm could not work fast enough to complete the repair job in one day. "It appears we are faced with a two-EVA (extravehicular activity) plan," flight director Bill Reeves said. He blamed a failed circuit that prevented Discovery's robot arm from operating in an automatic mode. Reeves noted that ground tests showed that the robot arm, when operated manually, would need about 75% more time to maneuver the Syncom 3 satellite and that it would take two 6-and-a-half hour spacewalks to complete the repair. Mission specialists Dr. James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher spent about four hours August 28 checking out electronic gear they would use to repair the satellite. Mission specialist John Lounge would work the robot arm from inside the cockpit, while van Hoften and Fisher worked outside on the satellite. The robot arm would play a crucial role, holding van Hoften in place while he worked on the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay. Lounge would also use the robot arm to help van Hoften turn the satellite so Fisher, standing in foot restraints inside the bay, could remove a panel and disengage a timing lever, then plug two electrical cables into the panel and, in effect, jump start the satellite. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A3)
"Let's face it, these brakes are right at the edge in a vehicle that lands as heavy and as fast as the shuttle does," said astronaut Daniel Brandenstein, commander of the next Space Shuttle mission. "My guess is we'll be landing for awhile out in the Mojave, where there's no end to the runways and there's almost nothing on either side of the runways to worry about either." Also, studies suggested that the Space Shuttle nose gear might require rebuilding to provide better steering during landing in a crosswind, a situation more likely to occur at KSC than at Edwards. Cost of such rebuilding could run as high as $3 million for each orbiter. (W Post, May 30/85, A19)
NASA announced selection of 13 new astronaut candidates, six pilots and seven mission specialists, who would report to the Johnson Space Center in late summer to begin a one-year period of training and evaluation. Upon successful completion of the training, they would be eligible for assignment to Space Shuttle flights. The candidates would join 90 current astronauts. Including the new group, NASA had named 157 astronauts since the beginning of the program. In making the latest selections, NASA considered 33 civilians from the selection rosters developed during the 1984 selection process and 133 nominees from the military services. Those selected as pilot candidates were LCdr. Michael Baker (USN), Maj. Robert Caban (USMC), Capt. Brian Duffy (USAF), Stephen Oswald (civilian), and LCdr. Stephen Thorne (USN). Mission specialist candidates were Jerome Apt (PhD—civilian), Capt. Charles Gemar (US Army), Linda Godwin (PhD— civilian), Richard Hieb (civilian), Tamara Gernigan (civilian), Capt. Carl Meade (USAF), and Lt. Pierre Thuot (USN). (NASA Release 85-84)
NASA launched at 12:02 p.m. EDT today from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger mission 51 —B carrying seven astronauts, Spacelab 3, 24 rats, and two squirrel monkeys for the most intensive science mission to date, the Washington Post reported. Launched 17 days after Discovery left the same launch pad, the Challenger flight bested the previous "turnaround" record of 34 days. Challenger carried the oldest crew ever to fly in space. Marine Col. Robert Overmyer, commander, was 49; Frederick Gregory, pilot, and Taylor Wang, payload specialist, were 44; Don Lind, mission specialist, was 54; Lodewijk van den Berg, payload specialist, was 53; William Thornton, mission specialist, was 55; and Norman Thagard, mission specialist, 41. The crew called the flight one by scientists for science. "This mission marks the first time that scientists who designed their own experiments will be executing those experiments in space," said Lind, who had been waiting 16 years for the flight. The five scientists would work in around-the-clock shifts on the 15 experiments inside the European-built Spacelab. Before liftoff NASA decided not to have the crew launch two Get-Away Special satellites, one a student experiment and the other a Pentago payload, because a nine-volt battery had failed on the last Space Shuttle flight. Ground tests showed that three other batteries from the same batch failed after 18 hours in vacuum. The satellites would return to the ground with the Space Shuttle. The crew successfully deployed a satellite intended to calibrate air traffic control radars on the ground, but encountered difficulties when trying to deploy a U.S. Navy satellite that would locate drifting weather buoys. The satellite would not move from the cargo bay despite repeated signals to trigger deployment. Later the crew discovered they had no fresh water from their galley faucet and had to bypass the faucet and reconnect themselves to their water supply using an all-purpose hose carried for such emergencies. Other problems ranged from an overheated hydraulic system power unit to a urine collection device that one crew member said sprayed water "all over the place." The monkeys and rats appeared to be doing well. Four of the rats had surgical implants in their hearts to record changes in heartbeat and blood flow. The others were testing cages and equipment for future animal experiments. The monkeys were on a shakedown flight to determine how they tolerated living in orbit. If they didn't get nervous or frightened in space, later flights would carry squirrel monkeys with surgical implants to test for space sickness and heart changes. (W Post, Apr 28/85, A18, Apr 29/85, A3, Apr 30/ 85, A7)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $139,000 follow-on contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study a system for reclaiming unused propellant from Space Shuttle external fuel tanks and transferring it to an orbiting space station, Aerospace Daily reported. Martin Marietta Corp's New Orleans, Louisiana, manufacturing facility would perform the work on the preliminary design study. The contract followed one let in February 1984 and valued at $250,000 to examine the basic "propellant scavenging" concept. The system under study would consist of two to four propellant collecting or scavenging tanks in an aft cargo carrier affixed to the rear of the Space Shuttle external tank. After Space Shuttle launch and cutoff of the main engines, residual liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen would drain from the external tank into the collection tanks aided by a thrust system designed for zero-gravity conditions. Once filled with fuel, the scavenging tank assembly would separate from the aft cargo carrier as a self-contained, remote-controlled vehicle with its own propulsion system. After the vehicle moved into position beside the space station, technicians aboard the station would send an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV) to bring it to the space station fuel depot for transfer of the reclaimed propellant to permanent tanks. When out of fuel, the scavenger vehicle would return to earth in the Space Shuttle cargo bay for reuse on later missions. The proposed system would be capable of reclaiming and transporting up to 25,000 lb. of propellant per mission, depending on the Space Shuttle payload. Unused fuel on Space Shuttle missions to date had ranged from 9,500	to 28,300 lb. of the total 1.6 million lb. of propellant carried by the external fuel tank on each flight. It was currently estimated that the space station would require some 250,000 lb. of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants each year. Martin Marietta said the proposed system would result in reduced costs for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the space station; the company estimated the system could provide propellants at an average cost of approximately $350 per lb. NASA had studied other methods of scavenging fuel from the Space Shuttle external tank but found them to have a higher cost per lb. or to provide fewer opportunities for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the station. (A/D, July 12/85, 61) During July. Yvonne Clearwater, in an article in Psychology Today, described the work of the Space Human Factors team, an interdisciplinary team of which she was a member, to determine what could make the proposed space station a congenial habitat for living and performing highly sophisticated work. The team—representing psychology, architecture, and engineering— was defining what "habitability" meant in space by looking at the critical relationships among environment, psychological well-being, and performance. Clearwater said the team would begin by developing architectural and interior-design guidelines based on behavioral research. NASA contractors and development engineers at Johnson Space Center would then use the guidelines in designing and building the space station. The team would then turn to examining social and psychological issues such as crew selection, training, and support; organization and management; and operations planning. Although recommendations would focus on the physical and social-psychological environments separately, the team had to consider all the factors together in the planning process, because they interacted in the real world, whether on earth or in space. In contrast to the Soviets, who placed a high priority on the mental wellbeing of their space crews, NASA originally had focused on technological engineering rather than behavioral science. In addition, the early astronauts had little interest in psychological support or intervention; reportedly the first seven U.S. astronauts announced they would not tolerate psychologists. Clearwater pointed out, however, that NASA had grown more sophisticated and more sensitive to the fact that body-mind-environment interactions affected the health and performance of people. The formation of the Space Human Factors Office at Ames Research Center reflected NASA's commitment to psychological as well as physical health of space workers. The challenge was to troubleshoot the proposed space station systems and settings while they were still being developed conceptually by, first, identifying the environmental conditions likely to be significant stressors; second, defining the kinds of psychological, emotional, and behavioral problems these could produce; and finally, showing how such problems might affect work performance. Clearwater concluded that by defining and meeting human needs in space environments, it might be possible to create more supportive places for living and working on earth. (Psychology Today, July 85, 34)
The Congressional Record reported the remarks of Cong. Frank Annunzio (D-lll.) during a U.S. House session on May 22. ". . . Today I am introducing legislation to strike medals in commemoration of the Young Astronaut Program. The medals would be sold by the Young Astronaut Council to raise money to help fund the program. ". . . The Young Astronaut Program is designed to use the excitement of the United States space program to increase student interest and skills in math and science through a comprehensive program in elementary and junior high schools. ". . . This September, the council will launch its 'Decade of Discovery.' Already more than 20,000 schools have responded to the program. The council estimates every elementary and junior high school in the nation will be signed up for the program by the beginning of the next school year. ". . . To assist the council, and commemorate the'Decade of Discovery,' the Young Astronaut Program Medal Act will authorize the United States Mint to strike up to 750,000 gold, silver, and bronze medals for the council to sell to raise money for this exciting educational endeavor. The council will pay the mint the cost of manufacture plus a 10 percent surcharge. "... I urge my colleagues to join with me in cosponsoring this worthwhile legislation." (CR-House, May 22/85, H3585)
As five military officers on the Space Shuttle Atlantis orbited earth on the secret 51 —J mission, a debate was growing in the U.S. over how much secrecy was necessary in the civilian-run space program and what the military's role in it should be, the NY Times reported. Proponents of an expanded role for the Defense Department (DOD) said the U.S. needed to counter a growing Soviet threat in space. They pointed out that the USSR launched four to five times as many spacecraft a year as the U.S., with the majority of missions devoted to military objectives, and that Soviet military officers had logged years in space, while the U.S. military had logged days. Critics of an expanded DOD role said the U.S. already had an advantage in military space technology. They said U.S. systems worked better and lasted longer, pointing out the USSR was still trying to perfect a vehicle similar to the Space Shuttle. The critics also argued that the U.S. military's assertions about the Soviet Union were often veiled excuses to try to edge civilians out of the astronaut corps and to classify the most mundane Space Shuttle payloads. This goal of secrecy, they said, was not heightened security but was intended to protect DOD's plans and programs from public scrutiny. The debate was likely to become more vocal, the Times said, as the military expanded its manned space activity when secret military missions would account for 25 to 30% of all Space Shuttle flights in the next decade. Carl Sagan, professor of astronomy and space sciences at Cornell University, said there was a "fundamental tension" between open scientific inquiry and "the necessarily closed world of military activities ... As military programs expand," he said, "there's a huge deflection of resources, financial and intellectual, from peaceful uses into the production of weapons." Daniel Graham, a retired Army lieutenant general who formerly headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, disagreed, saying the military had been at the forefront of U.S. space exploration since its earliest days. "The myth since the Eisenhower Administration is that there's a distinction between military and civilian matters in space," he said. "That's a pretense that a lot of people in NASA would like to believe, that all their activities are sweetness and light," he insisted. However, even military proponents saw emerging tensions in the manned space program, the Times reported. William Gregory, editor of Aviation Week & Technology said in an editorial, "The original legislation creating [NASA] specified a civilian space program, separate from the military . . . That line is being crossed now not so much as a formal policy change as out of simple economic necessity. The shuttle needs the military as a customer to spread the system's overhead costs." Some critics feared that NASA's charter for free and open dissemination of scientific information was eroding as the military's role grew. Scientists ineffectually protested last year when NASA announced that its Defense Department Affairs Division would review and possibly censor images from a large camera and radar carried on a civilian Space Shuttle mission. "There's a real question of how the decision was made to move the space agency from being open to substantially closed," the Times quoted Morton Halperin, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What's at stake is the public's right to participate in the process of making government policy." (NY Times, Oct 6/85, A1)
The Coca-Cola Co. had developed the first container capable of dispensing carbonated beverages in weightlessness, and NASA officials said Coca-Cola could be aboard Space Shuttle flights as early as July, the Washington Post reported. Coca-Cola President Donald Keough said that including carbonated soft drinks on a Space Shuttle flight reflected NASA's interest in providing home-like comforts for the astronauts. Because liquids did not pour in weightlessness, astronauts had to sip drinks from straws inserted into plastic containers that collapsed as they were emptied. However, gas in carbonated drinks expanded in weightlessness and low atmospheric pressure and therefore could escape from plastic containers. A company spokesman said Coca-Cola had solved the problem with a steel supercan equipped with a drinking spout, a screw to adjust beverage flow, and a safety lock to prevent leaks. (WPost, May 9/85, A8)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1985 activities, which included nine Space Shuttle flights and launches of three Atlas Centaurs, two Scouts, and an Aerobee vehicle, its last flight. In 1985 NASA introduced the last and lightest-weight Space Shuttle orbiter—Atlantis. McDonnell Douglas inaugurated its upper stage booster, the Payload Assist Module D-2. Fifty two individuals flew aboard Space Shuttles in 1985. Of this group 19 were scientists performing observations, experiments, or investigations; 27 were U.S. military officers, and six were payload specialists from foreign countries (Mexico, Saudi Arabia, France, the Netherlands, and two from West Germany). The 52 individuals' combined time in space was nearly 55 days or over 880 earth orbits, for a combined travel distance of nearly 22 million miles. Six Space Shuttle astronauts spent a total of more than a day in extravehicular activities during the year. Two Spacelab missions aboard the Space Shuttle and an encounter by the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) with Comet Giacobini-Zinner highlighted the year for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	167 ^^LLLLjWTENTlONAai 8LANK On April 19, 1985, a little more than a year after President Reagan directed NASA to develop within a decade a permanently manned space station, NASA awarded competitive contracts to eight industry teams for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements of the station. NASA signed a memorandum of understanding with Canada, the European Space Agency, and Japan for cooperation during the definition and preliminary design phase of the program. NASA's aeronautical research and technology efforts included continuing work on such programs as the NASA/Department of Defense X-29 X-wing research aircraft, the tilt rotor/JVX aircraft, the advanced X-29 aircraft featuring a forward-swept wing, and the mission adaptive wing that could change its curvature. In the area of space technology, Langley Research Center completed development, assembly, and testing of a 15-meter hoop column deployable structure and antenna system. Other advances in space technology included significant modification to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to measure dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for design and testing for the space station space reactor power program, and completion of space construction experiments outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA's advances in space tracking and data systems included transition from ground network station support for low earth-orbiting spacecraft to use of the first Tracking and Data Relay Satellite in geosynchronous orbit. NASA had scheduled TDRS-2 and 3 for launch in January and July 1986, respectively. In February NASA completed consolidation of the Deep Space Network (DSN) and later an upgrade of the network that would enable the DSN to receive significantly more images from Voyager as it encountered Uranus in January 1986. NASA's Office of Commercial Programs funded and opened the first five of a planned series of centers for commercial development of space, which NASA expected would become self-supporting through research collaboration by industry, academia, and government agencies. (NASA Release 85177)
NASA announced it would test on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, scheduled for mid-July 1985, a Coca Cola Co. technology, developed at its own initiative and expense, to dispense its carbonated beverage in space [see NASA/Technology Transfer, May 9]. Previously it was impossible for astronauts to consume carbonated soft drinks in microgravity because there was no way to dispense the beverages. The test was part of an agreement between NASA and Coca-Cola under which the company would grant NASA a license to use the company's patented technology, a specially designed can, for unrestricted use in dispensing carbonated beverages in space. NASA would also receive the technical information necessary to fabricate its own cans. NASA added that other companies in the carbonated beverage industry were welcome to propose different technology for the same purpose. (NASA Release 85-96)
Commander Robert Overmyer landed the Space Shuttle Challenger today on a lake-bed runway at Edwards Air Force Base, after it had caused two sonic booms that triggered burglar alarms and calls to police, the Washington Post reported. Of the 15 experiments flown on Spacelab 3, 12 apparently operated successfully and two at least partially so. Among the successful experiments was photography of the Northern and Southern lights, which sent streaks of brilliant flashes at the extreme latitudes near the north and south polar regions at that time of year. Challenger's crew photographed 18 auroras. Another successful device was a laser spectrometer that for the first time measured from orbit the ozone layer that protected the earth from the sun's ultraviolet light. Crew members were able to restore two experiments that had initially been inoperable. One was an experiment to study the dynamics of droplets of fluids in weightlessness, the other an instrument that counted and measured cosmic rays striking Challenger in orbit. They were unable to deploy the wide-field camera intended to study the ultraviolet light of hot stars. The afternoon of the landing NASA personnel removed the monkeys and rats in their cages for a flight to Kennedy Space Center, where researchers would kill and dissect the rats to examine their vital organs under a microscope for changes caused by weightlessness. Physician/astronaut William Thornton said they had brought back two monkeys that were even friendlier than they were before the flight—"Those primates are part of the crew right now," he commented. During the flight, one of the monkeys experienced motion sickness for several days, requiring Thornton to feed it by hand. On May 4 the Greensboro News & Record reported that Thornton said, "Our feeding crisis is over. I wouldn't have believed the effect of a caring human hand." However, on May 14 Overmyer told reporters at Johnson Space Center that, "NASA has a problem that NASA has to solve if we're going to fly those cages again," the W Post reported. "I never dreamed that all that stuff would come out of those cages and escape into our atmosphere" [see May 2], He added that the experience with the animals "never took away the luster" of spaceflight, a sentiment echoed by pilot Frederick Gregory, an Air Force colonel who became the first black astronaut to take the Space Shuttle's controls. (W Post, May 5/85, A4, May 6/85, A3, May 7/85, A1, May 14/85, A3; Greensboro News & Record, May 4/85, A4)
NASA announced it was discussing with representatives of the Chilean Government possible arrangements for landing support for the Space Shuttle in the event of an emergency during launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The discussions were consistent with arrangements made with other countries since 1981 supporting launches from Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning provided for emergency landing options for all phases of the flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. Since the first launch of the Space Shuttle from KSC, NASA had plans for each mission for trans-Atlantic landing sites (TAL) and contingency landing sites (CLS) in addition to the primary landing sites. This was consistent with relevant international agreements relating to the rescue and recovery of astronauts in distress and return of the space vehicle. Space Shuttle launches, scheduled to begin from Vandenberg in early 1986, required one or more trans-Pacific landing (TPL) and CLS sites in the Pacific Basin. NASA had determined that Mataveri Airfield on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) could serve as a Space Shuttle TPL/CLS in the event of an emergency. A Chilean contractor was working on preliminary designs for minor improvements at the airfield, which would be necessary in the event an agreement was reached. Improvements would be in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island. Any actual improvements were contingent on final agreement with the Government of Chile. (NASA Release 85-74)
The Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) office said today that the Space Shuttle Discovery would participate in June in the first SDI experiment in orbit, carrying a mirror intended to intercept and reflect a laser beam fired from earth, the Washington Post reported. In some missile defense systems, a large orbiting mirror would receive a powerful beam from a ground-based laser and reflect it to destroy an enemy missile, but in the space shuttle experiment, the laser beam would be too weak to harm the spacecraft. A small mirror would reflect the beam back to the ground so engineers could verify their ability to keep the laser pointed at the orbiting mirror. The laser would travel from an Air Force Base on Maui, Hawaii, and bounce back by a special 8-in.-diameter "retroreflector" that astronauts would place in one of the Space Shuttle's middeck side windows while the spacecraft was over the Pacific. An SDI spokesman said the laser had successfully tracked during earlier tests an airplane carrying the mirror at an altitude of 30,000 feet. The Space Shuttle flew in orbit at 100 miles and more. The test, called the high precision tracking experiment, was the first in a series that the SDI office had booked aboard the Space Shuttle. Beginning in 1987,	the Pentagon would fly two major SDI experiments each year. (IV Post, May 24/85, A8) During May: Brigadier General Robert Rankine, Jr,, U.S. Air Force, writing in Aerospace about the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), said that, "In the long term, we have confidence that SDI will be a crucial means by which both the U.S. and the Soviet Union can safely agree to very deep reductions and eventually even the elimination of ballistic missiles and the nuclear weapons they carry. This does not represent a shift from the basic deterrent strategy of the U.S., but represents a new means for enhancing deterrence. ". . . A ballistic missile defense capability has the potential of increasing deterrence and adding to stability, by increasing substantially the uncertainties in the success of nuclear attack by an enemy, thoroughly confounding his targeting strategy, thus significantly reducing or eliminating the utility of preemptive attack. The system need not be perfect to accomplish this objective, but most meet three important criteria: —effective against the systems and countermeasures that exist or could be deployed, —sufficiently survivable that it would not encourage an attack on the system itself . . . —effective at lower cost than any proliferation or countermeasure attempts to overcome it. ". . . Some of the opponents of the Strategic Defense Initiative," Rankine said, "have argued that the research and technology program currently under way is inconsistent with the ABM treaty and conflicts with arms control in general. Quite to the contrary, the initiative it totally consistent with current U.S. ABM treaty obligations. The initiative contemplates only research and experimentation on a broad range of defense technologies to provide the basis for a decision in the future whether or not to develop systems which would provide an effective ballistic missile defense capability." Rankine then described the technical scope of SDI and said the program was broken into five major program elements: surveillance, acquisition, tracking and kill, assessment; directed energy weapons; kinetic energy weapons; systems analysis and battle management; and an assortment of other high-priority technologies that did not warrant separate program elements. Rankine concluded that the goal for SDI had not changed since the President's March 1983 speech proposing the system, when he "challenged all of us in the scientific community to create a means for rendering ballistic missiles impotent and obsolete." (Aerospace, Spring 85, 2)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
The Celestis Group, an organization of Florida undertakers, signed a contract with Space Services, Inc., headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original seven U.S. astronauts and based in Houston, to orbit a payload of cremated human remains at 1,900 miles high, the NY Times reported. The mission, scheduled for late 1986 or early 1987, would cost about $15 million. The Department of Transportation (DOT), which must approve the contract, indicated it had no immediate objections. In 1982 Space Services had become the first private company to launch its own rocket, the 36-foot Conestoga, into suborbital flight. The company's original liquid-fuel rocket had exploded on the launching pad a year before. The space-burial mission would use a second-generation Conestoga capable of putting 1,500 lb. into orbit. John Cherry, who had formed the Celestis Group, said that a Conestoga nose cone could contain as many as 13,000 capsules, each 3/8 inches by 1/4 inches, holding ashes reduced in volume by a Celestis-developed technique. Burial price would be $3,900 a customer. A reflective material would cover the nose cone in the first launch, enabling viewing of the satellite mausoleum as it passed overhead. Later missions would be deep-space burials, in which the nose cone would eject the capsules for dispersion into the cosmos. The Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 empowered the DOT to license all commercial space launchings. DOT examined proposals for their effect on public safety, national security, and international treaty obligations. (NY'^Jan 25/85, A13)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)
In their last full day aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51-B, the crew concluded an array of experiments and prepared for their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Answering questions radioed from reporters at Johnson Space Flight Center, the astronauts reported progress not only in working out space station construction techniques, but also in developing a gravity-free pharmaceutical factory to be based on the proposed space station. Payload specialist Charles Walker of the McDonnell Douglas Corp. was in charge of the experiment for development of a space-based factory for purification of a human hormone produced by genetically engineered bacteria. Astronauts on previous flights had tested the basic purification technique, called continuous-flow electrophoresis in a gravity-free environment; the current experiment simulated an actual production run of the hormone, which might prove useful in treating certain forms of anemia. During the questioning, astronauts Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring and Maj. Jerry Ross acknowledged that they were extremely fatigued after each of their spacewalks and that their hands were stiff and numb after the practice assembly, manipulation, and disassembly of a 45-foot-long truss and a pyramidal module. Nevertheless, the two deemed the exercise a success. "We don't know yet what this will mean for a future space station," Spring commented, "but it's a start. Personally, it was really exhilarating for me out there, face to face with the universe." (NYT, Dec 3/85, C3)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
During a news conference today at Johnson Space Center, Space Shuttle mission 51—F commander Gordon Fullerton said the Challenger's crew members could not endorse either the Coca-Cola or Fepsi-Cola they carried into space for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Both drinks were warm, fizzy, and full of froth whenever the crew tried to drink them. "They both failed miserably, mainly because we had no refrigerator. Warm cola is not on anybody's favorite list of things . . . They just weren't at the right temperature and we had no desire to drain the cans the two drinks came in," Fullerton said. He added that, although the crew suffered no gastric distress from drinking the two colas, "I just can't extrapolate to any great desire to want them." When reporters asked the seven crew members if they would forsake the fruit juices they usually drank for the colas if the colas were refrigerated, they all shook their heads. "The drinks we have on board now are quite attractive," said astronaut Anthony England. (W Times, Aug 15/85, A8)
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
NASA announced that a NASA scientist and a Stanford University engineer developed the bone stiffness analyzer, an instrument that might aid in treating bone fractures and bone-weaking diseases including osteoporosis, which afflicted millions of the elderly. The two originally developed the instrument, which measured bone mass and stiffness, to help scientists combat bone loss that might occur during long-term spaceflights, particularly on manned space stations or extended space journeys such as trips to Mars. The instrument was based on a theory, initially demonstrated by Dr. Donald Young, a physiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center, that bone behaved as a structural beam and that well-developed concepts for testing the stiffness and displacement properties of structural beams could be applied to measuring the same properties in arm and leg bones. Dr. Charles Steele, professor of mechanical engineering at Stanford University, adapted the instrument for clinical application. The analyzer gauged the bone's resistance to a small amount of pressure applied to the forearm or leg bone, while the subject's arm or leg was positioned so the ends were immobile. The instrument's probe, an electromagnetic "shaker" or iron core wrapped with wire, was placed at mid bone and current was run through it, causing the bone to vibrate. A microprocessor then measured the bone's displacement using algorithms stored in its memory, deducing the bone's stiffness and effective mass. Since the analyzer responded quickly—a test took less than one minute and did not damage the bone or tissue—the analyzer might have wide applications for screening diseases such as osteoporosis, which weakened bones but was usually diagnosed only after a fracture occurred when the disease was well advanced. Although the bone analyzer could not be used on the spine where osteoporosis often first appeared, it could detect the disease long before X-rays, which did not show evidence of change until after at least 20% bone loss. Steele was planning to adapt the device for use on fingers, which also showed early evidence of the bone disease. Since the analyzer could also monitor a bone's strength as it healed, the device might also aid in the treatment of fractures. The analyzer's quantitative measure of bone strength could replace the inference and guesswork that usually was the basis for a decision on removing a cast from a fractured bone. After three years of clinical testing on more than 300 subjects, Steele believed the device was at a useful level of precision. To find normal values for bone stiffness, Young and Steele tested participants in the Stanford Invitational Rugby Tournament in 1984. In the coming year, they would conduct more tests on healthy subjects and a data search to find normal "loads," the amount of stresses and strains needed to maintain healthy bones. After further tests, Young and Steele planned to use the instrument to create an exercise program for maintaining bone strength during the weightless environment associated with extended spaceflight missions when bones tended to atrophy. Young hoped to develop a program efficient enough to place the necessary stresses on bones through short periods of daily exercise. "It would be great if it could be done in an hour a day," Young commented. He believed a trampoline-like device, with restraints to hold the body, might be effective. Eventually, the analyzer itself might go into space with astronauts, who could test their own bone strength, perhaps determining when they needed to return to earth. (NASA Release 85, 163)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B today launched satellites for Mexico and Australia, the Washington Post reported. The crew launched Mexico's Morelos B in the morning, just hours after liftoff. Morelos B was a Hughes 376 satellite, a standard design used by many foreign national and private companies, Kennedy Space Center's Spaceport News said. It would provide telephone, TV, and wire services to Mexico through a total of 22 transponders. A PAM-D payload assist module then boosted the satellite to geosynchronous orbit 22,300 miles above earth. The satellite would drift, unused, until it reached it final stationary position in 1989. Mexican officials chose to store Morelos B in orbit because launch cost for the satellite could increase to four times the amount that Mexico paid to NASA for today's deployment. Payload specialist Rudolfo Neri Vela, the first Mexican astronaut, was onboard to observe satellite deployment. In June 1985 crew in the orbiter Discovery deployed the first Morelos satellite. At 8:20 p.m. the Australian satellite AUSSAT 2 spun out of the Atlantis's cargo bay. "We got a good deploy," said mission specialist Sherwood Spring, who supervised the satellite's spring ejection. "It looked like it might have gone a second early," he added. AUSSAT2, also a Hughes 376 satellite, was the second of three operations satellites for the government-owned Australian National Satellite System. It had eleven 12-watt transponders and four 30-watt transponders to provide domestic communications to Australia's 15-million population. Australia would also use the satellite to improve maritime and air traffic control communications, relay digital data for business purposes, provide standard telephone communications, and direct satellite to home TV broadcasts. A PAM-D would also boost the satellite to geosynchronous orbit. In August 1985 the Discovery crew deployed the first AUSSAT. Mission commander Brewster Shaw had tested all systems aboard Atlantis and reported that one of four videotape recorders was not working. Mission control gave him permission to take apart an electronic cabinet to look for a wiring flaw, but Shaw said he could not see anything that was obviously wrong. Later, following directions from the ground, Shaw cycled a circuit breaker and reported, "Bingo. That seems to get power to VTR1." (IV Post, Nov 28/85, A28; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
Astronauts Maj. Jerry Ross of the Air Force and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring of the Army today stepped outside the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B for the second construction exercise in the weightlessness of space [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Nov. 30], the NY Times reported. To TV viewers on earth, the two appeared to manipulate with ease the heavy structures they were building, although both were sweating and breathing heavily after the first 20 minutes of work. Two hours into the spacewalk, they reported that though their hands, feet, and backs were moist with sweat, they were working comfortably. The purpose of today's spacewalk was the same as previously, to test the efficiency of techniques to build a 45-foot-high aluminum tower. However, the astronauts changed the way they worked and had the assistance of astronaut Dr. Mary Cleave, who was operating the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm. She moved the men from place to place as their work required. Later in the exercise, the Washington Post reported, Ross and Spring took turns stringing cable along the four-story metal frame they had constructed, just as future crews might lay cable for a space station. They also removed parts of the tower and replaced them with other parts, simulating a space repair. NASA officials commented after the first spacewalk on November 30 that the work had proved more taxing than expected, perhaps because the astronauts' gloves, unlike the rest of their spacesuits, were not air-conditioned and could not carry away excess heat. Most of the work had entailed repeated squeezing and twisting with the hands. Ross and Spring said after the exercise that they would not want to repeat it before having a day of rest. They indicated that the activity had left their hands so numb and fatigued that they had trouble fastening the airlock of the Space Shuttle as they reentered it. NASA officials did note they were favorably surprised by the astronauts' rapid improvement in performance as they learned from successive repetitions of the exercise. (NYT, Dec 2/85, B6; W Post, Dec 2/85, A3)
