Astronaut Robert F. Overmyer announced that he planned to leave NASA, on June 1, and retire from the Marine Corps. His past accomplishments include piloting the November 1982 Columbia mission and serving as commander of the April 1985 Challenger flight. Colonel Overmyer joined NASA in September 1969. (NASA Release 8648)
Al Louviere, who headed a team of engineers at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, recommended to Shuttle Program Director Arnold Aldrich that an escape system be built into orbiters. Equipped with pressure suits and an oxygen supply, astronauts could bail out of the aircraft while it was in gliding flight below 100,000 feet. Although no specific plan was given, Louviere stressed the fact that no escape system could have saved the Challenger crew. (p Inq, Jul 2/86)
Astronaut Joe H. Engle retired from the United States Air Force as a colonel and resigned from NASA. After coming to NASA in 1966, he commanded Columbia and Discovery flights and was named Deputy Associate Administrator, in March 1982, for the Office of Space Flight. (NASA Release 86166; W Post, Dec 3/86)
Astronaut Frederick H. Hauck, former Navy Captain, was appointed Acting Associate Administrator for External Relations. He was commander of STS51A and pilot for STS7, as well as a member of the support crew for STS1 and reentry capsule communicator on the support crew for STS2. In midOctober, Kenneth S. Pedersen would become the Deputy Associate Administrator, upon his return from Georgetown University. Since 1979, he had been Director, International Affairs Division and Assistant Associate Administrator for External Affairs. Hauck's duties included policy level management and direction and coordination of the Agency's relationships with public and private organizations. (NASA Release 86130)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident released its report, two hundred pages, plus appendices, that recommended reorganization of NASA's management structure. Other changes cited by the Commission included more rigid quality control, reorganization of the lines of communication in the NASA chain of command, a larger role for NASA astronauts in Shuttle matters, and a Shuttle escape system. By the time these conclusions were announced, the report had been sent to the printers; it was scheduled to be on President Ronald Reagan's desk by June 9. (Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident; W Post, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; B Sun, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86; WSJ, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86)
Evidence revealed the Challenger crew cabin did not explode with the midair accident, but remained intact until it struck the water. The cabin, said engineers, was seven times stronger than other parts of the Shuttle because it had to maintain an Earthlike atmosphere while in space. All seven astronauts, however, were probably killed instantly by shock from the initial blast, sudden depressurization of the cabin, or the tumbling ninemile descent. (W Post, Apr 10/86; NY Times, Apr 10/86; W Times, Apr 10/86; CSM, Apr 10/86; USA Today, Apr 10/86; C Trib, Apr 10/86)
Speaking to NASA employees, Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an intense safety program to include reassessment of Shuttle management structure, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for aborting Shuttle flights, and recertification of all critical Shuttle parts. He noted that "the business of flying in space is a bold business," and added, "We cannot print enough money to make it totally riskfree. But we certainly are going to correct any mistakes we have made...and we're going to get going ahead just as soon as we can." When the Shuttle Program resumes, he continued, the first Shuttle would be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards Air Force Base, in California. (USA Today, Mar 26/68; W Post, Mar 26/86; WSJ, Mar 26/86; NY Times, Mar 26/86; W Times, Mar 26/86)
Astronaut Paul J. Weitz was named deputy director of the Johnson Space Center (JCS), Houston, Texas. Past achievements include participation in the first astronaut visit to the Skylab, serving as commander of the sixth Space Shuttle mission, and serving as technical assistant to the JSC Director. (NASA Release
For the third time in 19 days, launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed. This time, a malfunction with Columbia's computer control failed to close an oxygen valve. Engineers were successful in closing the valve under manual control, but the additional time it was open resulted in 1,500 gallons to 3,000 gallons of oxygen entering the fuel lines to the main engine, lowering temperatures to an unacceptable level. With 15 flights slated for 1886, another attempt was immediately planned for January 7. The chief goal of the mission was to carry a $50 million communications satellite, Satcom, for RCA. When an RCA engineer announced that 8:47 PM was the cut off point for a launch that would later deliver the satellite at an optimum time, the mission was canceled. Scheduled to ride into space with NASA's astronauts and engineers was Florida's Democratic Congressman Bill Nelson, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications that oversees NASA's budget. (NY Times, Jan 7/86; W Post, Jan 7/86; P Inq, Jan 7/86; C Trib, Jan 7/86; W Times, Jan 7/86; B Sun, Jan 7/86)
Astronaut James Van Hoften announced his resignation from NASA to enter private industry. His past achievements include two Space Shuttle Flights and the position of Assistant Professor of Civil Engineering at the University of Houston. He was the fifth astronaut to leave NASA since the January 28 accident. (NASA Release 8678; USA Today, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jul 29/86)
NASA and SPACEHAB signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish cooperation for the latter's efforts to develop and market payload bay habitable modules, truncated metal cylinders that would be additions to the orbiter's crew department and connected by tunnel adapters. These modules, designed to increase the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle, would serve as additional living and work space for the astronauts by providing an additional 1,000 cubic feet. Another MOU, signed by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), was intended to give NASA access to Synthetic Aperture Radar data from the first European Remote Sensing Satellite for Government research purposes at the Fairbanks, Alaska, station0*that NASA was developing in connection with its Navy Remote Ocean Sensing Satellite System Scatterometer (NROSS). The data received from the ERS1 satellite, engineers hoped, would enhance NASAsupported polar ice research, NROSS, the Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation and Shuttle Imaging RadarC. NASA was then to exchange its Scatterometer and radar imagery for other ERS1 data of interest. The ERS1 was scheduled for launch in 1989. (NASA Release 866; 867; B Sun, Jan 17/86)
The Peoples Republic of China announced that it was nearing human space flight and was in the process of choosing astronauts for its planned Space Shuttle. It had built and was using an extensive training center and had solved many of the problems space has to offer, such as maintaining life support. No date was given as to when a craft would be built. (W Post, Sep 1/86; W Times, Sep 1/86)
A Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope for studying gamma ray sources in the universe was the basis for a $93,000 contract awarded to Martin Marietta. By housing the telescope inside of a Space Shuttle external liquid hydrogen tank, which is normally discarded just before the Shuttle achieves orbit, Martin Marietta deemed it possible that the unit could also be set into orbit. Telescope components would be carried in the cargo bay and assembled inside the emptied tank by astronauts, who could enter via an existing 36inch aft manhole port or through tank modifications. The satellite could then be pressurized to provide the needed environment for gamma ray detection technique; the rays would be converted to positrons and electrons that travel the length of the telescope emitting light. Gamma ray astronomy is essential to understanding the evolution of stars and the universe and the physical processes occurring in pulsars, quasars, and black holes. (NASA Release 86111)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command and former NASA astronaut, was appointed Associate Administrator for Space Flight. The new position called for Truly to head the Space Shuttle program and to direct NASA's Design and Data Analysis Task Force, which reviewed the Shuttle Challenger's January accident. He succeeded Jesse W. Moore in both of these roles. (NASA Release 8615; WSJ, Feb 20/86; NY Times, Feb 20/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; B Sun, Feb 21/86)
NASA and the Astronauts Memorial Foundation, Inc. announced plans to build a memorial at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, dedicated to astronauts who lost their lives while flying, training, or awaiting assignment to fly for the space agency. The memorial would honor the 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger crewFrancis Scobee, Michael Smith, Judith Resnik, Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, Christa McAuliffe, and Gregory Jarvis; the 1967 Apollo crewVirgil Grissom, Edward H. White II,0*and Roger Chaffee; Charles Bassett and Elliott See, killed in 1966, Theodore Freeman killed in 1964, and Clifton Williams killed in 1967all killed in T38 trainer aircraft accidents; and Edward Givens, killed in 1967 in an automobile accident. (NASA Release 8638)
For the first time since the Challenger accident, astronauts boarded a Space Shuttle; they took part in a mock countdown at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on the Atlantis. Computers halted the drill 25 seconds short of simulated engine firing, but officials deemed the test successful. (W Post Nov 19/86; NY Times, Nov 19/86)
Astronaut Owen K. Garriott planned to leave both NASA and government service during the current week. His past achievements include a 2month stay in space aboard Skylab and the 10day Spacelab 1 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 8675)
NASA extended a oneyear, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86184) 'J0** The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to a 10year, $99 million contract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the personnel, equipment, and supplies necessary to carry out duties at the Slidell Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86185) During 1986: The Space Shuttle Challenger accident and the subsequent investigation and recovery activities headed the list of prominent events for NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of note: Voyager 2 encountered the planet Uranus in January, continued with its journey and was expected to reach Neptune by 1989. A new baseline configuration was drafted for the Space Stationa major milestone for development. NASA and the Department of Defense initiated a joint AeroSpace Plane research program concerning vehicles capable of horizontal takeoff and landing, singlestage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle, and Dr. James C. Fletcher, for the second time, became Administrator of NASA. Two books concerning NASA endeavors were published in 1986. Joseph P. Allen's EnteringSpace deals with an astronaut's journey into the last frontier, and William E. Burrows' Deep Black looks into space espionage and national security. (NASA Release 86177)
Following a review of the wreckage and all other available data from the Challenger flight, copies of the final report on the investigation into the cause of death of the crew were released. Although NASA was unable to arrive at a positive determination, it seemed possible, after examining the transcripts from internal communication, that the crew was unaware of the events immediately preceding the breakup of the Release of the Challenger tapes to the news media, however, revealed that some members of the crew may have been aware of the accident. Seconds before the crash, pilot Michael Smith uttered the phrase "Ohoh" and subsequent to that other evidence revealed that a few astronauts attempted to use emergency air supply. The exact cause of death was never determined, but sources agreed that it was doubtful that the initial blast was sufficient to cause death or injury and whether any of the crew were able to maintain consciousness until the cabin struck the ocean's surface could not be determined. (NASA Release 86100; W Post, Jul 29/86; W Times, Jul 29/86; NY Times, Jul 29/86; WSJ, Aug 5/86)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
Astronaut Sally K. Ride was named Special Assistant to the Administrator for strategic planning, where she would be responsible for reviewing NASA's goals and objectives for near'40*tolongterm planning. Ride was a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle flights and a member of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86114)
