NASA announced the creation of an Office of Exploration, responsible for coordinating the Agency's missions to "expand the human presence beyond the Earth." Dr. Sally K. Ride, who had been in charge of a NASA study group to determine U.S. goals in space, was named the Acting Assistant Administrator until midAugust 1987. h)(NASA Release 8787; H Post, June 2/87)h)0*0*0*June 3: An Information Science Division was established at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to conduct research in artificial intelligence for applications to space exploration. It was expected that artificial intelligence would be used to develop automated systems for all phases of space missions, from launch to mission control and for onboard operations. Artificial intelligence technology would also be used to advance spacecraft performance and safety, and would free astronauts from routine chores. Research in artificial intelligence and the development of automated system would be a joint effort between the Information Science Division, other NASA Centers, private industry, and academic institutions. (NASA Release 8789)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
NASA announced that it was studying four major initiatives to help determine the next major goal in space. The initiatives emerged from proposals by NASA's Strategic Planning Group and by a group headed by astronaut Dr. Sally Ride. The four initiatives were a considerably expanded study of Earth systems, an enhanced program of solar system exploration, establishment of a permanent scientific base on the moon, and human exploration of Mars preceded by untended missions. At the same time, the independent NASA Advisory Council recommended that exploration of Mars be the Nation's primary goal in space. (NASA Release 8736)
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
Top astronaut John W. Young told the Orlando Sentinel that he had been forced to resign as chief of NASA's astronaut office. Young claimed that his reassignment to a new post, as special assistant to the director for Shuttle engineering and safety, stemmed from his frequent criticism of NASA safety policies after the Challenger disaster. (LA Times, July 30/87)
NASA announced that 5 civilians and 10 military officers were selected as new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. Of the 15, 7 were chosen as pilot astronaut candidates and 8 as mission specialist candidates. The elite group also included the first Black woman, Dr. Mae C. Jemison, to be chosen for the program. (NASA Release 8793; NY Times, June 6/87; LA Times, June 6/87; H Chron, June 6/87)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehicle, Soyuz TM2, toward a rendezvous with the orbiting Mir space station. This was the first crewtended Soviet space launch since July 1986 and only the second launch in the Russian human space program to be shown live on Soviet television. Western experts speculated that the two astronauts would aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin link up operations with the Mir space station on February 7. NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C Trib, Feb
The first fullscale test of the redesigned Space Shuttle booster since the Challenger accident was labeled a spectacular success by all who watched it. The firing of the 126foot Shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains, witnessed by 300 officials from NASA and Morton Thiokol, Inc., the company that designed the booster rocket, was the first of six fullscale tests. Also present at this test were the five astronauts scheduled to fly the Space Shuttle in June 1988. (B Sun, May 28/87; NY Times, May 28/87; W Post, May 28/87)
NASA announced that two Shuttle crew escape systems would be tested in November at the Naval Weapons Center in China Lake, California, using dummies and Navy volunteers. NASA is toh)$0*0*0*make a decision early in 1988 on whichif eitherof the two systems would be installed aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. One of the escape systems involved the installation of twofootlong tractor rockets that would extract the astronauts through an open hatch. The other system consisted of a telescoping slide pole that would extend through the hatch for the crew members to slide down, away from the disabled spacecraft. The crew would be connected to the rocket or the slide pole with a lanyard. Neither system would be of use in a Challengertype explosion that occurred without warning. But either could function in the event of a main engine failure aborting the mission during launch. Both systems require the Shuttle to be equipped with a hatch that can be blown off the spacecraft in an emergency. (NASA Release 87170; H Chron, Nov 13/87; H Post, Nov 13/87; NY Times, Nov 14/87)
NASA announced that astronaut Dr. Sally K. Ride would leave the agency in Fall 1987. Dr. Ride, the first American woman to fly in space, would assume the position of Science Fellow at the Stanford University Center for International Security and Arms Control in Palo Alto, California. (NASA Release 8784; B Sun, May 27/87; NY Times, May 27/87; W Post, May 27/87; W Times, May 27/87)
Astronaut John A. McBride was named acting Assistant Administrator for Congressional Relations, effective September 1, 1987. He would replace John F. Murphy, who was appointed Chief of the Office of External Affairs at NASA's Ames Research Center, in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 87116)
