Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA announced that astronaut James F. Buchli (Col., USMC), a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, was to retire from the U.S. Marine Corps and leave NASA to accept the position of Manager, Station Systems Operations and Requirements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release: 92-77)
Veteran NASA astronauts Richard O. Covey and Kenneth        Bowersox and ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier were named to the crew for STS-61, the Hubble Space Shuttle Telescope servicing mission scheduled for late 1993. Covey was appointed the mission commander, and Bowersox was to be the pilot. Nicollier was named to be a mission specialist. Three other crew members previously named to the STS-61 mission were payload commander Story Musgrave, and mission specialists Tom Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Kathryn D. Thornton. (NASA Release 92-218)
Astronaut Kathryn Thornton became the second woman to walk in space when she floated into the open cargo bay of Endeavour and tested techniques for building a Space Station. Thornton was accompanied by Thomas Akers, one of three men who had captured a wayward satellite the day before. (C Trib, May 15/92)
NASA and NPO-Energia, A Russian company, planned to meet during the next two weeks for a final review on the feasibility of using the Soyuz TM spacecraft as an Assured Crew Return Vehicle for astronauts aboard the Space Station. The Soyuz spacecraft was one of various concepts being considered for use as a return vehicle. (NASA Release 92-212)
Final preparations were made for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hoped to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain of the Earthwinds and a former crew member of both the trans-Atlantic balloon flight in 1978 and the trans-Pacific flight in 1981, predicted a successful voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. Included in the crew, was to be Maj. Gen. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, chief of astronaut training in the Russian air force. The balloon, which is higher than the Statue of Liberty, would carry scientific experiments built in the former Soviet Union and NASA. (NY Times, Jan 29/92)
NASA set a December 2d launch date for the year's eighth and last Shuttle flight, a military mission, designated STS-53. Five astronauts, all military men, will release a classified satellite, thought to be a Lacrosse radar-imaging satellite from the Shuttle Discovery. Crew members are David Walker, commander; Robert Cabana, co-pilot; James Voss, Guion Bluford, and Michael Richard Clifford. (W Times, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
Astronauts on the Shuttle Atlantis cleared a snag in the tether cord linking the Italian-built satellite to the Shuttle and safely reeled the satellite back into the Shuttle's cargo bay, averting the need for an emergency space walk. The satellite flew above Atlantis for 24 hours, never going higher than 850 feet on the tether, far short of the twelve-and-one-half mile target. Even though the experiment fell short of its goal of generating electricity with a tethered satellite, the exercise showed that tethered vehicles probably can be reliably controlled in space. (LA Times, Aug 6/92; P Inq, Aug 6/92; W Post, Aug 6/92; W Times, Aug 6/92; NY Times, Aug 6/92, Aug 9/92; USA Today, Aug 6/92; WSJ, Aug 6/92; APn, Aug 6/92, Aug 8/92; UPI, Aug 6/92, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 6/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
NASA-sponsored research into the biological effects of space flight at the University of Wisconsin suggested that astronauts may have to workout in space to protect their bones on long-duration flights. Dr. Arthur Vailas of the university's Biodynamics Laboratory based his conclusions on the metabolic processes in the bones of rats that had experienced days of weightlessness aboard the Space Shuttle. (UPI, Oct 21/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
Shuttle Columbia astronauts carried out experiments designed to ease reentry from space. They pedalled furiously on a stationary bicycle and floated in a depressurization sack to draw blood from the top of the body to the legs. They also grabbed an aluminum panel with the Shuttle's arm and swung it about the spacecraft's cargo bay to test a Canadian robotic vision system. A day earlier, they deployed the Lageos II geodynamics satellite. (NY Times, (Oct 25/92; W Post, Oct 25/92; P Inq Oct 24/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
James V. Correale, 69, a native of Philadelphia who figured out how to clean the air that Apollo 13 astronauts rapidly were running out of during their mission to the moon in 1970, died Saturday at a hospital in Nassau Bay, Texas. (P Inq, Mar 17/92)
NASA continued to prepare for what it called "the most aggressive" space-shuttle mission yet--its mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope, tentatively set for December 7, 1993. As conceived, it would require four astronauts working in two-person shifts several days to make the repairs. They would need three or possibly four space walks to complete the work. The main task was to install a new camera and a set of corrective mirrors to compensate for spherical aberration in the main 2.4-meter mirror. These and other repairs would, NASA hoped, restore 90 to 95 percent of Hubble's design capabilities. (CSM, Dec 16/92)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA officials had scheduled an unprecedented spacewalk by three Shuttle astronauts to rescue a satellite. The agency decided to undertake the third and final three-man rescue attempt upon the request of Shuttle Endeavour's commander. (WSJ, May 13/92; USA Today, May 13/92; W Post, May 13/92; W Times, May 13/92; NY Times, May 13/92; LA Times, May 13/92; P Inq, May 13/92; AP, May 13/92; UPI, May 13/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
On their first full day in space, two crew members of the Space Shuttle Endeavour conducted experiments involving motion sickness. Understanding motion sickness has high priority among space agencies around the world. It strikes most astronauts during their first few days in space, and it affects flight planning, such as space walks, which are never scheduled early in a mission. (W Post, Sept 14/92; NY Times, Sept 14/92; W Times, Sept 14/92; AP, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
NASA researchers said that tests on astronauts aboard a June 5-14, 1991, flight of the Space Shuttle Columbia found their hearts, lungs, immune systems, and nervous systems responded in unexpected ways. Involved were blood pressure, muscle mass, production of key cells, and proper balance and orientation. The results do not suggest any major obstacles to long-term space missions, according to Ronald White, NASA's chief of life sciences. Longer human space flights, however, might depend on developing artificial gravity or other measures to minimize the physical effects of spaceflight. (UPI, Jul 25/92; NY Times, Jul 25/92; W Post, Jul 25/92)
Three American astronauts took a historic spacewalk using their gloved hands to make a last-ditch rescue of a wayward satellite. It was the first time so many astronsuts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands. All previous salvage operations had mainly used some type of high-technology hardware. At 230 miles above the Earth, the three astronauts of the Space Shuttle Endeavour grabbed the wobbling 4.5 ton, 17 foot satellite and stopped its rotation, holding it motionless for about a minute while sloshing fuel settled down. (NY Times, May 14/92; B Sun, May 14/92; USA Today, May 14/92; W Times, May 14/92; W Post, May 14/92; P Inq, May 14/92; AP, May 14/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
Lending their expertise with long-duration exposure to microgravity, the Skylab IV astronaut crew was scheduled to participate in a series of underwater tests that would help in the development of Space Station Freedom. The tests will be monitored by engineers represented by NASA, the Boeing Defense and Space Group, and international partners from the European Space Agency and the Japanese Space Agency. (NASA Note N92-42)
It was announced that astronaut John O. Creighton (Capt., USN) would retire from the U.S. Navy and leave NASA to work in the Commercial Airplanee Group of the Boeing Co., Seattle, Washington, beginning September 1, 1992. He was to work as a production test pilot and as an instructor pilot in the customer support area. (NASA Release 92-96)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
Shuttle Atlantis' astronauts unreeled a tethered satellite in a risky electrical experiment never before tried in space, but the effort immediately ran into difficulties. Four hours and about a dozen tries were needed to free the satellite from the Shuttle. Then the unreeling tether line jammed twice, and the satellite ended the day about 850 feet instead of twelve and one-half miles from the Shuttle. NASA added an eighth day to Atlantis' mission because of problems with the Eureca and tethered satellite experiments. (W Post, Aug 5/92; The Sun, Aug 5/92; LA Times, Aug 5/92; WSJ, Aug 5/92; USA Today, Aug 5/92; NY Times, Aug 5/92; P Inq, Aug 5/92; W Times, Aug 5/92; APn, Aug 5/92; UPI, Aug 5/92; C Trib, Aug 5/92; Time Magazine, Aug 17/92)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his first hiring decisions, naming four men to senior management posts at NASA headquarters. The new appointments--Maj. Gen. Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Bryan D. O'Connor, Charles F. Bolden and Frederick D. Gregory--included three present or former astronauts and a Marine general who led forces during Operation Desert Storm. (W Post, Apr 29/92; NASA Release 92-54)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's international crew took time off from their scientific work to remember the seven astronauts who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger six years ago. "It being the 28th, we're all mindful of the sacrifices made along the way," Discovery crewman William Readdy said during a news conference from space. It was the first time that Americans had been in orbit on the anniversary of the Jan 28, 1986 explosion of Challenger 73 seconds after it took off from Cape Canaveral. (P Inq, Jan 29/92; USA Today, Jan 29/92)
A Russian-German crew docked with the Mir Space Station and was to relieve a Russian cosmonaut who had been orbiting over an extended period of time. The ITAR-Tass news agency reported that the TM-14 capsule docked on schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Alexander Volkov, who were scheduled to return to Earth on March 25. Germany paid $24 million to send its astronaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade into space. He was to spend six days studying the influence of zero gravity on the human body. (P Inq, Mar 20/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
On the second day of Discovery's mission, astronauts took turns being spun in a chair, strapped blindfolded onto a lurching sled, and jolted by electrodes high above the Earth in a study of space motion sickness. Between medical tests, the seven astronauts tended to organisms carried into orbit for research, including roundworms, fruit flies, stick insects, lentil roots, bacteria and billions of single cells. The mission was scheduled to end at Edwards Air Force Base in California. (NY Times, Jan 24/92)
NASA announced that congressionally imposed funding limits for Space Station Freedom would delay its full operation by about nine months. Under a revised schedule, NASA would begin launching parts of the Space Station in March 1996, a four-month delay. The station would be ready for limited astronaut use in June 1997 and for full astronaut use in June 2000, a nine-month delay. (Space News, Sept 28-October 4/92)
NASA announced the departure of Navy Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein, Chief of the Astronaut Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, since 1986 and a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, effective about October 1. Selected by NASA in 1978, Brandenstein first flew as a pilot aboard the Shuttle Challenger in 1978 and holds the record for time in space (789 hours) among Space Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 92-100)
President Bush held a scheduled meeting with NASA astronauts in the Oval Office, followed by an address to Young Astronauts Council in the Old Executive Office Building. (NASA Release 92-12)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour resumed science work after successful repairs Sunday night on a set of water-cooled furnaces critical to several of the 43 experiments aboard the shuttle. The crew observed irradiated fruit fly larvae, fertilized frog eggs, kept tabs on two fish with electrodes attached to their brains, and tested a new manufacturing method for electronic components. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Sept 15/92; W Post, Sept 15/92; The Sun, Sept 15/92)
Two astronauts at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that they had evidence of planets or other bodies around eight stars they had studied in a star-forming region of the Milky Way Galaxy, 450 light years from Earth. The scientists, Drs. Kenneth Marsh and Michael J. Mahoney, said their discovery of unseen companions around low-mass stars in the Taurus-Auriga region of the Milky Way had resulted from the study of data from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in 1983 and data from ground-based observations acquired mostly from 1981-1983. (NASA Release 92-87)
The flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, carrying seven astronauts from three countries, was the second Shuttle mission in a row to carry an array of life science experiments focusing on the effects of space travel on humans and other organisms, with an eye toward preparing to send astronauts on interplanetary flights, specifically, NASA's proposed manned mission to Mars. The astronauts were split 12-hour work shifts so experiments including a battery of medical tests could be conducted non-stop. Researchers hoped to learn more about space motion sickness and back pain, common ailments among astronauts in orbit. Experiments were also to be conducted in the cargo bay to measure effects of zero gravity, fertilization of eggs, and cartilage formation in various organisms. The Shuttle would also study the effect of bombardment by high-energy cosmic rays on living tissue. (B Sun, Jan 22/92; NY Times, Jan 23/92)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
The Space Shuttle Columbia blasted into space under control of a five-man, one-woman crew. In command was James Wetherbee of the Navy; his co-pilot was Capt. Michael Baker.  Mission specialists were Capt. William Shepherd of the Navy, flight engineer; Charles Lacy Veach; Tamara Jernigan; and Canadian researcher Steven MacLean. On board were commercially sponsored experiments that were to examine a potential treatment for osteoporosis, material crystals to increase the speed of computers, protein crystals to determine the molecular structure of "alfa-2b interferon" used in the treatment of some cancers, and experiments on microgravity effects on astronauts. (NASA Release 92-180; P Inq, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92; AP, Oct 22/92; P Inq, Oct 23/92; NY Times, Oct 23/92; Oct 25/92; W Times, Oct 23/92; USA Today, Oct 23/92; AP, Oct 23/92; CSM, Oct 23/92; LA Times, Oct 23/92; The Sun, Oct 23/92; C Trib, Oct 23/92)
The Association of Space Explorers 8th Planetary Congress opened at Georgetown University in Washington, D. C. It was attended by the largest group of astronauts and cosmonauts ever assembled, with over 100 international space flyers, representing 19 nations, in attendance. The congress opened with remarks by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and was concerned mainly with discussions about an international mission to Mars. Goldin also mentioned the practical applications of NASA's technology innovations since the 1960s. He identified CAT scans, laser surgery, and intensive care units as having had their genesis in the space program. "New products, new industries, and new jobs come through NASA research," Goldin said. (NASA Note to Editors: N92-75; W Times, Aug 31/92)
A space-for-rent company unveiled its first Shuttle module, which is scheduled to fly aboard Atlantis in the spring of 1993. The Spacehab module, which consists of up to 61 lockers for experiments, would be the first privately owned and operated space facility that can be tended by astronauts in orbit. (AP, Apr 3/92)
Discovery's astronauts dimmed the Shuttle lights to conserve energy as NASA considered extending the weeklong research mission by a day to collect extra scientific data. (P Inq, Jan 27/92; W Times, Jan 27/92)
A NASA "aquanaut" set an endurance record of 69 days, 20 minutes underwater after spending time in a scuba divers' lodge submerged in a Florida Keys Lagoon. Richard Presley began the habitation May 6 as part of an experiment by NASA on conditions astronauts would face during long space missions. (W Times, Jul 15/92; USA Today 15/92; AP, Jul 15/92)
On the fourth day of their mission, Shuttle Columbia's astronauts measured ozone in Earth's upper atmosphere and tested a new toilet. The flight was scheduled to last ten days. (W Post, Oct 26/92; P Inq, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 26/92; USA Today, Oct 26/92; W. Times, Oct 26/92; AP, Oct 25/92, Oct 26/92; UPI, Oct 26/92)
Astronauts aboard the Shuttle Columbia beamed down Fourth of July greetings on the 10th day of a planned 13-day mission, the longest in Shuttle history. The goal of Columbia's was  twofold: to study the effects of weightlessness on physical, chemical, medical, and biological processes, and to demonstrate the Shuttle's capability to remain in orbit at least 13 days. A wide range of experiments aimed at generating knowledge from microgravity science were underway in the long Spacelab module being flown on Columbia. (UPI, Jul 4/92; AP, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; W Post, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92; P Inq, Jul 5/92; W Times, Jul 5/92; Reuters, Jul 4/92; AvWk, Jul 6/92)
NASA announced that an exotic mix of materials and equipment would be exposed to the unique conditions of microgravity during Space Shuttle Columbia's 13-day mission scheduled for June 1992. The flight would be NASA's longest Shuttle mission and was the first of a series of missions leading to 90-day assignments aboard the planned Space Station Freedom. Astronaut Bonnie Dunbar and three scientists were scheduled spend most of their time in the pressurized Spacelab module in Columbia's cargo bay. (USA Today, May 27/92)
The countdown for the December 2 launch of the Shuttle Discovery began, the 10th and allegedly the last Shuttle mission dedicated to U. S. Department of Defense work. Aside from releasing a secret military satellite, astronauts were to conduct a number of military experiments, such as testing a Shuttle laser system and releasing of metal balls to be tracked by space debris researchers. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 28/92 and Nov 29/92; W Times, Nov 28/92; Nov 29/92, and Nov 30/92; CSM, Nov 27/92; P Inq, Nov 30/92; USA Today, Nov 30/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
Shuttle Endeavour's astronauts reported abnormal behavior for tadpoles hatched aboard the shuttle. Oriental hornets similarly displayed confused, disoriented behavior, seemingly unable to build nests in a weightless environment. The tadpoles and hornets were part of 43 experiments in weightless conditions being carried out on the Shuttle. (UPI, Sept 15/92; W Times, Sept 16/92; UPI, Sept 16/92; AP, Sept 16/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour began testing a system to deliver intravenous fluids in weightlessness, a step toward meeting the possible medical needs of astronauts who stay in space long-term. (AP Sept 18/92)
NASA set Sept. 12 as the launch date for the seven-day scientific mission of the Shuttle Endeavour. The 50th Shuttle mission was to include a number of Shuttle mission firsts: the first married couple, the first black woman, and the first Japanese astronaut on a U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release STS-47 Launch Advisory; USA Today, Sept. 2/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis photographed natural auroras and fired clouds of gas into space as they circled Earth for a fourth day. (NY Times, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 27/92; W Post, Mar 27/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis released the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, but it encountered immediate problems with its steering system and remained in too low an orbit. Engineers at the European Space Agency's control center in Darmstadt, Germany, struggled to understand the problem, hoping to boost the satellite into its proper orbit 320 miles above the Earth within  a day or two. (W Times, Aug 3/92; WSJ, Aug 3/92; The Sun, Aug 3/92; LA Times, Aug 3/92; NY Times, Aug 3/92; P Inq, Aug 3/92; APn, Aug 3/92; UPI, Aug 3/92)
After hearing complaints from employees across the nation, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin unexpectedly announced he was changing the agency's logo. Goldin killed the despised "worm," which displayed "NASA" in high-tech red lettering, and restored the insignia affectionately known as the "meatball." The meatball, which served the agency from 1959 to 1975, consists of the agency's name surrounding a starry blue background, a red wing shape and the flight path of a spaceship. It was worn by astronauts on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions. (W Post, May 26/92)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
Atlantis's astronauts reported the loss of a second scientific instrument, a telescope probing galaxies millions of light years away. Controllers spent hours trying to restore the telescope but to no avail. The telescope, the only astronomical instrument abroad, accomplished 19 observations before the fuse blew. More than 34 were planned for the nine-day mission. (W Post, Mar 31/92; USA Today, Mar 31/92; W Times, Mar 31/92; B Sun, Mar 31/92; NY Times, Mar 31/92)
Reacting to the recent failed attempt at tethered space flight by the crew of Shuttle Atlantis, Astronaut Jeffrey Hoffman, the payload commander, said NASA needed to improve the way equipment was tested on the ground before flight. "When we're doing fundamentally new things, we've really got to pay close attention to how we're doing the testing on the ground or else we're going to continue to get surprised," Hoffman said. (APn, Aug 14/92)
China reported that it would send astronauts into space by the year 2000 as the first step toward launching its own Space Station. "Before the year 2000 China will have completed its research into experimental manned spacecraft and carrier rockets," said the State Commission on Science and Technology. (UPI, Apr 7/92; LA Times, Apr 8/92)
NASA reported that astronaut Bruce E. Melnick, Commander USCG, will be leaving NASA in July 1992. Melnick, who flew on Space Shuttle missions STS-41 and STS-49, accepted the position of Director, Shuttle Processing Contract Process Improvement Technology with Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 92-68; USA Today, May 20/92; AP, May 19/92)
The seven astronauts who returned to Earth July 9 after spending 14 days on the Shuttle Columbia said that getting used to Earth again had been similar to adjusting after shorter flights. They also said that preliminary results indicated their experiments had been successful. The crew grew protein crystals for use in medical research, studied fire safety in space by lighting candles and igniting wiring insulation and polyurethane foam, jiggled drops of liquid with sound waves to see how fluids behave in space, and tested a new miniature space greenhouse. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 21/92)
Technicians searching for a leak in a Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket found a 1-inch hair pressed into a secondary seal, a NASA spokesman said. The leak was detected yesterday in a segment of a booster for the Shuttle Columbia, which was being prepared for a February launch date. It was a leak in an O-ring seal that was blamed for the 1986 Shuttle Challenger explosion in which seven astronauts were killed. (W Times, Dec 27/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 27/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Astronauts had to wait more than two hours before debarking because of toxic fumes from a leaking thruster. The main mission, the deployment of a secret Pentagon satellite, occurred soon after launch in what was the last Shuttle mission for the U. S. military. The day before, the Shuttle had to swerve in orbit to avoid a four-inch piece of space junk, the third such incident in two years. (The Sun, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; UPI, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; NY Times, Dec 10/92; WSJ, Dec 10/92; P Inq, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 13/92; USA Today, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 11/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia commander Richard N. Richards made a pitch today for the Space Station Freedom, saying that astronauts on the Columbia Shuttle flight needed more time in orbit to conduct scheduled experiments. Such time would be available on the Space Station, which had experienced funding difficulties in Congress. Two Shuttle astronauts worked though part of their breaks as they rushed to complete experiments, one dealing with the growth of crystals and the other with dust particles. (W Post, Jul 4/92)
U.S. Rep. Louis Stokes, who criticized NASA hiring policies as racially discriminatory during Congressional debate in July, said that he was encouraged by recent steps toward diversification discussed by the space agency at a gathering of top NASA officials at a mostly black elementary school in Cleveland. The gathering included a visit by black astronaut Charles Bolden. (The Plain Dealer, Oct 22/92)
