The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Space & Rocket Center was operating two nonprofit Space Camps, one in Huntsville, Alabama, and the other in Florida, near the Kennedy Space Center. The programs at the camp were designed to encourage young people to think about careers in science, technology, and the aerospace industry when they grow up, or to encourage them to try to become astronauts. Since the program began in 1982, more than 150,000 students have graduated from the program. (W Post, June 1/93)
The European Space Agency in the Netherlands invented new shoes for astronauts to use in orbit. The new shoes, which look like ordinary sneakers, have small suction cups on the bottom of each shoe. The suction cups grip floor, wall, and ceiling and allow the astronauts to walk around in the weightless Shuttle. Up until now, in order to get around astronauts have had to stick their feet into loops placed around the Shuttle. (AP, Jan 22/93)
Astronauts assigned to the Space Shuttle Columbia mission in the fall of 1993 were scheduled to conduct experiments on rats while in orbit. After beheading the rats, they were to dissect them. This would be the first dissection of an animal in space, to NASA's knowledge. The remaining rats aboard the Shuttle were scheduled for a similar fate once they returned to Earth.  NASA's Willy Hinds, a biologist and immunologist who is in charge of the project, said that "these tissues...are the biological equivalent of the moon rocks."  (AP, Aug 30/93; LA Times, Sept 5/93)
NASA reported that Space Shuttle Discovery's astronauts had retrieved the $6 million satellite, called the Spartan, that they had released into space two days previously. When the Shuttle came to within 35 of the satellite, astronaut Ellen Ochoa grabbed it with the arm of the Space Shuttle's robot and placed it in its cradle in the Shuttle bay. The Spartan spent about 50 hours as a free-flying satellite with two automated telescopes gathering data about the sun and the solar wind streaming from it. (AP, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 13/93; W Times, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93; W Post, Apr 14/93; B Sun, Apr 14/93; P Inq, Apr 14/93; UPI, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; USA Today, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93, Apr 15/93; C Trib, Apr 15/93)
The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)
The Space Shuttle Discovery, with five astronauts on board, was scheduled to lift off at 1:32 a.m. April 6 to study the condition of the Earth's ozone layer and sample 30 to 40 other gases. Three instruments in the Shuttle cargo bay would measure ozone, and four others would probe solar energy. A nighttime launch was necessary to put Discovery on the desired course for observing sunrises in the Northern Hemisphere. Meteorologists predicted an 80 percent chance of good weather. (W Post, Apr 5/93, Apr 6/93; W Times, Apr 5/93; LA Times, Apr 5/93; NY Times, Apr 4/93; AP, Apr 5/93; UPn, Apr 3/93; RTw, Apr 3/97)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
People with temperature disorders have benefitted from suits developed by NASA for use by astronauts in very hot temperatures.  The suits have been modified for people who need help in keeping their body temperature down in hot weather.  The suits for children are vests stuffed with detachable "cold packs," much like those used to keep food cold in picnic coolers.  Other suits are powered by battery packs and fitted with tubes that circulate coolant. The suits are made of a material known as Thinsulate. (Fairfax County Journal, Aug 31/93)
NASA added a spacewalk to a U.S. Shuttle mission scheduled for July as part of a continuing program to give astronauts experience before start of Space Station construction in 1996. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
NASA announced that NASA and the Russian Space Agency had agreed to up to 10 Shuttle flights to Mir with a total of 24 months time on board Mir for U.S. astronauts, a program of scientific and technological research, and the upgrade and extension of the Mir lifetime during the period 1995-1997. (NASA Release 93-222)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)
In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station.
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.
The media reported that the crew aboard Shuttle Columbia had succeeded in flushing urine and other waste water into space from a backup storage system. This was the first time crew members had attempted to dump fluid overboard from contingency containers. Later in the day, the astronauts repaired a nitrogen gas line, restoring the shuttle's normal water pressure, which had dropped as a result of the Shuttle's plumbing problems. The mission's science experiments continued as planned.
Ellen Ochoa, the first Hispanic woman astronaut, was scheduled to be a mission specialist on the Shuttle Endeavour launch March 23. Her mission raised anticipation in the Hispanic community, and NASA invited several Hispanic educators and activists to be present at the launch. NASA planned to send Ochoa on a tour of several cities later in the year. (El Sol, Feb 4/93, Feb 10/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93)
Donald K. Slayton, one of the original seven American astronauts, died June 13 at his home in League City, Texas, of brain cancer. He was 69.
Computers halted Shuttle Discovery's countdown only 19 seconds before launch when they sensed a problem with one of the spaceship's two booster rockets.  NASA said that the flight could not be rescheduled until sometime in the first week of August, after engineers had replaced a bad hydraulic power unit in the booster.  It was the second launch delay.  Five astronauts aimed to deploy an experimental communications satellite during the mission. (Rtw, Jul 24/93; AP, Jul 24/94; UPI, Jul 24/93; W Post, Jul 25/93; NY Times, Jul 25/93; W Times, Jul 25/93; USA Today, Jul 26/93)
NASA announced that the agency was accepting applications for mission specialist and pilot astronaut positions effective immediately. The cut-off date for applications was July 1, 1993.
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were measuring how the human body reacted to exercise done on Earth and comparing those measurements to the exercise measurements of astronauts working in the microgravity environment of space. The goal was to try to improve the productivity of astronauts involved in space walks. (NASA Release 93-93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
NASA scientists were scheduled to test an "intelligent" computer on the 14-day Spacelab Life Sciences mission, scheduled for launch in early October. The computer, known as the Astronaut Science Advisor, was designed to help astronauts work more efficiently and improve the quality of science in space. (NASA Release 93-180)
Shuttle astronaut Mae Jemison was scheduled to make a guest appearance on a "Star Trek: The Next Generation" episode during the week of May 31. Very much in demand as a speaker when she was with NASA, Jemison also has had a school named after her in Detroit. (Ap, Apr 4/93, Apr 19/93, May 24/93, May 26/93)
NASA announced that 14 astronauts who orbited the Earth during Project Gemini were installed in the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame. The new inductees were John E. Young, James A. McDivit, the late Edward H. White II, Charles Conrad Jr., Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Thomas P. Stafford, Neil A. Armstrong, David R. Scott, Eugene A. Cernan, Michael Collins, Richard F. Gordon Jr, and Buzz Aldrin. (UPI, Mar 18/93, March 22/93; Reuters, March 22/93; AP, Mar 22/93; P Inq, Mar 21/93)
NASA reported that an explosive designed to free a satellite aboard Space Shuttle Discovery accidentally detonated while the Shuttle was in orbit last month, hurling shrapnel though the cargo compartment.  The five astronauts were never in any danger, a NASA official said. The damage would not delay Discovery's next flight in January. (RTw, Oct 7/93; AP, Oct 8/93; Fla Today, Oct 11/93, Oct 14/93)
Senior astronaut Jerry Ross, payload commander for the Shuttle Columbia's February 25 mission, said that NASA should revamp globe-spanning training because such programs endangered fliers' family life and could lead to physical and mental exhaustion. Ross and another astronaut spent about 28 weeks in Germany preparing for the German spacelab mission aboard Columbia. (USA Today, Feb 5/93; W Times, Feb 5/93; AP, Feb 4/93; Space News, Feb 8-14)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched on a satellite-deployment mission after two months of delays.  The liftoff had been postponed five times for equipment failure, payload problems, and a meteor shower.  After a short delay caused by a minor communications problem, astronauts on board successfully deployed the $363 million Advanced Communication Technology Satellite (ACTS). The satellite could one day shrink the diameter of satellite dishes to one and one-half feet.
Belgian scientists, using research from outer space, invented a new detection system they hoped would prevent crib deaths. Physics professor Manuel Paiva monitored the breathing of astronauts during a Space Shuttle mission two months ago by using a custom-made space suit with special sensors built into the garment. Paiva said that he had used the same technique for babies by attaching the electronic sensors inside pajamas.  The sensors are able to detect a range of respiration problems. Paiva said research had so far been promising but another six months were needed to complete the studies. (RTw, Jul 28/93)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia left their medical and scientific studies on Tuesday, April 27, to work on repairing a malfunctioning toilet and waste-water system. Engineers believed that a device that squirts waste overboard from a storage tank got stuck and caused the tank to spring a small nitrogen leak. The astronauts rerouted the waste into two rubber-lined storage bags until the problem could be fixed. NASA said that the problem would not endanger the nine-day mission.	Earlier in the day, the astronauts carried out a series of medical and scientific experiments. (UPI, Apr 27/93; AP, Apr 28/93; RTw, Apr 27/93, Apr 28/93; NY Times, Apr 28/93; C Trib, Apr 28/93)
At a news conference during the annual Naval Aviation Symposium, astronauts Eugene Cerman, Alan Shepherd, Neil Armstrong, and James Lovell spoke of the importance of continued exploration of the moon. Cerman, the last man to walk on the moon, said, "We are going to go. It's man's intuitive spirit to go back and go on to Mars." (AP, May 7/93)
NASA announced that Nasa technology developed to keep astronauts cool on the lunar surface and a NASA patient-monitoring device, originally designed for astronaut heart rate transmittal, were scheduled to be inducted into the U.S. Space Foundation's Technology Hall of Fame on April 16. (NASA Release 93-069)
NASA announced that a study at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, might lead to a reduction in the lightheadness astronauts feel after returning to earth from space. A reduced level of plasma was believed to contribute to the tendency to feel faint. (NASA Release 93-030)
The media reported that Columbia's astronauts were attempting to find a slight air leak that NASA said posed no danger to the crew. The leak had been detected the previous evening. According to NASA sources, the leak would not affect the duration of the space mission. (AP, Apr 30/93)
The Washington Times reported that Space Shuttle Endeavour had to delay firing a jet to avoid possibly coming in contact with a piece of space trash, in this instance, a 27-year-old spent Russian rocket. This was the fourth time in two years that Shuttle astronauts had to take measures to avoid trash in space. There were hundreds of thousands of pieces of trash floating in space as a result of space missions. (AP, June 23/93; W Times, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93)
Responding to Alan Shepherd's June 19 letter on the DC-X (Delta Clipper), Charles Conrad Jr., a former astronaut and staff vice president at McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, defended the concept behind the vertical-takeoff, vertical-landing vehicle.  He also noted that by the time the vehicle would be operational it would not be a Shuttle replacement but would provide an adjunct to the space lift capacity in the 20,000-pound-payload category.  Conrad noted that the experimental vehicle was designed to be reusable, like aircraft.  (W Post, Jul 19/93)
A first formal industrial test of a system that uses computer-set lights to adjust a person's sleep patterns got underway in January at a San Diego Gas and Electric Company plant. The system may prove useful in keeping astronauts and night workers alert, easing jet lag, helping older people sleep, and helping teens get out of bed. NASA started using the system in 1991 to adapt astronauts to night launches and shift work.
Bryan O'Connor, a former astronaut and deputy director of the redesign team and deputy associate administrator of the office of space flight at NASA, said that NASA engineers planned to have three new design options ready by June. O'Connor said that two plans could cut the cost of the project by 50 percent or more. The third plan, which would be based on the current Space Station Freedom concept, would cost more. Whether the redesign effort could be done quickly and cheaply was still in doubt, O'Connor said. (AP, Apr 6/93; W Post, Apr 6/93)
Guion Bluford Jr., America's first African-American astronaut in space, was scheduled to leave NASA in July to join NYMA, Inc., a Greenbelt, Maryland, engineering and computer software company. (USA Today, June 16/93; NASA Release, 93-113)
NASA rewarded the Columbia astronaut's energy-conservation efforts by adding a day to the Space Shuttle's mission. The extra day would allow scientists to meet and possibly exceed mission goals, which had been jeopardized by equipment problems.
NASA astronaut Bernard A. Harris Jr., M.D. was scheduled to present a National Urban League (NLU) banner, flown on the STS-55 Space Shuttle mission, to NLU president John Jacob during the organization's opening keynote ceremony on Sunday, August 1, in Washington, D.C. (NASA Media Advisory)
NASA ground crews began final preparations to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite delivery mission.  The liftoff was scheduled for August 12.  Discovery was to carry two satellites.  Five astronauts were scheduled to put one satellite in orbit to conduct advanced communications experiments.  The other, a telescope, was to be let out of the cargo bay for several days of celestial observations, then captured and returned to Earth.  (Rtw, Aug 9/93; AP, Aug 9/93, Aug 10/93; W Post, Aug 10/93; UPI, Aug 8/93)
Guy Bluford, the nation's first African American astronaut in space, was scheduled to retire later in the month.  Bluford, 50, who went on four Shuttle missions, planned to work for a Maryland aerospace company. (AP, Jul 13/93)
Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)
NASA announced that it planned to launch Shuttle Endeavour and seven astronauts on December 1 on a  mission to repair the troubled Hubble Space Telescope. (UPI, Oct 21/93)
During Take Our Daughters to Work Day on April 26, daughters of Johnson Space Center employees got to see where astronauts prepare for space flights and were even able to test the pressurized spacesuit gloves worn by astronauts. Daughters were also welcomed at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, where they toured the control room, investigated an SE-71 cockpit, and crawled around inside a modified Boeing 747. (AP, Apr 27/93; W Times, Apr 29/93; Antelope Valley, Apr 29/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and astronaut Mae Jemison visited the Challengers Boys and Girls Club in South-Central Los Angeles and announced funding of a science room in the club's new facility. The club runs all-day education, social, and sports programs, six days a week.
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts released a spacecraft that was to study the solar wind and the sun's corona. The spacecraft would be picked up by Discovery after two days.
Reinhard Furrer, a former German astronaut, criticized the German government for planning to cut funds for manned space flights such as the U.S.-German Shuttle mission now orbiting the Earth. Furrer flew on a joint U.S.-German scientific mission in 1885. (RTw, Apr 27/93)
NASA announced that Mae C. Jemison, M.D., the first woman of color in space, had resigned to pursue interests in "teaching, mentoring, health care issues, and increasing participation in science and technology of those who have traditionally been left out."  Jemison, who joined the astronaut program in 1987, was a science mission specialist on STS-47, Spacelab-J, in September 1992, a cooperative mission with the Japanese to study life sciences and materials processing. (NASA Release 93-043; P Inq, Mar 7/93; B Sun, Mar 7/93; W Post, Mar 8/93; W Times, Mar 7/93; AP, Mar 6/93; UPI, Mar 6/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; People Magazine, Apr/93)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Columbus were to be injected with a saline solution and wired with catheters during next week's research mission in an attempt to help doctors understand the effects of weightlessness on the body. The two German astronauts on board would also have catheters in their veins during the launch in order to measure blood pressure.
Intelsat and Martin Marietta reached a tentative settlement of lawsuits connected with a communications satellite that Space Shuttle astronauts rescued after it was stranded in low orbit. The lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 1990 launch of a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went into a low, useless orbit after a Martin Marietta rocket launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts attached a new rocket booster package to the satellite in May 1992, and the satellite then fired itself into its proper orbit. (W Times, June 12/93; W Post, June 12/93)
NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)
NASA named Astronauts Tamara E. Jernigan, Thomas David Jones, James S. Voss, and Ellen Ochoa payload commanders on upcoming Space Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 93-140)
Astronaut Ellen Ochoa, scheduled to be aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery when it was launched in April, would be the first Hispanic female to fly in space. Ochoa, an expert with the shuttle's 50-foot-long robot arm, was scheduled to deploy and retrieve a $6 million spacecraft while on the mission. (FL Today, Apr 3/93)
Space School, a method of teaching math and science that uses spaceage technology to beam educational "adventures" into classrooms across America, was scheduled to open August 30. Space School lessons, which were to be carried on a delivery system called "distance learning," would be broadcast from a studio in Spokane, Washington, beamed up to a satellite, down to a receiver, and transmitted to a television in the classroom. Space school was to be operated and partially financed by the Young Astronaut Council, a nonprofit organization started by the White House in 1894. (Parade, June 27/93)
Space Shuttle Columbia, carrying seven astronauts, 48 rats, and a medical research lab, blasted into orbit for a record 14 days of experiments to learn more about keeping astronauts healthy during long voyages in weightlessness. The research was also expected to shed light on other health issues, including hypertension, anemia, and osteoporosis.  This mission was only the second mission in 58 Shuttle trips focused entirely on medical research.
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it had picked two Germans, a Spaniard, and a Swede for its first joint missions with Russian astronauts to the Mir-1 Space Station in 1994 and 1995. The ESA had reserved one slot each for the two flights. A decision on which two men would participate would be made in the weeks before the flight. (RTw, May 7/93)
A November Discovery flight, the second Spacehab flight of the year, was scheduled to carry the Wake Shield Facility (WSF), designed to be released from the payload bay to create an atomic oxygen wake as it circled the Earth. Discovery astronauts would conduct experiments to determine the effect the "space wake" had on them. The December flight of Endeavour was scheduled to be the first servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release 93-10)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.
The Houston Post reported that a faulty command from Mission Control during a Shuttle flight a month ago caused sparks aboard Endeavour and knocked out power to some of its equipment. The six astronauts aboard the Shuttle were in no danger, and power was restored in 10 minutes.  The incident, however, did lead NASA to convene a safety board meeting.  (AP, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 5/93; RTw, Aug 4/93; UPI, Aug 4/93)
Writing in the New York Times, Robert L. Park, professor of physics at the University of Maryland, suggested that now that the Cold War was over and there was no longer any need to demonstrate U.S. space superiority over the Soviet Union, the time had come to "put Space Station Freedom out of its misery." Parks noted that there was very little one could do in a Space Station; he added that the scientific accomplishments of the Russian cosmonauts in Russian Space Station Mir had been meager and that there was little expectation that U.S. astronauts would do any better. He noted, further, that the costs connected with the station were enormous. (NY Times, Apr 18/93)
The ITAR-Tass news agency announced that a cargo ship loaded with food, water, fuel and equipment had docked with the orbiting Space Station Mir. The cargo ship also delivered a landing capsule to the two Mir astronauts, who had been aboard the Mir for four months. (AP, May 24/93)
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of two astronauts, William M. Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, to senior management positions at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release June 24/93)
A European Space Agency official said that a re-usable science satellite scheduled to be rescued during Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission next week would be mothballed after astronauts returned it to earth and experiments were removed from it. The satellite was scheduled to be flown four more times, but there was no budget for additional flights. (RTw, June 16/93)
NASA announced that astronaut James P. Bagian, M.D., P.E., was taking a leave of absence from NASA to work as Vice-President of Corporate Development and Medical Affairs at Somanetics Corporation, Troy, Michigan.  Bagian was scheduled to head up the company's clinical research activities. (NASA Release 93-139)
The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)
Technical breakthroughs in space have helped launch clinical advances on earth. Space Shuttle experiments, which focus on determining how best to maintain the health of astronauts aboard a future Space Station, continue to provide spin-offs for clinical medicine on earth, from programmable pacemakers to a better understanding of vestibular disorders. The cost, however, is very high, and the question remains whether the Space Station project represents a potentially giant leap for medicine or a small step for a select few. (Medical World News, Aug 15/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
