The U.S. Space Walk of Fame, based in Titusville, Florida, recognized with a two-day celebration the 20,000 men and women who worked on the Gemini space program. NASA had launched 10 Gemini missions between 1965 and 1966, each spacecraft carrying two astronauts. Many staff members and astronauts involved in the Gemini program went on to work on the Apollo Moon program. Gemini astronauts included Neil A. Armstrong, Jim Lovell, and Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. The event organizers celebrated the achievements of the Gemini missions, in addition to raising funds to establish a permanent monument to the Gemini program.(Marilyn Meyer, “History-Making Gemini Team To Reunite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 June 1996.)
NASA and the scientific community celebrated the 15th anniversary of the Space Shuttle program. NASA had adopted the Shuttle as a means of controlling the costs of exploring space. However, NASA conceded that, since its deployment, the Shuttle had flown only nine times per year, compared with the 24 to 60 Shuttle flights per year anticipated. Furthermore, the cost of flying the Shuttle had reached almost US$500,000 more per mission than expected. During its first 15 years, the Shuttles had flown 76 missions, including 51 following the Challenger accident. The Shuttles had transported 545 tons (490,000 kilograms or 490 tonnes) of payloads to space, bringing back to Earth 18.5 tons (17,000 kilograms or 17 tonnes) of payloads. During the same period, 440 astronauts from 12 countries flew aboard the Shuttles. NASA experts predicted that the Shuttle would remain the primary vehicle of space exploration well into the 21st century.(Martin Burkey, “A Lean, Mean Teen: Shuttle Turns 15,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 April 1996; Seth Borenstein, “Costly History Dogs Shuttle on Anniversary,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 12 April 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Graham’s design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes,” news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttle’s appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, “Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans,” 21 October 1996.)
China announced it would participate in an international collaborative space research project for the first time in its history. Chinese scientists planned to assist their colleagues from Russia and the United States in the future Discovery mission. Although China had no plans to send an astronaut on the Shuttle, Chinese aerospace engineers volunteered to construct the sophisticated magnets needed to build a magnetic spectrometer. The project was the first time the usually secretive Chinese space science program had opened itself to outside scrutiny.(United Press International, “China To Assist U.S. Space Program,” 3 October 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavour’s launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavour’s flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay,” Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, “Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs,” 16 January 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
Former NASA astronaut Robert F. Overmyer died while test piloting the experimental Cirrus VK-30 aircraft near Duluth, Minnesota. Overmyer was performing a series of stalls at an altitude of more than 8,000 feet (2,400 meters) when the aircraft “departed from controlled flight.” Overmyer had served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1959 to 1986, becoming a NASA astronaut in 1969, and piloting Shuttle Mission STS-5 in 1982. After leaving NASA and the Marine Corps in 1986, Overmyer worked for McDonnell Douglas Aerospace.(Edward H. Phillips, “Overmyer Dies in Crash,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 144, no. 14 (1 April 1996): 29.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The mission, lasting nearly 17 days, set a new space endurance record for the crew. The astronauts had bested their previous record by nearly 7 hours. Columbia had carried into space a torch for the 1996 Olympic relay, and upon landing, two members of the crew joined the Olympic torch relay team in a special ceremony. The astronauts had overcome several small malfunctions to conduct the successful mission and land the Shuttle on time. Less than 2 hours before the Shuttle’s scheduled arrival, the crew had discovered a clogged cooling line, but the astronauts were able to flush ice from the system to clear the line. In addition, the mission brought to light a potential ongoing problem for Columbia. In studying the launch, NASA officials had observed gas and flames issuing from the rocket boosters, probably through the O- ring joints used to connect the booster’s fuel segments. Although Columbia’s crew was not in danger, NASA officials decided that the Shuttle would not launch again until scientists had determined how well the new water-based adhesive would function under extreme heat. NASA had discontinued the adhesive used previously on the rocket boosters, because the adhesive was an ozone-depleting agent.(William Harwood, “Record Shuttle Flight Ends; Problem May Delay Next Launch,” Washington Post, 8 July 1996; Associated Press, “Columbia Ends 17-Day Mission,” 8 July 1996.)
For the first time in its history, NASA allowed a researcher to direct an experiment from his home university, rather than from Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Martin Glickman led a group of scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, taking control of a crystal experiment aboard Shuttle Columbia. Both NASA and the scientific community praised the experiment as a crucial step in the relationship between astronauts and academic scientists. Because they did not have to travel to NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, the scientists were able to use their own instruments and data systems. Using remote control, they repeatedly cooled and heated the crystal samples on the Shuttle. Scientists hoped that allowing universities to control experiments from their own institutions would facilitate greater student participation in experiments conducted in space.
NASA selected astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence to replace Charles J. Precourt as Director of Operations, Russia, making Lawrence the primary contact between NASA and Russian Space Agency officials. As Director of Operations, Russia, Lawrence became responsible for overseeing the training and preparation of U.S. astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia, outside of Moscow. Lawrence was the sixth astronaut to serve in this position.(NASA, “Lawrence To Replace Precourt as NASA Manager in Russia,” news release 96-49, 13 March 1996.)
With funding from NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, researchers at Utah State University successfully developed a strain of wheat suitable for growth in space. The space wheat, called USU-Apogee, produced a yield equivalent to 600 bushels of grain per acre (21,000 liters of grain per 4,100 square meters), a rate three times more than the rate achieved in previous experiments. Researchers had worked for more than a decade developing the wheat. During the tests, USU- Apogee had thrived under the difficult conditions of artificial sunlight and high levels of carbon dioxide. In conditions approximating the environment in space, the wheat grew on short stalks, produced an unusually large number of seeds, and maintained green leaf tips (reflecting proper calcium levels). Scientists hoped that astronauts would be able to grow the wheat in the future International Space Station, as a more economical means of providing food for long-term space residents than frequent Shuttle supply missions.(NASA, “Utah State University Develops Space Crop,” news release 96-75, 15 April 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
NASA announced the retirement of Jay F. Honeycutt, Director of KSC. A search for Honeycutt’s successor began immediately following the announcement. Honeycutt had joined NASA in 1966 after working as an engineer for Redstone Arsenal. He had begun as an engineer in flight operations and had worked at JSC, later training Apollo astronauts for the lunar landings, and had moved to NASA Headquarters in 1981. Honeycutt had transferred to KSC in 1989 as Director of Shuttle Management and Operations and had become Director of KSC in 1995. Honeycutt had won two Exceptional Service Medals, the Special Achievement Award, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, NASA’s Equal Employment Opportunity Award, and the Meritorious Executive Presidential Rank Award.(NASA, “KSC Director Jay Honeycutt To Retire,” news release 96-215, 22 October 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nation’s oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASA’s Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASA’s final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbia’s launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttle’s mission.(Reuters, “Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly,” 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites,” New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-80—Press Kit,” news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, “Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope,” 20 November 1996.)
In a postflight inspection, NASA engineers discovered that one loose screw had caused the hatch on Shuttle Columbia to jam, preventing the astronauts from taking their scheduled spacewalks. The screw had probably dislodged during takeoff, falling into the gears of the hatch. NASA had decided to cancel the spacewalks, rather than force the hatch open and risk damaging it permanently. With the Shuttle scheduled to launch again in one month, NASA faced the question of whether to remove and replace the gearboxes on all the hatches inside the Shuttle as a precautionary measure.(Associated Press, “Loose Screw Caused Stuck Hatch on Shuttle,” 12 December 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Hatching Up Plan in Case Emergency Spacewalk Is Needed,” 2 December 1996.)
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a “glove box,” allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, “Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component,” Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent Shuttle–Mir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-79—Press Kit,” news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Arrives for Astronaut’s Long-Awaited Pickup,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
Endeavour’s crew successfully tested a giant inflatable antenna, deploying the structure and gathering data during its orbit. Project Manager Steven Bard, a NASA scientist at JPL, called the successful test a giant step toward developing lightweight, cost-effective equipment for space research. The silver, inflatable antenna, about the size of a tennis court, cost US$14 million to develop. The Shuttle astronauts used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to launch the small satellite carrying the antenna. The crew situated Endeavour about 400 feet (122 meters) immediately above the antenna, to observe its behavior after deployment, but when the antenna made some unexpected tumbling rotations, the astronauts moved the Shuttle to a safer distance. After completing the test, the astronauts set off a series of small explosions to cut loose the antenna. Before the mission began, NASA officials had determined that deflating and recapturing the antenna would be too risky and costly to attempt.(William Harwood, “Inflatable Antenna Passes Test,” Washington Post, 21 May 1996; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Deploys Giant Antenna,” Washington Times, 21 May 1996.)
Peter H. Diamandis, President of Angel Technologies Corporation, an aerospace firm located in St. Louis, Missouri, offered a US$10 million prize to the first private aviators to complete a suborbital flight into space. Diamandis stated that the object of the prize was to motivate private companies to invest in space exploration, someday making spaceflights open to the public. “We’re looking to spark a constructive competition,” Diamandis explained. To claim the prize, the privately financed and built aircraft would have to ascend to 62 miles (100 kilometers) high, twice within a period of two weeks, delivering three passengers safely to space and back. Diamandis claimed that creating an entirely reusable Space Shuttle would considerably decrease the cost of going to space, opening the space frontier to people who had not trained as professional astronauts. Diamandis intended to announce the winner of the “X Prize” on 18 May, beneath the St. Louis Gateway Arch. Creator of the Voyager and top contender for the prize Burt Rutan, as well as NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, planned to attend the award ceremony.
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASA’s Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as “the first day of a new space program in America.” Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve “very good” safety ratings.(Associated Press, “NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry,” 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, “NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 30 September 1996; United Press International, “NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 1 October 1996.)
At Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA announced that it had taken a major step forward in preparations for the International Space Station (ISS): the station’s air purification system had passed a month-long test. NASA scientists tested the ISS’s air pressure and the ability of its air system to regulate the mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen that the astronauts would breathe. In the simulation, scientists used a 6,200-cubic-foot (176-cubic-meter) module from which they had removed the oxygen. The air system not only proved it could maintain the proper levels of both oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also performed satisfactorily at a reduced power level. Engineers hoped to reduce the power level of the ISS during its nighttime orbit. The system, called the Atmosphere Revitalization Subsystem, demonstrated that it could provide healthy working and living conditions for the astronauts on board the ISS.(NASA, “Space Station Air Purification System Completes Major Test,” news release, 10 May 1996.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. “Rich” Clifford and Linda M. Godwin made an historic spacewalk outside the orbiting Mir space station. For the first time, astronauts exited Mir with the Shuttle docked at the station. Clifford and Godwin, wearing jet packs as a precaution, scaled the passageway connecting Shuttle Atlantis with the Mir complex, installing several experiment boxes on the outside of the space station. Some of these boxes were “cosmic dust catchers,” meant to gather samples of the materials that might smash into orbiting space stations. The spacewalk and associated experiments were part of ongoing research in preparation for the construction of the new International Space Station. NASA regarded the spacewalk as more dangerous than usual, because the Shuttle was docked with Mir and, thus, unable to give chase quickly if one of the astronauts broke away from the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Spacewalking Astronauts Venture Outside Atlantis-Mir Complex,” 27 March 1996; Todd Halverson, “Walkers Prepare for Historic Trek Outside Mir Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 March 1996. 50 Houston Chronicle, “United Space Alliance Taps New Top Officers,” 27 March 1996.)
NASA announced completion of the exterior of the U.S. modules constructed to house the astronauts aboard the ISS, as well as more than 80,000 pounds (36,000 kilograms) of flight hardware for the station. With the completion of the modules, the United States successfully attained the first benchmark in the long and expensive process to complete its part of the ISS. Boeing workers had completed the project at MSFC. NASA planned to launch the first node of the ISS in December 1997.(NASA, “Exterior of US Space Station Modules Completed; Flight Hardware on Track for Launch in 1997,” news release 96-17, 30 January 1996; NASA, “United States’ Space Station Modules Are Right on Track,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 3; The Boeing Company, “Exterior of U.S. Space Station Modules Completed Flight Hardware on Track; First Launch in 1997,” news release, 5 February 1996.)
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
Columbia astronauts set a series of small fires inside the Shuttle to help NASA scientists improve their design of smoke detectors and fire extinguishers for use in a weightless environment. The fires spread quickly within the enclosed vehicle. Astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman marveled at the behavior of the flames, which was completely different in a weightless environment from that typically observed on Earth. The fires scattered quickly and burned much more intensely than on Earth. NASA had never before tested the fire-detection equipment in a space environment. The fire equipment worked properly, and the crew put out all fires without incident.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Set Fires To Check Safety Equipment,” 3 March 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
In Marshall Space Flight Center’s (MSFC’s) underwater weightless simulator, NASA began testing a remotely controlled robot created by a team of researchers from the University of Maryland. Team leaders nicknamed the robot Ranger, predicting that it would one day assist astronauts aboard the Shuttle or the ISS. Project Manager Joseph Parrish pointed out that astronauts often use valuable spacewalk time completing mundane tasks, such as collecting tools, establishing footholds, and cleaning up. Scientists hoped Ranger could perform such tasks under the command of an operator located in space or even that of an operator at NASA’s command center. The 8-foot-long (2.4-meter-long), 1,700-pound (770-kilogram) robot used gas thrusters, robotic arms, lights, and cameras. The academic project filled a void in experimental robot design, a program affected by NASA’s budget cuts. Allowing university researchers and professors to design and test the robot cost NASA about US$8 million, far less than NASA would pay for similar projects contracted through an aerospace firm. During the tests, the University of Maryland’s team operated Ranger remotely from its campus hundreds of miles away from MSFC’s facility in Huntsville, Alabama.(Martin Burkey, “Ranger Gets a Workout,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 September 1996.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying France’s first female astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. André-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of André-Deshays at Mir, the head of France’s space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, “French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, “Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station,” 19 August 1996; Associated Press, “Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says,” 19 August 1996.)
Receiving congratulations from the rest of the international space community, Russia celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the Russian space station Mir. The pathbreaking spacecraft had hosted a steady stream of astronauts for long-term stays in space throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, transcending many of the changes in the political structure of its home country. The Soviet space program had launched the first Mir module on 20 February 1986 from the desert of Kazakhstan, but because of Cold War tensions, the Soviets had not released specific information about the station as it entered orbit module by module. Rockets had transported the individual modules into space, where cosmonauts assembled them. The fully assembled space station weighed 130 tons (120,000 kilograms or 120 tonnes). As tensions between the United States and the former Soviet Union lessened, Shuttle missions to Mir had become frequent. During the 1990s, many countries, including the United States, had paid the fledgling Soviet space administration, which became the Russian Space Agency, hundreds of millions of dollars to send their astronauts to Mir. Thus, Mir had provided the USSR with a needed source of revenue. However, since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian space program had received only one-fifth of the government funding provided to the Soviet space program. In 1996, even with Mir in an advanced state of decline, Russian officials remained committed to preserving the aging craft’s lifespan. Marcia S. Smith, an aerospace expert with the Congressional Research Service, described Mir’s state as akin to “a car that has 200,000 miles [320,000 kilometers] on it.” Nevertheless, the space station had provided scientists with the only spacecraft in space consistently occupied by humans for a decade, a significant contribution that deserved commemoration.(European Space Agency, news release, 15 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 20 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russian Space Program Drifting Toward Disaster?” 19 February 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking upon Mission STS-78. The Shuttle carried U.S. astronauts Terrence T. Henricks, Kevin R. Kregel, Richard M. Linnehan, Susan J. Helms, and Charles E. Brady Jr.; French astronaut Jean-Jacques Favier; and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thrisk. NASA planned to use an orbiting research laboratory to conduct a variety of experiments during the mission. In addition to its human cargo, the Shuttle transported the payload for the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences, used to conduct research on musculoskeletal physiology and on the responses of living organisms to a low- gravity environment.(NASA, “Life and Microgravity Science Research Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-78,” news release 96-116, June 1996; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 103.)
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASA’s budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former President’s call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the “faster, better, cheaper” mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, “White House Releasing New National Space Policy,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, “Space Policy,” 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, “Fact Sheet: National Space Policy,” 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
NASA announced its 1996 astronaut candidate class, which included the first set of identical twins ever selected⎯Mark E. Kelly and Scott J. Kelly. The sibling U.S. Navy pilots joined 33 other astronauts in the class. NASA selected 10 pilots and 25 mission specialists from an applicant pool of more than 2,400 candidates, including members of the U.S. Army, Air Force, Coast Guard, Marine Corps, and Navy. Six members of the class held PhDs in their respective fields, and one was an MD. NASA selected the astronaut class, the largest in nearly 20 years, from 16 different states; in addition, one astronaut candidate had been born in Argentina and another in the United Kingdom.(NASA, “NASA Selects Astronaut Class of 1996,” news release 96-84, 1 May 1996; Marcia Dunn, “In NASA First Identical Twins Selected for Astronaut Corps,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 May 1996.)
NASA canceled a spacewalk for the astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia when the astronauts could not open the outer air lock. After communicating for more than 2 hours with Mission Control in Houston, with officials instructing them to “put as much force as you feel comfortable applying to the handle,” Columbia’s crew ended preparations for the spacewalk. During the spacewalk, the astronauts had intended to test a large crane and various power tools planned for the ISS.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Called Off as Air Lock Hatch Won’t Open,” Washington Post, 28 November 1996.)
During a top-level meeting between officials of the United States and Russia, NASA made public a shift in its policy, announcing that U.S. astronauts would not always have command aboard the ISS. In a compromise meant to encourage Russia to build its portion of the station, NASA conceded that astronauts from other countries would have the opportunity to command the ISS for significant periods.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Command of Space Station Will Be Shared by Other Nations,” 28 September 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers’ funds on NASA’s research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies “are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy.” The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, “NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame,” news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
Preparing to take over the administration of the Shuttle program from NASA, the Rockwell- Lockheed Martin joint venture, United Space Alliance (USA), named James C. Adamson as its chief operating officer. Adamson came to USA from Lockheed Martin, where he had served since 1994 as a group vice president and general manager of Lockheed’s Engineering and Science Services. Adamson had served as an astronaut at NASA from 1984 to 1992, spending more than 334 hours in space as a part of Missions STS-28 and STS-43.
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttle’s reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rocket’s three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, “Astronaut’s Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks,” New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
NASA named astronaut Michael Lopez-Alegria to replace astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as NASA’s Director of Operations at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia. The job of the director was to coordinate the training of U.S. astronauts headed for the Mir space station and to act as liaison between NASA and the Russian Space Agency.
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia conducted an overnight experiment on the effects of space travel on the body’s biological clock. Four astronauts slept with special caps equipped with electrodes to monitor their brain and muscle activity. Astronauts in space have no exposure to the once-daily rising and setting Sun, which helps trigger a regular sleep pattern on Earth. In space the Sun rises and sets more than a dozen times each “day.” NASA administrators planned the experiment because they recognized the value of restful sleep for astronauts working in space and were concerned that sleep loss would become a greater disadvantage the longer an astronaut stayed in space. With the ISS on the horizon, NASA researchers considered the possible effects on astronauts of record-setting stays in space a significant issue. “Sleep disruption is something that has to be taken seriously,” said Timothy H. Monk, the lead researcher on the project.(Reuters, “Shuttle Mission Probes Body Clock,” 24 June 1996.)
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. O’Connor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. O’Connor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, O’Connor had voiced some concerns about NASA’s planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, O’Connor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, O’Connor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. O’Connor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, “O’Connor To Leave NASA,” news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns,” Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russia’s Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-François Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, “Crew Named to Sixth Shuttle–Mir Docking Mission,” news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour tested new NASA spacesuits in extreme cold. In preparation for work on the ISS, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott stood nearly motionless in space for 35 minutes, in temperatures nearing 100° below 0°F (-73.33°C), to test the suit’s insulating capacity. In completing the exercise, Scott became the second African American man to walk in space. The newly improved suits, produced at a cost of US$10 million each, proved an effective barrier against the cold. The gloves and the boots of the suits contained heating elements. NASA made the thermal improvements to the spacesuits after the astronauts became cold during the February 1995 spacewalk, causing its early termination.(Michael Cabbage, “Staying Warm in Cosmic Cold,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 January 1996; Jet Magazine, “Navy Captain Winston Scott Becomes Second Black To Walk in Space,” 5 February 1996, 24. 11 Kathy Sawyer, “Two Planets Discovered that Might Sustain Life,” Washington Post, 18 January 1996.)
Horowitz, the first Shuttle pilot with a PhD, captained STS-75. NASA astronauts Andrew M.
two Italian astronauts, Umberto Guidoni and Maurizio Cheli, made up the crew. One of the
Allen, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz; Swiss astronaut Claude Nicollier; and
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-24 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri and the first female French astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. The crew of Soyuz planned to resupply Mir’s long-term crew.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 514, 25 August 1996, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx514.html (accessed 29 July 2008); Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI), “Russian Spaceship Heads for Space Station,” 18 August 1996.)
NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russia’s withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, “Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd.” Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, “experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation.” The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, “Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew,” 18 November 1996.)
NASA announced that the tethered satellite experiment had failed. The 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, attaching the 0.5-ton (450-kilogram or 0.45-tonne) satellite to Shuttle Columbia, broke unexpectedly just as the tether had nearly reached its full extension. Before the tether broke, the experiment to use an orbiting satellite to produce electricity had been proceeding smoothly. The astronauts had been in the process of extending the satellite from the Space Shuttle for more than 5 hours, when they noted a decrease in tension and realized that the tether and satellite had broken away. NASA Commander Andrew M. Allen responded to the break immediately, directing the Shuttle away from the satellite to prevent a collision. However, the satellite never came close to the Shuttle; it was more than 18 miles (29 kilometers) away only a few minutes after breaking free. NASA officials could not immediately identify the cause of the break. The astronauts aboard the Shuttle managed to record images of the satellite trailing away from the Shuttle. This footage, a black and white rendering of the tether disappearing into space, reached Flight Command Center in Houston, Texas, shortly after the event. “Those are some tether dynamics we did not want to see,” stated one Mission Control operative. NASA dismissed the idea of attempting to retrieve the satellite, explaining that, although it was technically possible, such a mission would be too dangerous and too costly in consumption of fuel.(NASA, “STS-75 Mission Control Status Report No. 10,” 26 February 1996; Steve Marshall, “Satellite Tether Snaps; Shuttle Safe,” USA Today, 26 February 1996; William Harwood, “Science Satellite Is Lost as Shuttle Tether Breaks,” Washington Post, 26 February 1996.)
