Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, NASA’s temporary resident aboard Russia’s Mir space station, became the second American to ride aboard the three-person Soyuz capsule that had delivered the cosmonauts to Mir. Cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri, Linenger’s Russian partners aboard Mir, took Linenger for a short ride around Mir, to free a docking station for the new Soyuz vehicle that Russia would soon launch. In allowing an American astronaut aboard the Russian craft, Russia took another step with the United States to foster a cooperative postcommunist relationship between the two countries.(Association Press, “Astronaut Rides Soyuz,” 8 February 1997.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia lit more than 200 small fires, testing the flammability of dozens of gases and materials. The experiments took place under the direction of Paul D. Ronney, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Southern California. Ronney explained that the experiments had as much application for Earth as for space. According to Ronney, the weaker the flame in space’s weightless environment, the cleaner its fuel would burn on Earth. The astronauts found that, without the effect of gravity, the flames often formed the shape of a ball and heat did not rise. The experiments created some attention for Mission STS- 94, largely overshadowed by the success of the Pathfinder mission to Mars.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests of Tiny Fires Spur Delight,” 9 July 1997; Wayne Tompkins, “Columbia Crew Ready for Hot Time in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 July 1997.)
Frank L. Culbertson Jr., NASA’s Manager for the Space Shuttle–Mir research program, announced that in the future NASA would likely require astronauts to have training in spacewalking. The announcement coincided with reports in the New York Times and other U.S. newspapers that David A. Wolf had replaced astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as the next NASA representative aboard Mir. NASA had replaced Lawrence because of her small stature. At 5 feet, 3 inches (1.6 meters) tall, she was too small to fit into the bulky Russian Orlan spacesuits worn on Mir. In addition, she had received no training in spacewalking. Previously, NASA had planned for Wolf to replace Lawrence aboard Mir following her research stint. NASA and the Russian Space Agency addressed the sensitive issue of replacing Lawrence because of her size, explaining the need for flexibility aboard Mir during significant repairs to the station. Lawrence reacted professionally, despite the disappointment of her replacement less than two months before her planned once-in-a-career mission.(Warren E. Leary, “Future Astronauts Must Walk Before They Fly,” New York Times, 1 August 1997; Todd Halverson, “Mir Prerequisite: Spacewalking,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 August 1997; United Press International, “U.S., Russia Cite Logic of Replacing Female Astronaut,” 1 August 1997; Associated Press, “NASA: Decision To Replace Astronaut Difficult but Necessary,” 31 July 1997.)
President William J. Clinton awarded Congressional Space Medals of Honor to Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chafee, who died in the Apollo 1 fire. Clinton presented the medals to members of the men’s families in a ceremony in the Oval Office. White and Chafee were part of the three-man crew involved in the tragedy, which had occurred more than 30 years earlier. On 27 January 1967, the Apollo 1 space capsule had caught fire on the launchpad, killing the three men on board the spacecraft. The third member of the crew, Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978. The accident had caused NASA to institute aggressive safety procedures, placing a premium on the well-being of its astronauts. Clinton noted the contributions of the fallen astronauts, “though they never got there, astronauts Chaffee, White, and Grissom’s footprints are on the moon.” Besides Apollo 1’s crew, only nine other astronauts had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.(Associated Press, “Apollo 1 Astronauts Honored: 3 Killed in 1967 Fire on Launch Pad,” 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Congressional Space Medal,” 17 December 1997.)
Reaffirming their commitment to the international consortium’s expensive and increasingly complicated task of constructing Mir’s replacement, NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced appointments to the first four crews that would live and work aboard the ISS. NASA chose astronaut William M. Shepherd as the first expedition commander. Russia selected cosmonauts Yuri P. Gidzenko and Sergei K. Krikalev to accompany Shepherd on the first increment crew. The second crew would have a Russian commander, Yury V. Usachev, accompanied by a crew of American astronauts, James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms. Each member of the first two crews possessed significant space experience. Moreover, the selection of the crews represented careful diplomatic choices meant to support the strong, but still strained, space partnership of the United States and Russia.(NASA, “U.S., Russia Name International Space Station Crews,” news release 97-269, 17 November 1997. 351 George Lardner Jr. and Walter Pincus, “Military Had Plan To Blame Cuba if Glenn’s Space Mission Failed,” Washington Post, 19 November 1997.)
NASA marked the one-year anniversary of the United States’ continuous presence in space, a tenure that began with the mission of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard the Mir space station. Astronauts John E. Blaha and Jerry M. Linenger had followed Lucid’s stay. NASA planned to maintain a continuous presence aboard Mir until 1998.
Shuttle Discovery, carrying a crew of seven astronauts, launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a mission to service the HST. NASA planned the 10-day Shuttle Mission STS-82 to upgrade significantly the scientific capabilities of HST, as well as to perform standard maintenance on the US$2 billion instrument. The spaceflight was the second servicing mission for HST since its deployment in April 1990 aboard Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-31. The astronauts planned to conduct at least four spacewalks to install new components, such as the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer. A NASA scientist described the improvements as “replacing 1970’s technology with 1990’s technology.” In addition to the work conducted on the HST, Discovery’s crew planned to move the telescope a few miles farther into the atmosphere, improving its chances for a longer operating life. Astronomers hypothesized that the potential gains from refurbishing the HST outweighed the risks of tampering with its already spectacular abilities, justifying the US$800 million cost of the mission. The head of the HarvardSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics speculated that the refurbished HST could lead to “a whole different kind of science.”(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-82—Press Kit,” news release 97-18, February 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Starts Space Telescope Mission,” New York Times, 12 February 1997; Associated Press, “Improved Hubble Telescope To Give Astronomers New View of the Universe,” 8 February 1997.)
The Clipper Graham (DC-XA) Incident Investigation Board released its final report concerning the explosion of the vehicle at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The Board, chaired by former astronaut Vance Brand, determined that a disconnected brake line on the secondary landing gear had prevented the gear from fully extending. The DC-XA, a prototype developed by McDonnell Douglas for NASA, had flown successfully in its fourth test flight on 31 July 1996, before failing on landing. NASA’s director of space transportation noted that the failure, which occurred as part of ongoing research into reusable launch vehicles, had strengthened NASA’s resolve to reduce costs and to achieve efficient reusability, safety, and reliability, ideally using a combination of automation and human control.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Report Release,” news release 97-3, 7 January 1997.)
NASA dedicated a plaque in memory of Ellison S. Onizuka, celebrating his record of achieving the highest altitude for propeller-driven aircraft. Onizuka had been Hawaii’s first astronaut and a member of the Shuttle crew aboard Challenger when it exploded in 1986. NASA’s recognition of Onizuka’s achievement, more than a decade later, occurred during the same year that the remotely controlled AeroVironment Pathfinder broke a distance record for unpiloted space travel, topping 71,000 miles (114,000 kilometers) during its 7 July 1997 flight. NASA honored Onizuka for his part in “reaching for the heavens and striving for excellence,” noting that his achievement had contributed to that of Pathfinder. NASA dedicated the plaque honoring Onizuka at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, where the record-setting Pathfinder plane had set flight on its historic mission.(NASA, “NASA Solar-Powered Altitude Record To Be Dedicated to Challenger Astronaut,” news release N97- 087, 3 December 1997.)
Discovery’s crew released the HST from the Shuttle’s cargo bay after nearly a week of maintenance and refurbishing work. The astronauts had conducted a fifth spacewalk, one more than NASA had originally planned, to place a makeshift patch on the HST’s peeling insulation. “It’s not the Hubble Space Telescope. It’s really Hubble Space Telescope II,” remarked NASA’s chief Hubble scientist upon releasing the telescope. NASA deemed the mission a complete success.(Associated Press, “Hubble Released To Search Universe,” 20 February 1997; Associated Press, “Looking for Answers,” 19 February 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency launched Soyuz TM-25, carrying a crew of two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, and German astronaut Reinhold Ewald to the Mir space station, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The cosmonauts would become Mir’s new, long-term crew, and the German astronaut would return with the retiring crew in two weeks. Germany had paid the Russian Space Agency millions of dollars to carry Reinhold Ewald aboard the Shuttle to Mir.(Reuters, “Russians Launch 3 into Space,” 11 February 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Discovery successfully tested a new robotic arm, considerably smaller than Discovery’s massive 50-foot (15-meter) crane, intended for tasks of higher precision. Discovery’s crew used the arm to unlock a cargo bay door and lift a small box. NASA had engineered the Japanese-made robotic arm for US$100 million, expecting that it would eventually serve astronauts aboard the ISS. Of the robotic arm’s test performance, astronaut Stephen K. Robinson stated simply, “it operated beautifully.”
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, who had spent more than six months aboard Mir in 1996, received the Order of Friendship Medal from Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin in a ceremony at the Kremlin. The medal was the highest honor available to a non-Russian citizen.(NASA, “Astronaut Shannon Lucid Receives Russian Order of Friendship Medal,” news release 97-103, 19 May 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, just after sunrise, returning its seven-person crew to Earth. The landing marked the conclusion of a successful, 16- day mission, during which the astronauts completed 33 laboratory experiments. The low-cost mission was the first reflight in NASA’s history, concluding the research agenda planned for the April 1997 mission that NASA had terminated as a safety precaution. Although the press coverage of events on Mars and Mir had overshadowed the Columbia crew’s efforts, NASA Mission Manager Teresa B. Vanhooser stated confidently that scientific journals would give the mission due respect.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Returns Full of Research Information,” 17 July 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency celebrated the 36th anniversary of sending the first Russian, Yuri Gagarin, into space. At the same time, two cosmonauts and U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, who were on board Mir, reported that they had almost had to abandon the Russian space station twice over the past few months. Russia’s successful history of space exploration contrasted with the current struggles of the Russian Space Agency to obtain adequate funding for Mir and other space initiatives. When Russia launched its first piloted mission in 1961, the Cold War was driving an intense space competition between the Soviet Union and United States. In the days leading up to the anniversary, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed his support for increased funding to the Russian Space Agency in the future.
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger surprised onlookers at KSC when he bounded off Shuttle Atlantis only minutes after its landing. Physicians credited Linenger’s excellent condition after spending more than four months aboard the Mir space station to his regimen of orbital exercise. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was on hand to greet Linenger and the other astronauts returning home on Atlantis. The Shuttle’s safe landing returned Linenger to Earth after 132 days in space⎯the second longest stint by an American.(Los Angeles Times, “Returning Astronaut Surprises Even Himself; Shuttle: Four Months on Mir Sap Less Strength than Traveler Jerry Linenger Expected. He Credits the Exercising He Did in Orbit,” 25 May 1997.)
In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, “Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station,” New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
NASA announced that new smart software, with more realistic landing simulations for Shuttle pilots, would become an integral part of astronaut flight training. Hamid Berenji, Ping-Wei Chang, and Steven R. Swanson of JSC engineered the software, which used “adaptive fuzzy logic,” allowing the program to learn from experience and to function in a manner closer to human thinking than that of previous software. The software team predicted that the program would help not only Shuttle pilots, but also commercial pilots and even people learning to use machinery unrelated to aviation. Berenji predicted that, because the new training system would be easier to use than previous programs, new pilots would feel much more confident than before.(H. R. Berenji et al., “Refining the Shuttle Training Aircraft Controller,” Fuzzy Systems, 1997: Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International Conference 2 (1−5 July 1997): pp. 677−682; NASA, “Shuttle Landing Simulations To Improve with Smart Software,” news release 97-229, 14 October 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Roy D. Bridges Jr., retired U.S. Air Force Major General and Shuttle astronaut, as Director of KSC. Goldin called Bridges “the right person to take KSC into the next century.” As Director of KSC, Bridges assumed responsibility for the only site for launches of the Shuttle. At the time of Bridges’s appointment, about 2,000 employees worked at KSC, along with 14,000 contractors. Bridges’s appointment followed years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Air Force and NASA. Graduating with distinction from the U.S. Air Force Academy, he had served in several leadership positions in the Air Force and had received recognition as a distinguished graduate of the U.S. Air Force Pilot Training and Test Pilot Schools. Among other awards, he had received the Distinguished Service Medal, the Defense Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, the Legion of Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, the Meritorious Service Medal, the U.S. Air Force Commendation Medal, and NASA’s Flight Space Medal.(NASA, “Roy Bridges Selected as KSC’s New Center Director,” news release 97-17, 24 January 1997.)
Two members of Columbia’s crew, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott and Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, conducted a spacewalk, successfully recapturing the unresponsive Spartan satellite released on 21 November. After the 3,000-pound (1,400-kilogram) satellite had failed to turn toward the Sun, Columbia’s robotic arm had bumped it away from the Shuttle. NASA officials had cancelled the mission’s originally planned spacewalk to rescue the US$10 million spacecraft. Astronauts Scott and Doi later received a telephone call from President William J. Clinton congratulating them on grabbing the satellite.(William Harwood, “Satellite Designed To Study Sun Fails,” Washington Post, 22 November 1997; Associated Press, “Columbia Crew Prepares Plan To Recover Spinning Satellite,” 24 November 1997; William Harwood, “Space Walkers Grab Satellite, Wrestle It Back onto Shuttle,” 25 November 1997; Reuters, “Spacewalking Astronauts Grab Errant Satellite,” 25 November 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Calls Shuttle Crew with Thanks,” 28 November 1997.)
NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linenger’s first spacewalk and Tsibliyev’s third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, “U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk,” news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, “American, Russian Take a Spacewalk,” 30 April 1997; Associated Press, “Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk,” 29 April 1997.)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a German astronaut returned safely to Russia after tenures aboard the Russian space station Mir. The cosmonauts had spent more than six months in space, and Reinhold Ewald of Germany had spent two weeks aboard Mir as a paying guest of the Russian Space Agency. Ewald conducted geophysical, astrophysical, and medical experiments during his stay. The German Space Agency paid about US$60 million for Ewald’s trip, providing a much- needed infusion of capital for Russia’s space program.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 2 March 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Columbia, consulting with NASA ground support, decided to cut short their planned 16-day mission because of the potential for an explosion in the Shuttle’s electronic generator. NASA decided to abort the mission after the crew had attempted for two days to fix the balky generator. Despite the fact that the Shuttle’s two other generators could provide enough power for the Shuttle, NASA’s procedure required the Shuttle’s return, to prevent subsequent problems. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway clarified that the astronauts faced no imminent danger and that terminating the mission was a precaution rather than an emergency. “The conservative thing to do is land on Tuesday,” Holloway said at a news conference. Columbia’s early return to Earth in Mission STS-83 was only the third time in the history of the Shuttle program that NASA had ended a mission early. The astronauts had time to complete only a few of the planned 33 experiments on the mission, which cost nearly US$500 million.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Flight Cut Short as Risk Persists,” Washington Post, 7 April 1997; Warren Leary, “Power Problem on Shuttle Forces a Tuesday Landing,” New York Times, 7 April 1997; Associated Press, “Deteriorating Generator Cuts Short Mission,” 6 April 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earth’s ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASA’s trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, “one word for our mission would be diversity.” With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, “August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch,” news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study,” USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, “Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
NASA researchers, astronauts, and scholars gathered in Washington, DC, for a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, disclosing and discussing details of experiments conducted aboard the Shuttle during two 1996 missions. The event commemorated the one-year anniversaries of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory and the third U.S. Microgravity Payload. Scientists predicted that discoveries made aboard the Shuttle flights in 1996 would eventually lead to technological advances. Research on numerous topics, from the climate of the universe to human biology, could lead to production of cheaper metals and alloys or new synthetic drugs. Highlights from the research presentations included the announcement of the discovery that space-grown crystals are of much higher quality than those grown on Earth; the description of experiments intended to uncover the effect of space on the production of metal and alloys; and the presentation of evidence that the microgravity environment of space had enabled scientists to make more precise measurements of the physical properties of elemental gas.(NASA, “Significant Discoveries from Space Shuttle Experiments To Be Presented at Conference,” news release 97-23, 5 February 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Earth on Mission STS-87 with great fanfare, executing an unusual 180° roll 6 minutes into the 81⁄2-minute flight, a maneuver planned to put the Shuttle in radio contact with communication satellites. The launch itself took place at the “exact moment on the exact day as planned” for the sixth consecutive mission. The six-person crew included Takao Doi, a Japanese astronaut who planned to make his country’s first spacewalk; Kalpana Chawla, the first Indian-born woman to travel into space; Leonid K. Kadenyuk, the first Ukrainian to fly on a U.S. Shuttle; and U.S. astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Steven W. Lindsey, and Winston E. Scott. The crew planned to conduct a spacewalk to test instruments and procedures for the ISS. The Shuttle also carried the U.S. Microgravity Payload-4, which the astronauts planned to use to test the responses to conditions in space of a variety of materials and liquids.(NASA, “Solar and Microgravity Research Highlight Final Shuttle Mission of 1997,” news release J97037, November 1997; William Harwood, “Columbia Corkscrews into Orbit,” Washington Post, 20 November 1997; Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Blasts Off with Multinational Crew,” 19 November 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Executes Flip on Its Way into Orbit,” 16 November 1997.)
Crew aboard Shuttle Columbia successfully released and operated the Autonomous Extra- vehicular Robotic Camera Sprint (AERCam Sprint). The 35-pound (16-kilogram), spherical camera propelled itself around the Shuttle after astronaut Winston E. Scott had released it during a spacewalk. The camera used periodic jet thrusts to maneuver, responding to control commands made from inside Columbia. The US$3 million camera transmitted images of Columbia and its crew back to Earth, providing unique vantage points for observation. The astronauts, who retrieved the small robotic device without any complications, concluded that it would be a helpful technology for future Shuttle missions and the ISS.(Seth Borenstein, “Robot Set for 1st Space Walk in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 1997; Associated Press, “Free-Flying Camera Flits High Above Columbia, Sends Down Video,” 3 December 1997.)
The Assignation Records Review Board made public more than 1,500 pages of classified records, including a memorandum detailing a plan to blame Prime Minister Fidel Castro and the government of the Republic of Cuba if astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s attempt to orbit Earth in the Mercury capsule was unsuccessful. The 2 February 1962 document stated, “by manufacturing various pieces of evidence which would prove electronic interference on the part of the Cubans,” the United States could shift the blame to Castro. Glenn’s safe return to Earth rendered any such plans unnecessary.
A small fire broke out aboard the Mir space station, raising new questions about the fitness of the aging station for occupation and research. The six crew members on board quickly extinguished the fire, the result of a faulty air purification unit. The astronauts and cosmonauts estimated that the fire had burned for about 90 seconds, forcing the crew to don respirator masks. Mir continued to function normally after the fire, although the heat had melted several cables.(NASA, “Small Fire Extinguished on Mir,” news release 97-30, 24 February 1997; Associated Press, “Fire on Russian Space Station Doused, but Raises Concern,” 25 February 1997.)
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
The U.S. Capitol’s Statuary Hall installed a bronze statue of Apollo 13 astronaut John L. Swigert Jr., a native of Denver, to represent the state of Colorado. Each state chooses two statues for the hall to honor its most prominent citizens. Swigert was, perhaps, most famous for uttering the words, “Houston, we’ve had a problem.” Colorado had elected Swigert to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982, but he had died of cancer before his swearing-in. Swigert’s statue took its place alongside that of fellow Coloradoan Florence Rena Sabin, who led the crusade for women’s admission to medical schools. Astronaut Thomas Kenneth Mattingly II, whom Swigert replaced only three days before the Apollo 13 launch, attended the statue dedication, along with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and other dignitaries.(Paul Leavitt, “New Statue,” USA Today, 23 May 1997; Associated Press, “Newest Congressional Statue: Apollo 13 Astronaut John Swigert,” 22 May 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: “It doesn’t matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best.” NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenko’s participation.(Todd Halverson, “American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in ’99,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
Astronaut F. Story Musgrave retired from NASA after 30 years of service and six Shuttle flights. During his more than 1,200 hours in space, Musgrave had flown on the first voyage of Challenger and had been a member of the first crew to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Flying aboard STS-80 in 1996, Musgrave became the oldest person to fly in space. NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations David C. Leestma said of Musgrave, “throughout the Shuttle program, from its earliest stages to the present, Story has been instrumental in developing the techniques crew members use to perform spacewalks.”(NASA, “Astronaut Story Musgrave Retires from NASA,” news release 97-188, 2 September 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his “cardiovascular system.” The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt “irregularities” while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyev’s test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyev’s place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mir’s exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mir’s challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, “Latest Mir Trouble: Commander’s Heart,” USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task,” New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, “Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities,” 14 July 1997; Reuters, “Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem,” 14 July 1997; Associated Press, “Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut,” 15 July 1997; Reuters, “NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale,” 17 July 1997; New York Times, “A Rescue Assignment for NASA,” editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs,” 19 July 1997.)
Astronaut and lawmaker U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), on the 35th anniversary of his journey as the first American to orbit Earth, announced that he would retire from the U.S. Senate at the conclusion of his fourth term. On 20 February 1962, Glenn had orbited Earth three times, symbolizing a hard-fought achievement in the United States’ effort to catch up with the Soviet Union in the space race. Glenn, first elected to the Senate from Ohio in 1974, made the announcement at Muskingum College in New Concord, Ohio, joking that since “there is still no cure for the common birthday,” he intended to retire at age 75.(Paul Souhrada, “Glenn, 75, Will Retire, Citing ‘No Cure for Common Birthday’,” Washington Times, 21 February 1997; NASA, “Glenn Orbits the Earth 35 Years Ago Today,” video advisory V97-12, 20 February 1997. 207 NASA, “Next Generation Internet a Million Times Faster than Home Computer Modems,” news release 97-29, 21 February 1997.)
Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
NASA announced the retirement of veteran astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman, who had flown on five Shuttle missions. Hoffman planned to continue his NASA service, becoming NASA’s European representative in Paris. Hoffman was one of the four astronauts to take part in the spacewalking mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) in 1993. In total, Hoffman had spent more than 1,200 hours in space and traveled more than 21.5 million miles (35 million kilometers).(NASA, “Jeff Hoffman Retires from Astronaut Corps,” new release 97-151, 9 July 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to “serve as a bridge to America’s future in space.” In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttle’s launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, “Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83,” news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire,” 5 April 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
John E. Blaha became the first astronaut to leave the U.S. Space Shuttle carried by medical personnel. Blaha was experiencing weakness upon his return to Earth’s gravitational conditions, and NASA’s doctors wanted to gauge immediately the effects of long-term weightlessness on his body. Blaha remarked upon landing that he could hardly move, saying that he was “absolutely stunned” at the difficulty of returning to a gravity-controlled environment. NASA’s doctors focused specifically on Blaha’s dizziness and on his weakened bones and muscles, hoping to learn how to improve health plans for astronauts living aboard the ISS. Blaha had maintained an arduous schedule of exercise aboard Mir, to mitigate the weakening effects of the weightless environment. In addition, he had made the return flight aboard Atlantis lying down in a Shuttle seat, to minimize the crush of gravity.(William Harwood, “Atlantis Astronaut Wobbly on His Return to Gravity,” Washington Post, 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Carried off Shuttle, a First for NASA,” 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Returning Astronaut Sheds Right Stuff Image, Is Carried off Shuttle,” 22 January 1997.)
Mir cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov engaged in a 6-hour spacewalk, successfully dismantling a damaged solar panel so that Mir’s crew could install a replacement panel. The Russian Space Agency nearly called off the spacewalk when Solovyev discovered a problem with the radio-monitoring system on his spacesuit, just as the men prepared to leave the station. Although the crew’s attempts to repair the monitoring system were unsuccessful, Russian Mission Control eventually decided to proceed with the spacewalk. The cosmonauts worked effectively, communicating with Russian space officials only periodically. This was Solovyev’s fourth spacewalk during his tenure on Mir, confirming his status as the world’s most experienced spacewalker, with more than a dozen spacewalks to his credit. While the cosmonauts worked outside Mir, U.S. astronaut David A. Wolf monitored their progress from inside.(Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 November 1997.)
300Associated Press, “Astronauts Aboard Discovery Test New Japanese Robot Arm,” 9 August 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests a Robot Built To Spacewalk,” 11 August 1997. between the Progress cargo craft and Mir had occurred during the two men’s tenure, and shortly thereafter, doctors had diagnosed Tsibliyev’s irregular heartbeat. Space officials planned extensive debriefings for the two men. Meanwhile, President Boris N. Yeltsin congratulated the cosmonauts for their “persistence, courage, and heroism,” in spite of his having claimed only days earlier that the recent problems with Mir were solely the result of human error.(Daniel Williams, “Cosmonauts Return Safely from Space,” Washington Post, 15 August 1997; Michael Spencer, “Troubled Mir’s Crew Leaves, Landing Safely in Kazakhstan,” New York Times, 15 August 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Returns to Earth Safely, but to Many Questions,” 14 August 1997.)
The Astronauts Memorial Foundation recognized Major Robert H. Lawrence Jr. as the first black astronaut in NASA history, exactly 30 years after his death during a U.S. Air Force training mission. A ceremony adding Lawrence’s name to the Astronauts Memorial Foundation’s Space Mirror at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) ended a long bureaucratic debate over whether Lawrence qualified as an astronaut. Lawrence had never met the Air Force requisite that an astronaut must have flown at an altitude of least 50 miles (80 kilometers) above Earth, because, although he had received his appointment to the U.S. Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program, he had died before flying in space. Therefore, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation had repeatedly refused to include his name on the Space Mirror at KSC. However, in 1996 U.S. Representative Bobby L. Rush (D-IL) had persuaded the Air Force to verify Lawrence’s status as an astronaut. Thereafter, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation’s board of directors voted, immediately and unanimously, to include Lawrence’s name on the Space Mirror.(Associated Press, “Crash Victim Recognized as 1st Black Astronaut,” 8 December 1997.)
