The Soyuz landing capsule, carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a French astronaut returning from Mir, landed safely in the snow and bitter cold (-22°F or -30°C) about 20 miles (32 kilometers) from the northern Kazakhstan village of Arkalyk. Only one of eight rescue helicopters was able to meet the crew because of wind, clouds, and thick snow, limiting visibility to less than 160 feet (49 meters). Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov returned to Earth after a six-month mission on Mir. During their stay on Mir, the cosmonauts had focused on repairing the aging space station. Léopold Eyharts returned to Earth with six salamanders. The two cosmonauts who had replaced Solovyev and Vinogradov had flown the salamanders to Mir, carrying them on board the space station in January. While in space, Eyharts had conducted experiments on the salamanders, including monitoring the effects of antigravity on the reptiles’ egg-laying capabilities.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Focus: Russia-France Space Crew Returns to Deep Cold,” 20 February 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery undocked from Mir, carrying back to Earth Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, the last of seven U.S. astronauts to live aboard the station, and marking the completion of Phase I of the ISS program. Before closing the hatches, Mir Commander Talgat A. Musabayev presented Shuttle Commander Charles J. Precourt with a huge wrench that had been used in spacewalks and would be flown to the future ISS.(Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Discovery Undocks from Mir, Completes Historic Last Linkup,” 8 June 1998.)
Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook a 41⁄2-hour-long spacewalk, to install 40 electrical and data connectors linking the U.S.-built connecting module Unity with the Russian-built power module Zarya. The pair also bolted handrails to the side of Unity and photographed two of Zarya’s backup docking antennas, which had failed to deploy. Russian ground controllers sent commands to power up Zarya, jump-starting Unity’s electrical systems. Ross and Newman then removed thermal covers from Unity’s outside computers to prevent overheating.(Paul Hoversten, “Spacewalkers Complete a Tricky Wiring Job,” USA Today, 8 December 1998.)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discovery’s drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, “Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery,” Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-95,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
Astronauts and physicians Jay C. Buckey Jr. and Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams performed the first surgeries ever conducted on living specimens while in orbit. The two doctors injected chemical markers into the hind legs of six of the surviving baby rats to determine the role of gravity in the development of muscles. The crew anesthetized the baby rats before injecting them with the pink florescent chemical, the first time scientists had performed such a procedure in zero-gravity conditions. In addition to studying how muscles and nerves develop in space, the crew studied whether anesthesia really works without the help of gravity, whether patients have more difficulty recovering from anesthesia in space, and how wounds heal in space. Two other astronauts successfully completed “the most difficult medical procedure ever attempted on someone in space.” The astronauts guided tiny needles into the nerves behind their knees, in an experiment aimed at understanding and easing the blood pressure problems and dizziness that astronauts suffer after returning to Earth. An estimated 500,000 Americans experience the same symptoms every day when they stand up. The needle enabled the astronauts to “listen” to electrical impulses, as the brain sent messages to the nerve.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Surgeons Hope Rats Will Survive,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 April 1998; Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Crew Performs First Space Surgery,” 29 April 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 April 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Astronauts Listen to Brain-Nerve Chatter,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 1998.)
Shuttle Endeavour docked with Mir at an altitude of 214 nautical miles (2,467 miles or 3,970 kilometers), bringing the seventh American astronaut to work on board Mir since the program began in 1995. Andrew S. W. Thomas, a mechanical engineer, replaced David A. Wolf, a physician, who had been on board Mir since September. The hatches opened at 5:25 p.m. (EST), and Thomas's transfer occurred at 6:35 p.m. (EST).(New York Times, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station with Astronaut and Supplies,” 25 January 1998; NASA, “STS- 89.”)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, “Orbital’s Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecraft’s First Signals Indicate Early Success,” 2 April 1998.)
Astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas was unable to fit into his Russian-made emergency spacesuit before boarding Mir, but after initial orders that Thomas spend the first night in the Space Shuttle, Mission Control granted him permission to board. The suit was necessary only in case of emergency evacuation aboard Soyuz. Once aboard Mir, Thomas altered his spacesuit, adjusting and removing some straps in the armpit and torso areas. After the alterations, the suit fit exactly as it should, ensuring that Thomas would not have to return to Earth with Endeavour on Thursday.(Steve Marshall, “Mir Spacesuit, Astronaut Prove To Be a Poor Fit,” USA Today, 26 January 1998; Washington Post, “Astronaut Moves into Mir Despite Spacesuit Problem,” 26 January 1998; Washington Times, “Thomas Finally Fits in on Mir: Crucial Alterations Made to Space Suit,” 27 January 1998.)
NASA dedicated as a U.S. Air Force conference center the newly renovated, historic control center, Complex 14 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, the site of the Mercury program launches. The domed blockhouse with 10-foot-thick (3-meter-thick), reinforced concrete walls had protected launch controllers from possible explosions of Atlas rockets launched only 1,000 feet (305 meters) away. The renovation preserved the periscopes that controllers had used to safely view launches. The control center was at the launch site of the first piloted orbital flight of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.(USA Today, “Cape Canaveral Restores Piece of Space Age History,” 11 May 1998.)
Returning from the Neurolab mission, Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly, despite a malfunctioning hydraulic unit. Most of Columbia’s 1-hour-long descent relied on two hydraulic units, because the cooling system for the third unit had failed. To prevent the third unit from overheating, the crew turned it on just minutes before landing. After the landing, Mission Control congratulated the Neurolab astronauts on “a historic mission that elevated neuroscience research to record heights.” During the 16-day Neurolab flight, the team had accomplished a number of experiments never before performed in space, including the first direct nerve recordings, the first joint recording of sleep and breathing, the first embalming of animals, and the first surgery on animals. Because only the rodents aboard Columbia were accessible during the flight, astronauts and scientists did not immediately know how the other animals, including fish, snails, and crickets, had fared. A quick inspection after landing, however, “revealed that only 25 of 225 baby swordtail fish survived the mission, a much higher mortality rate than expected.” The baby rats also had a higher mortality rate than expected; 52 of the 96 baby rats had died in orbit after their mothers refused to nurse them. NASA veterinarians had expected a dozen deaths from natural causes. Animal rights groups criticized the experiments.(USA Today, “Scientists To Study Effects on Critters,” 4 May 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Mission’s Data Has Scientists Feeling Antsy: Neurolab Analysis Begins Today,” USA Today, 4 May 1998.)
This date marked Mir’s 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Mir,” 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion,” 20 February 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
American astronaut David A. Wolf made his first spacewalk, accompanied by veteran spacewalker Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Commander of the Mir space station. Solovyev, making his 18th spacewalk, set the world’s record for the highest number of spacewalks by one individual.382 The spacewalk began 20 minutes later than scheduled, because of problems opening locks on the malfunctioning outer hatch. The scheduled task had been to assess wear and tear on the exterior of the station using a photoreflectometer designed in the United States. David A. Wolf worked for 2 hours trying to verify whether the device was working properly, but only succeeded in taking readings on the shell of the nine-year-old Kvant-2 module, one of the station’s oldest compartments. Engineers planned to use the data to help make selections for materials and protective coatings for the new ISS. Flight Director Vladimir A. Solovyov explained in a news conference at Mission Control outside Moscow, “the device proved to be far from mature, so it was decided to skip the examination of the core module.” Instead, the two men studied the holes in the Spektr module, which had suffered punctures during a collision with a cargo craft on 25 June 1997.(USA Today, “American Looks at Mir from Outside,” 15 January 1998; Oleg Shchedrov for Reuters, “Hitches Marred Mir Crew Space Walk, Says Official,” 15 January 1998; Houston Chronicle, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Take Short Spacewalk: Excursion Marked by a Few Small Difficulties,” 15 January 1998.)
Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being “one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon.” A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepard’s spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, “Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard,” news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, “Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74,” news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard,” government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shepard’s Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age,” USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, “Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: ‘Pioneer’s Pioneer’ also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon,” Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Terrence W. Wilcutt to replace James D. Halsell Jr. as NASA’s Manager of Operational Activities at Star City, Russia. Wilcutt was the 10th astronaut to serve in the rotational position, supporting the training and preparation of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center and acting as a liaison between NASA and Russian management. Wilcutt had flown on three missions: the first, in 1994, as the pilot on Mission STS-68, to study the Earth’s surface; the second, in 1996, as the pilot for the fourth Shuttle–Mir docking mission, STS-79; and the third, in 1998, as the commander of Mission STS-89, the eighth docking mission.(NASA, “Astronaut Wilcutt Replaces Halsell in Star City, Russia,” news release 98-127, 22 July 1998.)
Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman made their final spacewalk to free the second Russian docking antenna on Zarya, which had failed to unfurl. The pair also finished outfitting the station. The astronauts had required a total of 21 hours over three spacewalks to complete the work.(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup.”)
At 7:15 a.m. (EST), Lunar Prospector executed the first of three engine bursts needed to settle into orbit. In a flawlessly executed maneuver, Prospector fired its engines for 30 minutes to slow down, permitting the Moon’s gravity to capture it. The small robotic spacecraft was NASA’s first visitor to the Moon since the astronauts from Apollo 17 had walked on its surface in 1972. The Lunar Prospector project had cost about US$63 million.(Washington Times, “After 25 Years, NASA Shoots for the Moon,” 12 January 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Prospector Slides into Lunar Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 12 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
Raytheon Systems Company’s training unit, formerly known as Hughes Training, appointed former astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield Jr. as Managing Director for the company’s NASA support business. In this position, Hartsfield was to manage the development of simulators for the ISS program.(David Welch for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Raytheon Systems Names Chief of NASA Deals,” 30 January 1998.)
A Russian Space Agency official insisted that there had been no problem with Andrew S. W. Thomas’s spacesuit, describing the U.S. astronaut as bad tempered and expressing concern about the implications of Thomas’s attitude for the remainder of the mission. Deputy Flight Commander Viktor Blagov indicated that, since major work would take place on Mir, “any fuss about the space suit is out of place.” Blagov explained that Thomas would keep both David Wolf’s spacesuit and his own.(Reuters, “Balky Suit.”)
NASA announced the arrival of international astronaut candidates at Johnson Space Center, where they began training as members of the 1998 astronaut class. The international candidates, from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, and Italy, were Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, Hans W. Schlegel, and Roberto Vittori of the European Space Agency; Bjarni V. Tryggvason of the Canadian Space Agency; and Marco C. Pontes of the Brazilian Space Agency.
NASA astronauts presented four employees of Boeing Reusable Space Systems with the Silver Snoopy, one of the most prestigious honors available to people working on NASA’s Space Shuttle program. Mark Brewer of the orbiter electrical-avionics team, Jeffrey Lewis of the mid- module-major assembly team, Michael Argent of the external-tank, umbilical and payload latch- assembly programs, and Larry Echaves of the configuration-management team each received a letter of commendation, a poster, a certificate, and a Silver Snoopy pin that had flown in space.(Romy Jacobson, “Hailing the Right Stuff; NASA Honors Boeing Workers,” Los Angeles Daily News, 20 May 1998.)
After problems with one of two network-signal processors caused a 24-hour delay, Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-90) blasted off on the Shuttle program’s final Neurolab mission, carrying 26 experiments for basic research in neurosciences to “expand understanding of how the nervous system develops and functions in space.” Test subjects aboard the Shuttle included crew members, rats, mice, crickets, snails, and two kinds of fish. The Neurolab mission was the joint effort of NASA, several U.S. partners, the space agencies of Canada, France, and Germany, the ESA, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan. Crew members included Commander Richard A. Searfoss; Pilot Scott D. Altman; Mission Specialists Richard M. Linnehan, Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams, and Kathryn P. Hire; and Payload Specialists Jay C. Buckey Jr. and James A. Pawelczyk. Mission Specialist Hire was the first KSC employee that NASA had selected as an astronaut candidate. Mission STS-90 was Columbia’s 25th flight.(NASA, “Neurolab Shuttle Mission To Launch April 16,” news release N98-25, 3 April 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-90,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-90.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2 p.m. (EDT), returning the U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, to Earth after four and one- half months in space. Thomas, unlike some of his predecessors, took the medical advice typically given to astronauts returning from a lengthy stay in space and allowed medical personnel to carry him off the Shuttle, rather than attempting to walk on his own.(Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Space Shuttle Returns with Last Mir Astronaut,” 12 June 1998.)
The newly developed Delta III rocket exploded during liftoff, destroying the Galaxy X communications satellite it was carrying into orbit. The launch was the maiden flight of Boeing’s newest version of the Delta rocket, designed to carry 8,400 pounds (3,800 kilograms), twice the payload of the previous version.(Seth Schiesel, “New Type of Rocket To Carry Satellites Explodes in Liftoff,” New York Times, 27 August 1998. 574 NASA, “International Candidates Join 1998 Astronaut Class,” news release 98-155, 27 August 1998.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was “a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula,” the site of a gas cloud generating enough water “to fill the Earth’s oceans 60 times a day.” The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting “large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula.” The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time “the vital role that water plays in star formation,” may “provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Michael Werner of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, “that water is prevalent in space” and “plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth,” 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, “Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, “Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena II’s first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, “Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, “Late Flagstaff Astronomer’s Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute,” Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, “NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers,” 7 January 1998.)
Dr. William K. Douglas, the physician who had overseen the care of the seven Mercury astronauts, died of a viral infection at the age of 76. As part of his assignment to NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, Dr. Douglas had been “personally responsible for the medical care and flight preparation of the seven Mercury astronauts.” He had cared for Alan B. Shepard Jr., Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, John H. Glenn Jr., and M. Scott Carpenter when they undertook the nation’s first four human spaceflights. After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 1977, Dr. Douglas had joined the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, where he had helped design an orbiting space station before retiring in 1988. In 1992 Douglas was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico.(Wolfgang Saxon, “William Douglas, 76, the Doctor for the Seven Early Astronauts,” New York Times, 24 November 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery attempted, but failed, to fix the spacecraft’s high- speed data-transmission system. NASA believed the source of the problem was in an electronics box in the cargo bay, but stated that only a spacewalk would enable the crew to reach the box. NASA Mission Operations representative Robert E. Castle Jr. remarked that, even with a spacewalk, the astronauts would probably not be able to repair the malfunction. Because of the lack of the high-speed data transmission system, scientists could not view the data that the AMS had collected. Although the Shuttle had stored the data on board, NASA was unable to determine whether the data was useful, or whether the instrument’s adjustment was correct.(Marcia Dunn, “Discover Astronauts Unable To Fix Communications Link,” Buffalo News (NY), 6 June 1998. 505 Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Unable To Spot Mir Hull Breach,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Test Fails To Find Leaks in Mir,” Seattle Times (WA), 7 June 1998.)
Research scientists working on a US$33 million experiment to search for antimatter in space, spoke at a news conference, announcing that the communication-system breakdown on Space Shuttle Discovery had ruined their tests. The astronauts had been unable to repair Discovery’s main antenna system, which had broken shortly after launch, rendering the Shuttle unable to transmit high-speed data or video back to Earth. Scientists working on the project needed continuous, high-speed data to calibrate the AMS, which was searching space for rare subatomic particles known as antimatter. However, using a patchwork system, they had only been able to receive a few minutes of data each hour, which meant that, although they could see that the AMS was working, the spectrometer was not providing them with enough data to fine tune the magnet. According to Project Manager James Bates, the scientists had failed to accomplish their objectives because of the malfunction.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Physics Testing Thwarted; A Glitch Has Undermined an Antimatter Experiment,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 June 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-95 launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr.; Pilot Steven W. Lindsey; Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Stephen K. Robinson, and Pedro Duque; and Payload Specialists Chiaki Mukai and John H. Glenn Jr. The primary objectives of STS-95 included conveying a variety of science experiments inside the SPACEHAB module; deploying and retrieving the Spartan free-flyer payload; performing operations with the HST Orbiting Systems Test; and transporting the International Extreme Ultraviolet Hitchhiker payloads. The historic mission also returned veteran astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. to space. Thirty-six years after Glenn had first orbited Earth, the seventy-seven-year-old astronaut became the oldest person to fly in orbit. As a veteran of NASA’s early Mercury program, Glenn had been the first American to orbit Earth. On 20 February 1962, in a flight lasting 5 hours, Glenn had orbited Earth three times in a tiny capsule. After he had passed a battery of medical tests and participated in astronaut training, NASA had selected U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. as a crew member of STS-95, so that scientists could study “how space travel affects an aging astronaut’s body.”(Bill Sammon, “Senator Upholds Status as Hero with His Return to Orbit,” Washington Times, 30 October 1998; John Noble Wilford, “Pioneer Returns as Crewman in the Shuttle,” New York Times, 29 October 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-95, John Glenn’s Flight; SPACEHAB,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-95.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
Endeavour’s Commander Robert D. Cabana and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev, leading the four other crew members, entered the Unity module for the first time, via an airlock attached to the Shuttle. The crew checked air pressure and quality, turned on lights and systems, detached components that were stored in the modules, and set up a communications system, connecting internal components with the two antennas outside Unity. Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman had installed the two antennas on 9 December. The Shuttle crew spent 28 hours inside the modules before turning off the lights and closing the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Enter International Space Station,” New York Times, 11 December 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup with Space Station,” USA Today, 14 December 1998.)
NASA announced the astronaut candidate class of 1998, including 8 pilot candidates and 17 mission specialist candidates, and composed of 21 male and 4 female candidates. Among the candidate class was teacher Barbara R. Morgan, the former understudy to Christa McAuliffe. NASA had designated Morgan as Educator Mission Specialist in January 1998.(NASA, “NASA Names Astronaut Class of 1998,” news release 98-97, 4 June 1998. 142)
Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook their second spacewalk, lasting 7 hours, to install two 100-pound (45.4-kilogram) communications antennas on each side of the Unity module. They hooked one of the antennas to a video cable running from the Zarya module. Then the two astronauts erected a folding sunshade over a computer outside of Unity, bundling loose cables that ran along the exterior of the module. Ross and Newman also removed the restraints that had stabilized the four Unity hatchways during the launch. Finally, Newman successfully tapped free one of Zarya’s stuck antennas, using a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long), extendable grappling hook.(Warren E. Leary, “2 Astronauts Make 2d Space Walk To Install Antennas on Station,” New York Times, 10 December 1998.)
The crew closed the hatches used to transfer equipment between Endeavour and Mir at 5:34 p.m. (EST) in preparation for Endeavour’s return flight to Earth. The closure of the hatches concluded five days of Endeavour’s continuous link-up with Mir, during which time the astronauts and cosmonauts had transferred 9,600 pounds (4,350 kilograms) of materials. In addition to equipment exchanges, the crew exchanged American astronaut David A. Wolf for Andrew S. W. Thomas, a U.S. astronaut born in Australia, who was to remain aboard Mir for a planned four- and-one-half-month mission.
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery successfully retrieved the Spartan spacecraft, thus completing a priority project of the nine-day mission. The crew had deployed the satellite on 1 November, to record observations of the Sun’s outer atmosphere and the solar wind. Spartan had lagged 40 miles (64 kilometers) behind the Shuttle, in free flight, as it recorded the data. The flight was the last in a series of four flights begun in 1993 to “gather observations at different points in the [S]un’s 11-year cycle of magnetic activity.” NASA had originally scheduled the mission for November 1997, but astronauts had “failed to send a crucial command” before releasing the satellite, so Spartan had gathered no data. The crew had also tested an experimental laser range-finding device mounted in the Shuttle, aiming at targets on Spartan.(Washington Times, “Glenn Reports No Space Sickness as Discovery Releases Sun Gazer,” 2 November 1998; Washington Times, “Astronauts Snag Sun Observer To Complete a Primary Mission: Glenn, 77, Undergoes More Tests of His Response to Space,” 4 November 1998; New York Times, “Shuttle Easily Regains Satellite, and Photos,” 4 November 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
