Discovery astronauts placed the HST back in orbit using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Astronaut Jean-François Clervoy operated the arm, grabbing a handle on the telescope’s side. After releasing the latches securing the observatory inside the Shuttle’s bay, the robotic arm lifted the telescope above the spacecraft, and ground controllers opened the door covering HST’s telescopic eye. Once ground controllers gave the command, Discovery’s robotic arm released the telescope. Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and Pilot Scott J. Kelly fired the Shuttle’s thrusters to move away from the telescope slowly.(Robyn Suriano, “Hubble Set Free: Discovery’s Crew Ready for Monday Landing at KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 December 1999.)
The salvage team lifted astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom’s Mercury capsule to the surface of the Atlantic Ocean just one day before the 38th anniversary of the astronaut’s historic suborbital flight. The second American in space, Grissom had flown in his Liberty Bell 7 Mercury capsule on 21 July 1961. After its ocean landing, the capsule’s hatch had blown open prematurely, nearly drowning him. Both the location of the capsule and the cause of the accident had remained a mystery until 1 May 1999, when a salvage team led by Curt Newport and funded by the Discovery Channel had discovered the spacecraft 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the ocean. Even after the team had retrieved the capsule, the cause of the accident remained a mystery. The salvage team had yet to locate the capsule’s hatch, which Newport believed had the greatest potential for determining what had caused the malfunction at the end of Grissom’s flight.(Los Angeles Times, “Grissom’s Mercury Capsule Recovered,” 21 July 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Expedition Begins To Recover Mercury Capsule from Ocean,” 2 July 1999.)
Astronaut Charles P. “Pete” Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who “combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet.” As an example of Conrad’s wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” Conrad had been a member of NASA’s second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident,” news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
New York Governor George E. Pataki awarded NASA astronaut Eileen M. Collins of Elmira, New York, the state’s highest award, the Jackie Robinson Empire State Freedom Medal, for her achievement as the first female Space Shuttle Commander. Collins had been Commander of the historic Mission STS-93. During that mission, she and her crew had deployed the Chandra X- ray Observatory, the heaviest, largest, and most powerful x-ray telescope ever launched into space. Governor Pataki described Collins as “a bold pioneer of the reaches of space” and remarked that “her talent, intelligence and courage set an example that every woman and every man can hope to duplicate in their lives.” Every year New York presents the Empire State Freedom Medal, established in 1997, to “those who best demonstrate the qualities of determination, dignity, fairness, and honor that were exemplified by Jackie Robinson, who broke major league baseball’s color barrier.”(NASA, “First Female Shuttle Commander Eileen Collins Receives Jackie Robinson Medal,” news release 99- 125, 27 October 1999.)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robot’s components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASA’s ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiment’s success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts’ hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine “housekeeping chores,” such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions,” news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, “Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails,” news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Hubble Trouble,” 15 November 1999.)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing “development of crucial parts of the ISS,” such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team “responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory.” She had also served as “lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring” before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, “Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive,” Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts captured the HST using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Discovery had to alter its approach to the space telescope, because the telescope’s failed gyroscopes had “left the telescope a little shaky,” but Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and his crew had prepared for such a scenario. A fully operational HST would have had its aft pointed at the center of Earth; Brown would have carried out a straightforward approach, rising up from below until the robotic arm simply locked on. Without its gyroscopes functioning, the HST slowly rotated at one revolution per hour. Therefore, controllers activated backup gyroscopes to eliminate the rotation as much as possible, permitting Brown to fly around the HST and properly position the Shuttle’s robotic arm. As both spacecraft traveled around the Earth at 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour with Brown at the controls, Discovery moved closer to the HST until French astronaut Jean-François Clervoy had removed the 43-foot (13-meter), 25,000-pound (11,300-kilogram) telescope from orbit and anchored it in the Shuttle cargo bay.(Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Capture Hubble Telescope for Repairs,” Washington Times, 22 December 1999; William Harwood, “Discovery Catches Up with Hubble for a Service Call in Space,” Washington Post, 22 December 1999.)
After a search of nearly two weeks, a team of salvagers funded by the Discovery Channel located the Liberty Bell 7, the Mercury space capsule flown by astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, which had been lost at sea on 21 July 1961. Grissom had survived the splashdown and had been rescued from the Atlantic Ocean. He had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo I launchpad fire that he had done nothing that could have caused the hatch to blow out following the splashdown. The cause of the accident remained a mystery and “forever marred” Grissom’s otherwise successful 15-minute suborbital flight, the nation’s second piloted spaceflight. The salvagers’ remotely operated submersible had located and recorded video of the capsule about 300 miles (480 kilometers) southeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the surface of the ocean. Expedition leader Curt Newport said the video showed that the capsule was in “amazingly good condition.” It was “still shiny in spots,” the window and parachute liner were intact, its periscope was extended, and the words “United States” and “Liberty Bell” were “plainly visible.” Newport explained the difficulty of locating the capsule, comparing the attempt to find it to searching for the Titanic⎯the Liberty Bell’s capsule, smaller than one of the Titanic’s boilers, was hidden in water 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) deeper than the doomed ocean liner. Although the submersible located two cameras and a tape recorder with the capsule, which might possibly help to explain why the hatch blew open prematurely, it was doubtful that the film from those items would be salvageable after 38 years underwater. Although the discovery of the hatch itself would more likely provide an answer, Newport estimated that the hatch could be a mile from the capsule. The capsule remained in the ocean, for recovery at a later unspecified date.(Washington Times, “Salvagers Able To Locate Grissom’s Space Capsule,” 3 May 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Sunken Spacecraft,” 3 May 1999.)
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbia’s launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety “stand down.” NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted “full responsibility for wiring damage” found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch team’s skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, “Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, “NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panel’s Attention,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Swiss astronaut Claude Nicollier installed a new central computer on HST, 20 times faster than the telescope’s previous one, and a refurbished, 550-pound (250-kilogram), fine guidance sensor. At 8 hours and 10 minutes, the pair’s spacewalk was the third longest in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-103,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts- 103.html (accessed 25 March 2008).)
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the “spacecraft ground and flight control at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland].” In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASA’s four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a “long-overdue tune-up.” The orbiter’s overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbia’s fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tuneup,” 25 September 1999.)
The National Research Council (NRC) published a NASA-funded study, which found that NASA needed more safeguards to protect astronauts from potentially cancer-causing radiation during spacewalks they would make while building the International Space Station (ISS). The study recommended that NASA change flight rules, improve space-weather forecasting, and install a radiation-monitoring device outside the ISS. The NRC recommended the extra precautions because the station’s assembly schedule, consisting of more than three dozen flights and 1,500 hours of spacewalks over four years, would coincide with the most active part of the 11-year solar cycle. Moreover, the report estimated a nearly 100 percent chance that at least two assembly missions would overlap with a serious solar storm and a 50 percent chance that five flights would overlap with such a storm. Additionally, the NRC predicted that a change in the station’s planned orbit, which the Russian Space Agency had requested to accommodate Russian launches to help build and resupply the station, would increase the level of radiation exposure. George L. Siscoe, a Boston University physics professor and chairperson of the study, remarked that, although the radiation levels were not life threatening, they exceeded the 30-day and 60-day limits set to protect the skin and eyes. To safeguard crew from exposure to the increased risk of developing cancer later in life, countries participating in the ISS program would have to pay careful attention to flight schedules and crew rotation. Furthermore, the amount of radiation exposure sustained during ISS missions might affect an astronaut’s chances of assignment to additional spacewalks and their selection for future missions.(Michael Cabbage for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Study Urges NASA To Increase Radiation Safeguards,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1999.)
Astronauts Steven L. Smith and John M. Grunsfeld completed the HST servicing mission, replacing a nonfunctioning radio transmitter and an outdated tape recorder. The spacewalk again exceeded 8 hours and, for the third time, ran behind schedule. As the pair prepared to begin their spacewalk, Grunsfeld encountered a mechanical problem with his suit and had to exchange it before exiting Discovery’s airlock. Grunsfeld also faced the most difficult task, replacing the transmitter, which was not easy to service in space. The job required him to disconnect and reconnect a series of thin coaxial cables while wearing bulky pressurized gloves. NASA had designed a special tool for the job, but even so, the task required more than an hour, and Grunsfeld needed to stop to rest his hands. The eight-day repair flight had accomplished all of the mission’s major objectives, although NASA cancelled a fourth spacewalk, preventing the astronauts from installing all six steel sunshades that protect HST from solar damage.(Michael Cabbage, “Good Job: Hubble Looks Fit as Fiddle at the End of a Happy Day in Space, the Astronauts Sent Holiday Greetings to Earth,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 25 December 1999; Reuters, “Astronauts Wrap Up Work on Hubble: Christmas Eve Mission Replaces Bad Transmitter,” Washington Times, 25 December 1999; Associated Press, “Repairs Done, Shuttle Crew Makes Plans for Landing,” New York Times, 27 December 1999.)
NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, “Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit,” news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, “Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission,” 9 February 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to “John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field.” George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewis’s death in 1948, NACA had named the facility “Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory” to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to “Lewis Research Center” in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to “two of Ohio’s famous names⎯one an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.”(NASA, “NASA Announces Field Center Name Change,” news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
