The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASA’s special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Voss’s mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the class’s trip to NASA to watch Endeavour’s launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.”(Billy Cox, “Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
Sally K. Ride, the first female astronaut from the United States to travel into space, resigned her position as President of Space.com to concentrate on her education career. She had worked with Space.com founder Lou Dobbs, former host of CNN’s Moneyline, since the company’s start-up in June 1999 and had been the company’s president for the past year. Ride would continue her leave of absence from the University of California at San Diego where she is a physics professor throughout the remainder of the fall academic term.(Bloomberg News, “Ride Leaves Space.com Top Post⎯For 1st U.S. Female Astronaut in Space, It’s Back to Education,” 27 September 2000.)
Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASA’s exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commission’s report and Collins’s response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, “NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America,” news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
Engineers completed a weeklong series of tests on the U.S.-built Destiny laboratory, planned to launch to the ISS in 2001, ensuring that the module had no leaks and would provide a safe, vacuum-sealed environment in which the ISS astronauts could conduct research. NASA and the Boeing Company had worked together to test the 32,000-pound (14,500-kilogram) research laboratory. Placing Destiny in a pressurized chamber, engineers had monitored gas levels inside the module over the course of the week. Tip Talone, Director of the ISS Payload Process at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), characterized the results as “a large step in meeting the lab’s ‘Destiny’,” stating that the laboratory had “exceeded expectations.”(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space State Laboratory Exceeds Expectations in Vacuum Chamber Test,” 7 July 2000.)
By conserving fuel throughout their mission, the astronauts aboard Shuttle Endeavour were able to prolong their time in space by one extra day, allowing the crew to map the Earth’s terrain, covering several million square miles more than they had originally estimated possible. The extra 9 hours and 10 minutes of mapping allowed the radar flown from Endeavour to survey Australia in detail, making up for time lost when a Shuttle thruster had failed.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Squeezes in Extra Mapping Day,” 21 February 2000.)
Members of the astronaut crew who had flown aboard NASA’s historic 100th Space Shuttle flight, Mission STS-92, visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility to present Silver Snoopy awards, “the highest accolade that the astronauts corps gives to people who build flight hardware,” to the Lockheed Martin employees who had built the Shuttle’s super-lightweight tank and liquid-oxygen tank. NASA had named the Silver Snoopy award after the Peanuts character, the dog that imagined he was a fighter pilot.(New Orleans Time-Picayune, “Astronauts Thank Lockheed Workers: Company Makes Shuttle Components,” 17 December 2000.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off in Mission STS-99, planning to use new radar technology to map Earth’s terrain. Crew included astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Dominic L. P. Gorie, Janet L. Kavandi, Janice E. Voss, Mamoru Mohri, and Gerhard P. J. Thiele. The astronauts planned to extend the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission antenna from Endeavour’s cargo bay. The 197- foot (60-meter) antenna would gather mapping data necessary to create the most comprehensive map of Earth ever drawn. NASA collaborated with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency in planning the mission and hoped to cover more than 70 percent of Earth’s surface during the 11-day mission.(Associated Press, “Endeavour on Mission To Get Best Map of Earth,” 12 February 2000.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko installed three new batteries in the Russian service module Zvezda, which had launched with only five of its eight batteries to reduce its launch weight. Meanwhile, astronaut Daniel C. Burbank and cosmonaut Boris V. Morukov installed one of six batteries on the Russian-built control module Zarya. Burbank and Morukov needed a hammer and chisel to remove four small nut plates, which were obstructing a pair of bolts; the astronauts needed to loosen the bolts so that they could replace a voltage converter.(NASA, “STS-106”; C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Astronauts Installing Fresh Batteries in Space Station,” 13 September 2000.)
NASA released the first HST images taken after the Shuttle’s Mission STS-103, in which the crew of Discovery realigned and refurbished the telescope. The stunning clarity of the new images suggested that the mission specialists had succeeded in their sensitive work. According to Steven Beckwith, Director of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the work returned HST to “a condition that was better than it was even before the fourth gyroscope failed.” Astronomers had focused on targets more than 5,000 light-years away to test the upgraded telescope. During the servicing mission, astronauts had also installed a Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 and a Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, new instruments that would contribute to the already formidable strength of the HST.(NASA, “Hubble Reopens Eye on the Universe,” news release 00-16, 24 January 2000.)
Russian police announced that cosmonaut German S. Titov, the Soviet Union’s second man in space and the first person to spend more than one day in orbit, had been found dead at home at the age of 65. Although the police had not reported an official cause of death, the media speculated that the cause was either carbon monoxide poisoning or a heart attack. Titov had spent 25 hours and 18 minutes aboard the tiny Soviet Vostok-2 spacecraft on 6 and 7 August 1961. Fellow Soviet Yuri Gagarin had made the first flight on Vostok-1 on 12 April, flying for less than 2 hours, and U.S. astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. had followed Gagarin’s mission with a 15-minute, suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. Titov worked on the Buran program during the 1980s, attempting to create a Russian space shuttle, but the Soviet Union abandoned the project after the Russian shuttle had made one unpiloted flight. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Titov had entered politics, representing the Communist Party on the defense committee of the State Duma lower house.(Reuters, “Russia’s 2nd Cosmonaut, German Titov, Dies in Sauna,” 21 September 2000. 285)
NASA released the research results of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic 1998 voyage aboard Shuttle Discovery. The report detailed the 88 experiments conducted on Mission STS-95, the most of any Shuttle mission. NASA responded to some critics, who called the mission a publicity-driven flight with little scientific value, disclosing that Glenn himself had participated in 10 experiments during the mission. After becoming the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962, Glenn had returned to space 36 years later to achieve another record⎯the oldest man to fly in space.(Associated Press, “Scientific Results of Glenn’s Mission Released by NASA,” 28 January 2000.)
Astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega were able to tighten the slack solar panel on the ISS within minutes, using only a hook to place two tension cables back on their pulleys. Although the wing functioned well even though it was slack, if the astronauts had not adjusted its tension, the solar cells might have torn or the support rods might have bent or broken. After repairing the wing, the two astronauts installed a camera cable and a static-electricity monitor on the outside of the ISS. The monitor would help NASA learn how to protect spacewalking astronauts from electrical shocks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Breeze Through Wing Repair: ‘All Finished’,” 7 December 2000.)
The Carrier Test Pilot Hall of Honor, aboard the USS Yorktown, inducted U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr., honoring him for his distinguished aviation career before becoming an astronaut. Before Glenn became the first man to orbit Earth, he had already achieved a long record of flight exploits. Glenn’s fellow test pilot Neil A. Armstrong, the first astronaut to walk on the Moon, attended the induction. Upon receiving the award, Glenn expressed his gratitude at joining the distinguished ranks of the Hall of Honor and spoke of his lifetime of flight experiences.
An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezda’s living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crew’s radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, “Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
The National Aviation Hall of Fame inducted four new members at a black-tie dinner and formal enshrinement ceremony at the Dayton Convention Center in Dayton, Ohio. Apollo astronaut Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. joined fellow Apollo 11 astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in the Hall of Fame. Aviators previously inducted to the Hall of Fame included Eugene A. Cernan, the last Apollo astronaut to walk on the Moon; Laurence C. “Bill” Craigie, the first U.S. military aviator to fly a jet aircraft; and Thomas B. McGuire Jr., the second-leading fighter ace in U.S. Air Force history. The National Aviation Hall of Fame’s Class of 2000 joined 166 award-winning aviators already chosen for the honor.(Dayton Daily News (OH), “Astronaut Meets a Fan; Aviation Hall of Fame Enshrines 4 More,” 16 July 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery arrived at the ISS. Shuttle Commander Brian Duffy successfully executed the rendezvous without the Shuttle’s radar, relying on a star-tracking system and on handheld lasers operated by his crew. The Ku-band antenna had failed after launch, disrupting the radar and television link. The Shuttle docking was NASA’s first conducted without radar.(Associated Press, “Bad Antenna Blacks Out Shuttle’s Television,” Charleston Gazette (SC), 13 October 2000; New York Times, “Astronauts Rendezvous with Space Station,” 14 October 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Discovery Docks Safely with Space Station,” 14 October 2000.)
Three astronauts attached a new docking port to the ISS, with two of the crew spacewalking and one operating Discovery’s robotic arm from inside the Shuttle. Astronauts Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff and Michael Lopez-Alegria, assigned to work outside the ISS, had difficulty loosening the latches securing the docking port inside Discovery’s cargo bay. However, once they had freed it, Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata lifted the 2,700-pound (1,200-kilogram) port using the Shuttle’s robotic arm and positioned it on the space station. When the port was within 1 foot (0.3 meters) of its position, the astronauts outside gave Wakata “invaluable” instructions, necessary because the crew was working without the assistance of the camera at the end of the robotic arm. The camera had been out of commission since the short circuit on 14 October.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Docking Port Nudged Carefully into Place,” Sun-Sentinel (Ft. Lauderdale, FL), 17 October 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts attempted to deploy the new solar array at the ISS, but only one of the two panels unfurled as planned. Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega conducted a spacewalk to assist in attaching a 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) power assembly, while Marc Garneau maneuvered the Shuttle’s robotic arm from inside Endeavour. The spacewalkers were unable to open the latches on the storage boxes containing the folded solar panels, delaying their attempts to unfurl the array. They began to unfurl the first panel 1 hour behind schedule, but although it reached its full length in 14 minutes, the panel did not appear to have the correct tension. NASA officials decided to delay expanding the second panel for a full day, to give them time to determine the cause of the inadequate tension of the first panel. The ISS crew did not witness the deployment of the solar array, because the Shuttle crew carried out their work during the ISS crew’s sleep period.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Gets Its Wings, but Only One Is Deployed,” New York Times, 4 December 2000.)
SkyCorp signed a commercial Space Act agreement with NASA providing that SkyCorp deploy into orbit, either from the Space Shuttle or from the ISS, a satellite containing an Internet server. NASA and SkyCorp planned to test the idea as a “proof of concept” for a Low Earth Orbit 544 satellite constellation, offering Internet access on a global scale. SkyCorp chose to launch an Apache server on a small satellite containing an Apple 500 MHz Power Mac G4. The agreement with NASA outlined SkyCorp’s novel idea of launching a partially assembled satellite aboard a Space Shuttle. Astronauts would assemble the craft in space before tossing it from a Shuttle or ISS airlock into an independent orbit. SkyCorp named its concept Gossamer. Typically, engineers assemble a satellite fully on Earth, and it must withstand the stress of launch. A satellite built according to the Gossamer concept would only need to retain structural integrity in microgravity, greatly simplifying guidance, navigation, and control requirements.(SkyCorp, “SkyCorp Announces Space Act Agreement with NASA To Fly First Internet Webserver in Space,” news release, 20 October 2000; Keith Cowing, “SkyCorp Signs Agreement with NASA To Fly the First Webserver in Space⎯and It Will Be a Mac G4,” SpaceRef.com, 23 October 2000.)
Emergency rescue personnel from Canada, Russia, and the United States participated in training exercises near St. Petersburg in Russia, where they practiced maneuvers for rescuing astronauts returning to Earth from the ISS. The rescuers practiced searching in water and on land for a module carrying three astronauts, as well as practicing first-aid techniques.(Associated Press, “Russian, U.S. Rescuers Practice Space Rescue,” 16 August 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. successfully unfurled the second panel of the solar array (colloquially referred to as a solar wing) that the crew had deployed on the ISS on 3 December. Jett used computer commands to unfold the panel a few feet at a time, a process that took nearly 2 hours. No problems occurred until the crew had extended the panel almost fully, when it became clear that a panel on each blanket was stuck to a neighboring section. Endeavour’s crew turned the Shuttle to allow the Sun to warm the blankets and fired thrusters to shake the array, snapping the wing into place. The panel began generating electricity before it reached its full 115 feet (35 meters). To NASA’s relief, the panel was stretched tight. Once the crew had completed the process, Commander Jett radioed to Mission Control that they had two tensioned blankets, and Mission Control replied, “Great work, gentlemen. We think you’ve earned your solar wings.”(Associated Press, “Astronaut Manages To Spread Station’s 2nd Wing,” USA Today, 5 April 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Finnish Adding Solar Wing to Station,” New York Times, 5 December 2000.)
In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellor’s Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that “in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years,” U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASA’s next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, “Red Planet Is Next Frontier,” 2 May 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega worked outside the ISS to connect power lines, correcting an electrical shortage that had restricted the station’s first crew to two of three habitable modules. The two astronauts also inspected the first solar panel that they had unfurled, to determine whether the crew could correct its tension. Wearing a small TV camera on his helmet, Noriega beamed down to Mission Control images of the loose tension cables on the array’s right wing. The cables had slipped off their pulleys during the solar panel’s deployment on 3 December. Tanner remarked that an astronaut could place one tension cable back on its pulley without too much trouble, but that the other cable would require more work. Mission Control instructed the spacewalkers to try to fix the cables on their third and final spacewalk the following day.(Chicago Tribune, “Space Station Gets an Electrical Boost from Solar Wings,” 6 December 2000; Associated Press, “Live from Space, ‘Carlos Cam’,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 6 December 2000.)
Engineers at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) successfully tested a prototype for the “flying lifeboat” that would transport astronauts to and from the ISS. DFRC officials launched a robotic X-38 from under the wing of a B-52 flying at 39,000 feet (12,000 meters). It free fell for more than 40 seconds before deploying a 5,500-square-foot (511-square-meter) parachute, which provided a soft landing for the spacecraft. The test was a significant step in evaluating the technology planned for the crew return vehicle, a low-cost ISS initiative.(Associated Press, “Space Station ‘Lifeboat’ Prototype Successfully Tested,” 30 March 2000.)
Despite unexpected problems, astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery installed a 9-ton (8,200-kilogram or 8.2-tonne) structural truss on the Unity module of the ISS, completing one of the major objectives of the mission. The Z1 truss held four mass gyroscopes and the station’s main Ku-band and S-band communications antennas. In addition, the truss provided a temporary attachment point for a set of solar arrays scheduled to arrive during a December Shuttle mission. The astronauts faced several obstacles during the installation process. A short in the Shuttle’s payload circuitry disabled the computerized camera system needed to orient the truss for attachment, causing a 21⁄2-hour delay. However, the astronauts were able to wire a backup computer into an alternate power source, restoring power to the Space Vision System, which NASA had programmed to “determine the truss’s precise location and orientation with respect to the station by measuring the locations of the targets on its surface as viewed from different payload bay cameras.” The astronauts had to delay their work again when the Space Vision System failed to generate reliable data during certain orbital lighting conditions, requiring astronaut William S. McArthur to recalibrate the system.(William Harwood, “Structural Truss Added to Spine of Space Station: Shuttle Astronauts Overcome Camera System’s Short Circuit,” Washington Post, 16 October 2000.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko conducted a spacewalk outside the ISS, connecting nine power, data, and communications cables between the Russian-built Zvezda and Zarya modules. Lu and Malenchenko also assembled and installed a 6-foot-long (1.8-meter- long) magnetometer boom on the Zvezda module, to serve as a compass showing the relation of the ISS to Earth.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts- 106.html (accessed 30 April 2008); NASA, “STS-106 Extravehicular Activities,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-106/eva/index.html (accessed 2 May 2008).)
In preparation for the December arrival of a pair of solar panels, astronauts Michael Lopez- Alegria and Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff cleaned up the top of the newly installed truss on the ISS. The two men also deployed a tray on the truss, which would hold the connections between the station’s central structure and the Destiny laboratory module built by the United States and scheduled for installation in January. Next, the spacewalkers tested “mini-jetpacks,” known as Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue or SAFER. NASA intended the nitrogen-powered jetpacks for use only in emergencies, such as rescuing an injured or incapacitated spacewalker. With only limited fuel supplies in the jetpacks, each of the astronauts’ moves had to be deliberate; each test maneuver lasted approximately 3 minutes, while the astronaut traveled a distance of about 50 feet (15 meters). The astronauts remained tethered to the Shuttle’s robotic arm throughout the tests.(C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Head Out for Final Day of Spacewalks,” 18 October 2000; Associated Press, “Discovery’s Crew Zips Around Bay on New Jetpacks,” USA Today, 19 October 2000.)
Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASA’s second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatch’s failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissom’s claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Grissom’s Capsule Back at Space Center,” 14 June 2000.)
As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
Laurence Vico released a study on astronauts’ loss of bone density because of time spent in space. Vico and his team of researchers had examined the bone-mineral density of 15 cosmonauts who had spent from one to six months aboard the Mir space station. They had found a “striking” loss of bone density, in some cases as serious as that experienced by paraplegic patients. The team of doctors suggested that physicians should examine astronauts more closely for susceptibility to bone-weakening conditions such as osteoporosis, before they traveled into space, and that postflight recovery periods should be much longer than previous standards dictated. The sample study found that astronauts experienced an average bone-density loss of more than 5 percent, and that the lost bone did not immediately regenerate after postflight recovery periods. Scientists had long been aware of the physical challenges posed by the lack of gravity in the space environment. Therefore, NASA and the space agencies of other countries had carefully dictated diet and exercise programs for astronauts. The study had special relevance, however, because the international space community was continuing work on the ISS and anticipating even longer stays in space.
Astronauts Jeffrey N. Williams and James S. Voss conducted a 6-hour spacewalk to make repairs to the ISS. The pair successfully repaired the station’s construction crane, replaced a failed antenna, and began installing a much larger, Russian-built crane, designed to aid workers in adding the final modules to the ISS. NASA officials highlighted the exercise as a precursor of the maintenance schedule to come: “This spacewalk was a good example of what future spacewalks are going to look like, where we will need to perform maintenance on the space station.” The spacewalk occurred after Atlantis had docked at the space station, but while the hatch doors between the two spacecraft remained shut.(Washington Post, “Spacewalkers Begin Repairs on Orbiting Station; Wobbly Crane Is Secured; Another Awaits Completion,” 22 May 2000; Associated Press, “Outside Repairs Finished, Astronauts Ready To Head Inside Space Station,” 22 May 2000.)
NASA announced that it had renamed the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft, already orbiting asteroid 433 (Eros), after Eugene M. Shoemaker, an expert in the study of asteroid craters and their origins who died in 1997. Shoemaker’s work on Meteor Crater in Arizona, during the 1960s, had set the standard for crater investigation. Shoemaker had worked for NASA teaching astronauts about meteors and craters. He died in the Australian outback while researching asteroid-impact craters.(NASA, “NASA Renames NEAR Spacecraft for Planetary Science Pioneer Gene Shoemaker,” news release 14, March 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
Astronauts Leroy Chiao and William S. McArthur made a spacewalk outside the ISS to link electrical cables to the station’s new truss and to deploy the main antenna. The pair routed six power- and data-cables between the truss and the station, as well as four backup cables. Tests indicated that all connections worked. The astronauts moved one of the truss’s two antennas to a temporary location out of the way of future construction work; mounted the main antenna, a 78- inch-wide (2-meter-wide) dish, to a 12-foot (3.7-meter) boom; and extended the main antenna. According to NASA’s schedule, the ISS crew would turn on the antenna during an April 2001 Shuttle mission.(Michael Cabbage, “Discovery Spacewalk Goes Off Without a Hitch: Crew Members Finished a Six-Hour Task that Included Hooking Up a Truss and an Antenna,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 October 2000.)
