Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:44 a.m. (CDT), marking the end of STS-112. During the mission, Atlantis’s crew had conducted joint operations with the ISS Expedition 5 crew, including the installation of the S1 Truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Astronauts Piers J. Sellers and David A. Wolf had performed three spacewalks to install the truss. In addition, the Shuttle’s crew members had transferred cargo to the ISS and had used the Shuttle’s thruster jets to raise the station’s orbit. The mission’s total duration was 10 days, 19 hours, and 58 minutes.
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 attached a 44-foot (13-meter) truss, containing computers, coolant lines, electrical cables, and other components to the ISS. The 27,000-pound (12,250-kilogram) beam, dubbed Starboard Zero or S0, was the first of nine truss segments that would form a 356-foot (110-meter) exterior spine, supporting new solar arrays, heat radiators, and laboratory modules. The installation, involving the first use of the 58-foot (18-meter), Canadian-built robotic arm designed for the station, required two separate spacewalks, performed by two different pairs of astronauts.(Warren E. Leary, “Major Component of Space Station Is Attached,” New York Times, 12 April 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:50 p.m. Central Standard Time (CST). The Shuttle’s crew members comprised Commander James D. Wetherbee and astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, John Bennett Herrington, Paul S. Lockhart, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Donald R. Pettit. The primary objective of STS-113, also designated as Station Assembly Flight 11A, was to transport the crew of Expedition 6―Bowersox, Budarin, and Pettit―to the ISS and return the crew of Expedition 5 to Earth. Another major objective was to install the Port 1 (P1) Truss segment on the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. The structure would eventually house the ISS’s solar arrays and would carry power, data, and temperature controls for the station’s electronics. In addition, STS113 would transport several experiments to the ISS, returning to Earth with several experiments that the crew of Expedition 5 had conducted.(NASA, “STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 29 October 2008); NASA, “STS-113 Shuttle Press Kit” press kit, 25 October 2002, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-113/SPK_sts-113.pdf (accessed 29 October 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of TRW Inc. to lead the team to build the HST’s successor, a new space-based observatory planned to launch in 2010. NASA planned to call the new satellite the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), in honor of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Under the US$824.8 million contract, TRW and its partner organizations would build an observatory capable of viewing deeper into space than the HST. The telescope’s main mirror would unfold to a diameter of at least 20 feet (6.1 meters), thereby providing six times more light-gathering area than the HST, which had an 8-foot (2.4-meter) primary mirror. The telescope would also have instruments highly sensitive to infrared light, which would help astronomers understand the universe’s creation and evolution. In addition, NASA planned for the new telescope to orbit 940,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth, within the second Lagrange point or L2, where a spacecraft maintains a balance between the gravity of the Sun and of Earth. Although the L2 orbit would be too far from Earth to allow astronauts to service the observatory, it would enable the observatory to cool to very low temperatures without the use of complex refrigeration equipment.(NASA, “NASA Announces Contract for Next-Generation Space Telescope Named After Space Pioneer,” news release 02-171, 10 September 2002.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TMA-1 from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 8:11 a.m., local time10:11 p.m. (EST). The launch was officially designated ISS Mission 5S. Soyuz TMA-1 was the first of a newly modified version of the Soyuz spacecraft, offering improved safety features and accommodation for crew members of a larger range of sizes. In addition, Soyuz TMA-1 was an automatic passenger craft intended to replace Soyuz TM- 34 as the ISS’s escape craft. The Russian Space Agency had been sending Soyuz vehicles to the ISS every six months as CRVs for scientists residing on the ISS. Soyuz TMA-1’s crew consisted of Commander Sergei V. Zalyotin and two crew members, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov and Belgian ESA astronaut Frank De Winne. The mission’s primary purpose was to provide a CRV for the ISS; however, Soyuz TMA-1’s crew also planned to conduct scientific experiments with the ISS Expedition 5 members. ISS crew would conduct most of these experiments under a commercial contract between Russia and ESA.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; NASA Mission Control Center, “Report #48,” http://quest.nasa.gov/ news/space/2002/10-29a.txt (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Crew members of STS-113 completed the installation of the P1 Truss segment, attaching it to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. The installation entailed the use of the Shuttle’s and the ISS’s robotic arms, as well as three spacewalks, which astronauts John Bennett Herrington and Michael Lopez-Alegria performed. STS-113’s crew attached the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long), 14-ton (12,700-kilogram or 12.7-tonne) P1 Truss to the port side of the Starboard Zero (S0) Truss, the centerpiece of the Integrated Truss Structure. The P1 was the third segment of planned ISS equipment that would eventually include 11 contiguous truss structures. This particular truss segment contained the ISS’s Active Thermal Control System, scheduled for activation in 2003; one of two Ultra High Frequency Communications systems on the ISS; and a Thermal Radiator Rotary Joint intended to provide mechanical and electrical energy to rotate the ISS’s heat- rejecting radiators.(NASA, “STS-113 Overview,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-113/mm-sts-113.pdf (accessed 29 October 2008); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA announced the backup crew members for ISS Expedition 10, including Jeffrey N. Williams, acting as backup for the ISS station commander, Russian cosmonaut Konstantin M. Kozeev, and U.S. astronaut Sunita L. Williams. The primary crew members for Expedition 10 were ISS Commander Leroy Chiao, U.S. astronaut John L. Phillips, and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov.(NASA, “Space Station Expedition Backup Crew Named,” news release 02-258, 23 December 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that Peggy A. Whitson would be NASA’s first ISS Science Officer. In the future, NASA planned to assign one of its astronauts to the post for each ISS expedition crew. The objective of the assignment was to increase the ISS’s emphasis on research. According to NASA, the ISS Science Officer would focus initially on U.S. research conducted on the ISS. As the station’s research capabilities expanded in the future, NASA would discuss with the ISS’s international partners the possibility of expanding the ISS Science Officer’s role. NASA’s ISS Science Officer would be responsible for working with the U.S. research community on the requirements and objectives of ISS experiments, acting as the point- of-contact between ISS crew and NASA-sponsored principal investigators, payload developers, and other ISS stakeholders. As a crew member of Expedition 5 in June 2002, Whitson, who had a PhD in biochemistry, would become the first resident scientist on the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names Whitson First NASA ISS Science Officer,” news release 02-175, 16 September 2002.)
Thomas J. Kelly, designated by NASA as father of the lunar module, died at the age of 72 in Cutchogue, New York. Kelly had led a team of engineers at Grumman Aircraft Corporation in designing and building the Lunar Excursion Module known as the Eagle. Apollo 11 astronauts had used the Eagle to land on the Moon and to return to the orbiting command module for the trip back to Earth. In 1972 NASA had awarded Kelly with its Distinguished Public Service Medal for his work on the Apollo program. Kelly’s wife, six children, and 10 grandchildren survived him.(Warren E. Leary, “T. J. Kelly, 72, Dies; Father of Lunar Module,” New York Times, 27 March 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of crew members for three ISS missions scheduled for 2003 and 2004. The crew of STS-118 would include Mission Commander Scott J. Kelly and crew members Charles O. Hobaugh, Barbara R. Morgan, Lisa M. Nowak, Scott E. Parazynski, and Dafydd Rhys Williams. Morgan, who had trained as Christa McAuliffe’s backup for the ill-fated Challenger Shuttle, would be the first teacher in space under NASA’s new Educator Astronaut Program. NASA hoped that the program would inspire students to become space explorers. The second mission, STS-119, would comprise Commander Steven W. Lindsey and U.S. astronauts Michael L. Gernhardt, Mark E. Kelly, and Carlos I. Noriega. STS-119 would also include ISS Expedition 9’s Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. Crew for STS-120 would be Commander James D. Halsell and astronauts Michael J. Foremen, Wendy B. Lawrence, Alan G. Poindexter, Piers J. Sellers, and Stephanie D. Wilson.(NASA, “Astronauts Named for Future Space Station Missions,” news release 02-249, 12 December 2002; NASA, “NASA’s Educator Astronaut Assigned First Flight,” news release 02-250, 12 December 2002; William Harwood, “Teacher Ready To Fulfill Space Legacy,” Washington Post, 13 December 2002.)
The General Services Administration (GSA) presented the Federal Aviation Award to the Aircraft Operations Division (AOD) of NASA’s JSC. The AOD, which provided astronauts with spaceflight training, had an exemplary safety record. In addition, GSA gave Chief of AOD Robert J. Naughton an Honorable Mention for the Federal Aviation Professional Award. GSA’s awards recognized effectiveness, efficiency, and safety in federal aviation operations, in the hope that honoring outstanding federal aviation programs and professionals would promote excellence in government aviation.(NASA JSC, “JSC’s Aircraft Operations Division Wins Top Federal Aviation Award,” news release J02-93, 19 September 2002.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-34 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:27 a.m. Greenwich Mean Time (GMT)1:27 a.m. (EST). The mission, designated Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight, carried three crew membersCommander Yuri P. Gidzenko of Russia, Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, and South African businessman Mark Shuttleworth. The mission’s main purpose was to deliver a new Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS for use as an emergency lifeboat for the ISS’s permanent three-member crew. In addition, major media noted that Shuttleworth had paid the Russian Space Agency a fee of approximately US$20 million to fly on Soyuz to the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp4/taxi4/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); Houston Chronicle, “Space Tourist No. 2,” 25 April 2002.)
NASA announced the assignment of three crew members to begin training for the ninth expedition to the ISS. The three were Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. NASA assigned American astronaut Daniel M. Tani to serve as backup for his fellow compatriot Fincke and selected cosmonauts Alexander F. Poleschuk and Roman Y. Romanenko to serve as backups for fellow Russians Kononenko and Padalka.(NASA, “Astronauts Assigned for Space Station Expedition Training,” news release 02-55, 18 March 2002.)
NASA released the first four images taken by the HST’s newly installed Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS). During Mission STS-109 in March 2002, astronauts had installed the ACS, capable of providing images with double the area and resolution of those provided by the Wide Field Planetary Camera 2, which the ACS had replaced. The ACS had captured images of a turbulent galaxy, which scientists called Tadpole because of its long tail of stars; of two colliding spiral galaxies known as the Mice; of the Cone Nebula, which looks like a red volcano; and of the M17 Swan Nebula, a richly colored, cloudy-looking nebula containing newly forming planetary systems.(NASA, “Hubble’s New Camera Delivers Breathtaking Views of the Universe,” news release 02-74, 30 April 2002; Warren E. Leary, “Telescope Opens Window on Dawn of the Universe,” New York Times, 1 May 2002.)
Two astronauts from Space Shuttle Endeavour undertook an extravehicular activity (EVA) to repair the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2. American astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz and French astronaut Philippe Perrin replaced one of seven joints on the US$600 million, Canadian- built robotic arm, which was critical to the continued construction of the ISS. To repair Canadarm2, the astronauts first removed its 450-pound (205-kilogram), hand-like, latching-end effector (LEE); loosened six bolts connecting the problematic “wrist roll” joint to the arm; and disconnected power, data, and video lines. They then installed the replacement joint, tightened the bolts to secure the new joint to the arm, restored the power and other lines, and reaffixed the LEE. Subsequent tests of the Canadarm2 confirmed the success of the repairs. The EVA, lasting 7 hours and 17 minutes, was the third for Mission STS-111.(William Harwood, “Spacewalkers Continue Space Station Repairs; Joint on Robotic Arm Is Replaced,” Washington Post, 14 June 2002; NASA JSC, “STS-111, Mission Control Center Status Report no. 18,” 13 June 2002, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts111/STS-111-18.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:46 p.m. (CDT). The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Jeffrey S. Ashby, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and crew members Sandra H. Magnus, Piers J. Sellers, David A. Wolf, and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. STS-112’s major objective was to deliver and install the Starboard One (S1) Truss, the second segment of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Astronauts Sellers and Wolf planned to make three spacewalks during the installation missiondesignated ISS Assembly Mission 9Ato install and activate the truss. Other mission objectives included transferring experiments and payloads from Atlantis to the ISS, deploying the station’s second S-Band communications system, and installing external camera systems.(NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008); NASA, “STS-112 Overview,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/mm-sts-112.pdf (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA awarded SLI contracts to Boeing and Lockheed Martin for flight-demonstrator technologies. The flight-demonstrator contracts would support development of the future OSP, which would serve as both the transport vehicle and the escape vehicle for astronauts assigned to the ISS. NASA awarded a contract valued at US$301 million (including options through 2006) to Boeing’s Phantom Works Division, to continue developing its X-37 test vehicle. The purpose of the X-37 was to test technologies that, eventually, NASA could use in the OSP. NASA awarded another contract worth US$53 million (including options through 2006) to Lockheed Martin, to develop a reusable, launchpad-abort demonstrator. The demonstrator, an escape module capable of recognizing problems and evacuating crew within seconds, would assist crews to escape emergencies occurring on the launchpad.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contracts for Flight Demonstrators,” news release c02-gg, 20 November 2002; Chris Kidler, “NASA Awards X-37 Contracts,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 November 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that, after international partners had completed certain portions of the ISS, former schoolteacher Barbara R. Morgan would fly on a Space Shuttle mission to the station. NASA had selected Morgan as a mission specialist in the astronaut class of 1998. She had subsequently worked in ISS Mission Control, relaying instructions between ISS Mission Control and the crew of Expedition 4 aboard the ISS. Morgan had previously served as a backup candidate for the Teacher in Space Program, training with Christa McAuliffe and the STS-51L crew of Space Shuttle Challenger. At the time of O’Keefe’s announcement, Morgan was part of a new Educator Astronaut Program administered by NASA and the Department of Education, designed to attract students to engineering, math, and science.(NASA, “Press Briefing Scheduled with NASA Administrator and Astronaut Barbara Morgan,” news release N02-28, 15 April 2002; William Harwood, “McAuliffe’s Backup Will Go to Space in 2004,” Washington Post, 13 April 2002.)
ESA announced that an international group of astronauts would attend a training session at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany, to prepare for missions to the ISS. The specific objective of the training was to prepare the astronauts for the tasks they would need to accomplish when a Japanese experiment module and ESA’s Columbus laboratory docked with the ISS. Upon completing the training, the international ISS partners planned to assign the astronauts to specific, long-duration ISS missions. The training session, scheduled to last from 26 August to 6 September, would include ESA astronauts Pedro Duque, Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, and Thomas Reiter; Japan’s NASDA astronauts Takao Doi, Satoshi Furukawa, Aikihiko Hoshide, and Koichi Wakata; and NASA astronauts Nicole Passonno Stott and Stephanie D. Wilson.(ESA, “Ten Astronauts Train in Europe for the International Space Station,” ESA news release 56-2002, 19 August 2002.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Frederick D. Gregory as NASA’s Deputy Administrator, making Gregory the first African American to serve as NASA’s second-in-command. Before becoming Deputy Administrator, Gregory had served as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Flight from December 2001 to August 2002 and as Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance from June 1992 to December 2001. In addition, Gregory had been an astronaut on three Shuttle missions and had served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years.(Kelly Young, “Senate Names New NASA Official,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 August 2002; NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory,” http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/gregory_bio.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe selected astronaut Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist. In this post, Lucid became responsible for ensuring that NASA’s programs were of scientific merit. At the time of the selection, Lucid was a spacecraft communicator supporting the Space Shuttle and ISS missions. A veteran of five Space Shuttle flights, Lucid had been one of the first six women selected to become an astronaut and the only woman awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor. Lucid replaced Kathie L. Olsen, who had occupied the position since May 1999. Olsen had accepted an appointment as the Associate Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut, Dr. Shannon Lucid, Selected as Chief Scientist,” news release 02-27, 12 February 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-111 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 5:22 p.m. (EDT). NASA had originally scheduled the mission to lift off on 30 May but had delayed the launch because of mechanical and weather concerns. The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell and astronauts Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, Valery G. Korzun, Paul S. Lockhart, Philippe Perrin, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson. Korzun, Treschev, and Whitson were also members of ISS Expedition 5, which was to remain at the ISS when Endeavour returned to Earth. STS-111 had several objectives. The Shuttle was transporting to the ISS the Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM), which contained racks for experiments, stowage, and resupply. The crew would also install a component called the Mobile Base System (MBS) to service the ISS’s robotic arm. Both the MPLM and the MBS were part of the payload of the mission, also designated ISS Utilization Flight 2. A further objective of the mission was to transport the crew of Expedition 5 to the ISS and to return the members of Expedition 4 to Earth.(NASA, “STS-111 (110),” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-111/mission-sts-111.html (accessed 17 August 2008); NASA, “STS-111: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-111/ (accessed 17 August 2008).)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 and the ISS installed the first Starboard truss segment, the S1 Truss, connecting it with the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Installation of the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long) S1 Truss was the mission’s main objective. Astronauts David A. Wolf and Piers J. Sellers accomplished the task during three spacewalks, with astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Sandra H. Magnus operating the ISS’s robotic arm to attach the S1 to the central truss segment, the S0 Truss. The astronauts also installed the Crew and Equipment Translation Aid, a cart that runs on rails along the top of the truss.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Install Girder on Space Station,” New York Times, 11 October 2002; NASA, “ISS Assembly Mission 9A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/structure/ iss_assembly_9a.html (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA named 16 crew members for two Space Shuttle missions to the ISS, scheduled for 2003. Mission STS-115 would carry Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. and crew members Daniel C. Burbank, Christopher J. Ferguson, Steven G. MacLean, Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, and Joseph R. Tanner. Mission STS-116 would carry Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt and the crew―American astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and William A. Oefelein, and Swedish ESA astronaut Christer Fuglesang. NASA planned for STS-115 to deliver a second port truss segment to the ISS. Later, crew would attach the second port truss segment to a third port truss, which STS-116 would deliver. STS-116 would also involve rotation of the crew: the Shuttle would carry ISS Expedition 8 Commander C. Michael Foale, astronaut William S. McArthur, and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev to the ISS, for a long-term stay, and would return ISS Expedition 7 Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and crew members Edward T. Lu and Sergei I. Moschenko to Earth.(NASA, “Astronauts Named to Key Space Station Missions,” news release 02-35, 26 February 2002.)
NASA announced that Donald R. Pettit, a backup member of the crew of the Expedition 6 Mission to the ISS, would replace Donald A. Thomas on the mission. NASA had reassigned Thomas, a veteran of four Space Shuttle flights, because of medical issues affecting his qualification for long-duration spaceflight. Pettit, a chemical engineer who had joined the astronaut corps in 1996, had previously served as a staff scientist at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico.(NASA, “Backup Crew Member Assigned to Expedition Six,” news release 02-139, 26 July 2002.)
