Scientists studying data from NASA’s Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) satellite and ESA’s four-satellite Cluster constellation published a study in the journal Nature reporting that solar wind creates large cracks in Earth’s magnetic field, allowing the wind to penetrate the magnetic field and causing geomagnetic storms. The leader of the study, Harald U. Frey of the University of California at Berkeley, stated that the data showed that the cracks do not open and close sporadically, as scientists had previously thought, but rather, that the cracks can remain open for several hours. Using this information, scientists would be able to create a better model of the affect of space weather on Earth, helping them to predict geomagnetic storms, which disrupt power, interfere with satellites, and endanger astronauts. IMAGE had monitored a spot in Earth’s upper atmosphere, revealing an area of heavy particles (ions) striking the ionosphere above the Arctic region, thereby creating an aurora with enough energy to power 75,000 homes. Unlike the auroras known as the northern and southern lights, this aurora was not visible to the human eye. Far above the IMAGE satellite, the Cluster constellation had flown through the opening created by the solar wind’s interaction with Earth’s protective magnetic field. The scientists estimated that the size of the crack was twice that of Earth. The crack occurred at the edge of the magnetic field, 38,000 miles (61,155 kilometers) above the planet.(H. U. Frey et al., “Continuous Magnetic Reconnection at Earth’s Magnetopause,” Nature 426, no. 6966 (4 December 2003): 533–537; Maggie Fox for Reuters, “Cracks Let Solar Wind Disrupt Earth’s Atmosphere,” 4 December 2003; Chris Kridler, “Protective Layer’s Cracks Make Earth Vulnerable,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 December 2003.)
NASA named astronaut and veteran Shuttle Commander James D. Halsell Jr. to lead its Return to Flight Team, which would prepare for the first Shuttle launch since the loss of Columbia, to occur as early as September 2003. Halsell had logged more than 1,250 hours in space on five Shuttle missions and, most recently, had served as Manager of Shuttle Launch Integration at NASA’s KSC. Before the Columbia disaster, NASA had assigned Halsell to STS-118, a mission to the ISS scheduled for later in 2003.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Names Shuttle Leader,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 April 2003.)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
NASA filed a request for proposal with Federal Business Opportunities, inviting companies to define their schedules for Orbital Space Plane (OSP) design completion, development, testing, and delivery. NASA requested the completion of a crew-rescue vehicle by 2008 and a crew- transfer vehicle by 2012, despite congressional requests that NASA slow down its work on the OSP project. The Boeing Company and a Lockheed Martin–Northrop Grumman team had both been developing concepts for the OSP, a vehicle anticipated as the next space vehicle to ferry astronaut crews to and from the ISS. NASA had hoped to award the prime contract in August 2004 at the earliest. On 29 October, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, responsible for authorizing NASA programs, had restated its position that NASA should halt work on the OSP Program until the White House, Congress, and NASA had agreed on the direction the U.S. human spaceflight program would take after completion of the ISS. Congressional leaders had also questioned NASA’s funding profile for the program.(Jason Bates, “NASA Releases Request for Orbital Space Plane Plans Despite Congressional Concern About the Program,” Space News, 4 November 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the members of the Space Shuttle Mishap Interagency Investigation Board, also known as the Gehman Board. To chair the Board, NASA had appointed retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr., who had cochaired the independent commission that investigated the attack on the USS Cole in Aden, Yemen, on 12 October 2000. Other members included Rear Admiral Stephen A. Turcotte of the U.S. Naval Safety Center; Major General John L. Barry of the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio; Major General Kenneth W. Hess of Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico; James N. Hallock of the U.S. Department of Transportation; Steven B. Wallace of the FAA; and Brigadier General Duane W. Deal of the 21st Space Wing at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado. Several senior- level NASA leaders were also named to the panel: G. Scott Hubbard, Director of NASA’s ARC; Bryan D. O’Connor, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance and a former astronaut; and Theron M. Bradley Jr., NASA’s Chief Engineer. NASA intended the Gehman Board to make a parallel investigation, complementing NASA’s own internal investigation. The Board would have access to the same scientific information and to the cooperation of the same agencies as NASA.(NASA, “NASA Announces Space Shuttle Columbia Accident Investigation Board (The Gehman Board),” news release 03-034, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-034.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); David Arnold, “Specialist Panel Convenes, Begins Search for Cause,” Boston Globe, 4 February 2003.)
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, to head NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a “natural selection to lead the Agency’s premiere center for aviation and space research,” according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred,” 13 June 2003.)
NASA announced that Administrator Sean O’Keefe had appointed three new members to the CAIB in compliance with a request from CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. The new members were Douglas D. Osheroff, the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Physics and Applied Physics at Stanford University and a 1996 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics; Sally K. Ride, a physicist and professor of Space Science at the University of California, San Diego, as well as a former NASA astronaut and the first American woman in space; and John M. Logsdon, Director of the George Washington University Space Policy Institute. O’Keefe had also appointed NASA astronaut retired U.S. Air Force Colonel Michael J. Bloomfield, in response to Gehman’s request that Bloomfield replace former astronaut Bryan D. O’Connor as Astronaut Advisor to the Board. O’Connor would return to NASA Headquarters in his role as NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “New Members Added to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board,” news release 03-097, 5 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03097.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
A reentry section of the People’s Republic of China’s Shenzhou 4 spacecraft landed in Inner Mongolia after Shenzhou 4 had orbited Earth for nearly a week. Phillip Clark, a U.K. observer of China’s space program, remarked that the Shenzhou 4 mission was key to flying Chinese astronauts in the future, noting that orbital control of the craft during this flight had been far tighter than in the two preceding tests. Furthermore, during two back-to-back Shenzhou launches, the Chinese had completed all the maneuvers necessary for a rendezvous and docking mission, indicating that China would progress quickly to an orbital docking. Clark predicted that either Shenzhou 7 or Shenzhou 8 would complete a nose-to-nose docking.(Leonard David, “After ShenzhouChina’s Space Plans Boosted Following Successful Mission,” Space.com, 5 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/after_shenzhou4_030105.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit undertook a 61⁄2-hour spacewalk at the ISS to finish preparing the station for the arrival of a new crew. In the second spacewalk of their four-month mission, Bowersox and Pettit worked on power connections, replaced lighting for a transport trolley, reconfigured cables on a navigational gyroscope, and secured covers on the station’s thermal control system. Cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin monitored the astronauts’ work from inside the ISS.(Reuters, “Astronauts End Space Walk from Orbiting Station,” 9 April 2003. 126)
NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale, living aboard the ISS, set a new U.S. space record―Foale had spent more time in orbit than any other American had achieved. During four Shuttle missions, an expedition aboard Russia’s former space station Mir, and his current residence at the ISS, Foale had spent more than 231 days in space, surpassing Carl E. Walz’s previous record for an American in space―230 days, 13 hours, 3 minutes, and 37 seconds. Walz had participated in four Shuttle missions and one ISS expedition in 2002. Along with astronaut Daniel W. Bursch, Walz continued to hold the U.S. record for the longest, single spaceflight―196 days.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Breaks U.S. Space Endurance Record,” news release 03-400, 9 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03400_Foale_record.html (accessed 23 March 2009); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Michael Foale’s 231 Days in Orbit Sets Record,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 December 2003; Associated Press, “Astronaut Sets Record for Time in Space,” 9 December 2003.)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz had won Discover Magazine’s Innovation Award for Space Science and Technology in the Space Explorer category. The annual awards, presented in the categories of Space Explorer, Communications, Space Scientists, Technology for Humanity, and Aerospace, honored scientists whose work had benefited the U.S. space program and all of humanity. A veteran of seven spaceflights, a record he shared with only one other astronaut, Chang-Dìaz was Director of the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory at NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where he was leading a team to develop the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) Engine. The team was working on a conceptual engine that would eventually enable humans to explore distant regions of Earth’s solar system and, perhaps, regions beyond the solar system. A native of Costa Rica, Chang-Dìaz had earned undergraduate and advanced degrees in mechanical engineering and applied plasma physics from the University of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming an astronaut in 1981. He had first traveled to space in 1986 and, most recently, had participated in the ISS assembly and crew-exchange mission in June 2002, during which he undertook three spacewalks.(NASA, “Astronaut Chang-Diaz Wins Discover Magazine Award,” news release 03-335, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03335_ChangDiaz_Award.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
Chinese taikonaut Yang Liwei successfully completed his 21-hour mission of 14 orbits around Earth aboard the Shenzhou 5, landing safely in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From aboard the ISS, American astronaut Edward T. Lu, speaking in Chinese, had welcomed Yang to space and wished him a safe journey and success. Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko had told Mission Control in Houston that he was glad to have someone else in space besides himself and Lu, congratulating the great accomplishment of thousands of people in the People’s Republic of China who had worked together to send Yang into space. After emerging from his capsule, Yang stated that Shenzhou 5 had operated very well, that he felt well, and that he was “proud of the motherland.”(John Pomfret, “China’s First Space Traveler Returns a Hero: Craft Made 14 Orbits in 21-Hour Mission,” Washington Post, 16 October 2003; Ching-Ching Ni, “China Completes Spaceflight: Nation’s First Astronaut, Lt. Col. Yang Liwei, Returns from Earth Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2003.)
At the Mojave Airport in California, aircraft designer Burt Rutan unveiled for the first time his White Knight launch system and SpaceShipOne spacecraft, which he had built in secret. Rutan had designed the White Knight, a type of aircraft, to carry the spacecraft to 50,000 feet, where the White Knight would release SpaceShipOne to launch like an aircraft into a steep climb. Rutan had begun testing the launch platform at lower altitudes in August 2002, also testing on the ground the release mechanism between the spacecraft and the launch platform. In the public unveiling, Rutan flew the White Knight only. The craft flew to an altitude of 9,000 feet (2,734 meters) before spiraling down to make a soft but extremely short landing. Rutan demonstrated SpaceShipOne’s systems, explaining that the craft should land in the same manner as the launch system. The flight profile of the system allowed SpaceShipOne to reach 54 nautical miles (62 miles or 99.8 kilometers) maximum altitude over a flight patch of 35 miles (56.3 kilometers). NASA designated anyone flying at an altitude of over 50 miles (80.4 kilometers) as an astronaut. If Rutan’s system succeeded in flights outside the atmosphere, it would become the first private human spaceflight program.(Jon Bonne, “Private Manned Space Plane Unveiled,” MSNBC.com, 19 April 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-3/ISS-9S launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan transporting to the ISS the Expedition 8 crew―American Mission Commander C. Michael Foale, Russian Flight Engineer Alexander Y. Kaleri, and Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque. Foale and Kaleri were traveling to the ISS for a 200-day mission, replacing American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko who were completing a six-month stay aboard the orbiting station. Duque would conduct 10 days of scientific experiments on the ISS and would return to Earth with Lu and Malenchenko.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Dmitry Solovyov for Reuters, “ISS Crew Blasts Off at Baikonur,” 20 October 2003; Justin Ray, “New Station Residents Arrive at Their Orbiting Home,” Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
NASA announced appointments to the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), formed to conduct an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s recommendations. On 13 June, NASA had initially announced the formation of the SCTG to oversee an independent assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement the CAIB’s recommendations. Cochaired by veteran astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, NASA had selected the SCTG’s members from experts in industry, academia, and government, active in fields relevant to spaceflight safety. NASA had organized the SCTG pursuant to the Federal Advisory Committee Act, selecting only non-NASA employees as members, as well as one nonvoting, ex officio NASA representativethe Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “NASA Names Return to Flight Task Group Members,” news release 03-248, 25 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03248_SCTG_Named.html (accessed 23 December 2003).)
The People’s Republic of China launched Shenzhou 5 on a Long March 2F rocket, becoming the third nation after Russia and the United States to send a human into orbit. Veteran fighter pilot Yang Liwei expected to orbit Earth 14 times before landing. The launch was the culmination of the decade-long effort of China’s secretive, military-linked space program, undertaken with the hope of improving the communist nation’s image abroad, as well as among its own citizens. Chinese officials described the Shenzhou program as homegrown, but western analysts stated that Russia had provided China with important technology and training for its taikonaut (astronaut) corps. Western analysts described the Shenzhou craft as an improvement over the Russian Soyuz design, with new solar arrays enabling the front-end orbital module to remain in space after the taikonaut compartment had returned to Earth. In addition, the craft’s improved collision-avoidance systems provided Shenzhou with enhanced capacity to avoid dangerous space debris.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; David Lynch, “China Blasts Off into Space,” USA Today, 15 October 2003; Christopher Bodeen for Associated Press, “China Launches First Manned Space Mission,” 15 October 2003.)
Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the craft’s unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecraft’s descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the craft’s antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, “Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction,” 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, “Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russia’s Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission,” 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, “Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency,” news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, “NASA Names New Chief of Staff,” news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
NASA launched a nationwide campaign to recruit elementary, middle, and high school classroom teachers for its astronaut corps, building on the legacy of its Teacher in Space Project of 1985. NASA had selected Christa McAuliffe and Barbara R. Morgan from among 12,000 applicants for the first project, which had ended tragically when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launching on 28 January 1986 with McAuliffe on board. McAuliffe’s backup Barbara R. Morgan had rejoined NASA in 1998 to train and qualify as a mission specialist. In December 2002, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had announced Morgan’s assignment to a November assembly mission to the ISS. NASA planned for the new recruitment campaign to extend the legacy of McAuliffe and the work of Morgan, making future educator- astronauts as much a part of the astronaut corps as test pilots, engineers, physicians, astronomers, geologists, and scientists from other disciplines. To accomplish this goal, NASA planned to train teachers with proven technical skills, making them eligible for missions ranging from 12-day Shuttle flights to months-long residencies aboard the ISS. Because of their ability to communicate with students in the classroom more effectively than traditional NASA astronauts, the educator-astronauts would be a critical part of an educational initiative to “make math and science as inspiring to youngsters as pop music and sports.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Seeking a Few Good Teachers,” Houston Chronicle, 22 January 2003.)
Israeli scientists announced that, while traveling aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, astronaut Ilan Ramon had successfully captured images of smoke from a burning rain forest, a dust storm above the Mediterranean Ocean, and a small dust plume off the African coast over the Atlantic Ocean. Operating a twin-camera multispectral instrument in Columbia’s payload bay, Ramon had scanned dust and other aerosol particles, which storms had blown from deserts and high winds had carried across the globe. The instrument had also operated during the night, capturing images of the tops of thousands of thunderstorms. The team of scientists from Tel Aviv University’s Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) intended to use the images to develop a better understanding of climate change, one of the goals of Columbia’s research flight, which had encountered two years of delays. Joachim Joseph, a principal researcher on the project, remarked that the experiment had gathered “very good data, very unique data.” The purpose of the US$2 million experiment was to “provide a better understanding of how migrating dust plumes affect climate.” (NASA, “Shuttle’s Desert Dust Experiment Delivers,” news release N03-010, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/note2edt/2003/n03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2003); Associated Press, “Astronaut Photographs Dust Storm,” 31 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “ Space Shuttle Crew Completes Israeli Dust and Cloud Studies,” New York Times, 31 January 2003.)
Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASA’s plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, “Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, “Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives,” http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
NASA notified SPACEHAB Inc. that NASA had not renewed SPACEHAB’s contracts for building and maintaining the Space Vehicle Mockup Facility (SVMF), the facility with ISS mockups at NASA’s JSC, and for operating the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (NBL) facility, where astronauts simulate spacewalks in a swimming pool. Instead, NASA had awarded the multiyear contract, valued at up to US$78.97 million, to Raytheon Technical Services of Houston. SPACEHAB’s subsidiary Johnson Engineering had operated the NBL for approximately 10 years. In 1998 SPACEHAB had acquired Johnson Engineering and had continued to operate the NBL. SPACEHAB had depended on Johnson Engineering and the NBL/SVMF contract for about half of its US$100 million in annual revenues. The loss of the contract followed SPACEHAB’s loss of one of its major flight articles, the Research Double Module, a pressurized science facility that had made its debut during STS-107 on the ill-fated Space Shuttle Columbia. SPACEHAB had insured the module for only US$17.7 million of its US$62.7 million value. SPACEHAB expected to contract with NASA to fly additional modules, which would enable the company to recoup its investment in the hardware.(NASA, “NASA Buoyancy Laboratory, Space Vehicle Mockup Facility Contract Awarded,” news release, 7 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_c03004_bb_030207.html (accessed 16 July 2008); Brian Berger, “Double Whammy: Spacehab Loses NASA Contract,” Space News, 12 February 2003; Brian Berger, “$100 Million Commercial Science Lab Lost on Columbia Was Insured,” Space News, 2 February 2003.)
NASA announced the names of three additional members of the crew of the Space Shuttle Program’s Return to Flight Mission STS-114. In 2001 NASA had named four astronauts to STS- 114―Mission Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of JAXA. The four were already training for the flight, scheduled to launch no earlier than September 2004. Astronauts Andrew S. W. Thomas, Wendy B. Lawrence, and Charles J. Camarda rounded out the mission’s crew of seven. NASA had originally planned for STS-114 to have a seven-member crew, but in the wake of the Columbia accident, NASA had changed the mission objective to focus on testing and evaluating new procedures for flight safety, rather than on ISS logistics and crew rotation. Thomas and Lawrence were veteran astronauts―Thomas was the second-highest-ranking member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, and Lawrence had flown on the Shuttle three times. Camarda was a rookie making his first orbital flight. NASA had assigned Robinson and Noguchi to conduct spacewalks on the flight.(NASA, “NASA Names Crew Members for Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” 7 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03360_STS_114_crew.html (accessed 5 February 2003); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Veterans, Rookie Fill Return-to-Flight Shuttle Crew,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 November 2003; Jim Banke, “NASA Names Additional Crew for Return to Flight Mission,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts114_ crew_)
John E. Riley, a 33-year member of NASA’s Public Affairs Department, broadcast voice of NASA’s Mission Control for the Apollo program, and NASA spokesperson, died of cancer at the age of 78. He had begun working for NASA in 1959 and, as a member of the Apollo program team, had provided commentary during the first moonwalk. Riley had also initiated the practice of encouraging astronauts’ interviews with media and had traveled with astronauts internationally.(Matt Schwartz, “Obituary: Riley, 78, Longtime Spokesman for NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 21 April 2003.)
NASA and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) commissioned the US$34 million NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) at the DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, where NASA biologists and physicists would perform thousands of experiments to measure the hazards of space radiation and to develop countermeasures to protect astronauts. Construction of the facility had begun in 1998. NASA and the DOE had cooperated in building the NSRL, which housed an accelerator producing beams of protons or heavy ions, like those that the Sun and other cosmic sources typically produce. The beams moved through a 328-foot (100-meter) transport tunnel to a 400-square-foot (37-square-meter) target hall, to hit a target composed either of a biological sample or of shielding material. Scientists planned to measure the interaction of specific particles with targets to determine the effectiveness of various materials in shielding against radiation and to develop and to test new materials. An NSRL health team would perform tests with biological samples to learn how radiation damages cells, how to predict risks, and to develop countermeasures to mitigate radiation effects.(NASA, “New NASA Facility Will Help Protect Space Crews from Radiation,” news release 03-326, 14 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03326_new_facility.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched on STS-107 from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:39 a.m. (EST). NASA had postponed the launch, originally scheduled for July 2001, because of technical and scheduling problems. Flying an orbital mission, a rare event since the ISS partners had begun construction of the space station in 1998, STS-107 was a “pure research mission.” The crew would conduct scientific investigations in two 12-hour shifts each day in the laboratory module of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. The crew included Shuttle Commander Rick D. Husband; Pilot William C. McCool; Payload Commander Michael P. Anderson; Payload Specialist Ilan Ramon, Israel’s first astronaut and a fighter pilot with the rank of colonel in Israel’s Air Force; Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, an aerospace engineer originally from India; and Mission Specialists David M. Brown and Laurel B. Clark, both physicians. The launch occurred under exceptionally tight security with more than 300 dignitaries and guests from Israel in attendance.(Broward Liston for Reuters, “Space Shuttle Launches with First Israeli Astronaut,” 16 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “Columbia Takes Off Under Tight Security,” New York Times, 16 January 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of John M. Grunsfeld to succeed Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist, effective immediately. NASA tasked Grunsfeld with ensuring the scientific merit of NASA’s programs. Grunsfeld, an astronomer, astrophysicist, and veteran astronaut, had been an integral member of two Space Shuttle–servicing missions to the HST. Lucid had served as Chief Scientist since February 2002. NASA’s Administrator Sean O’Keefe had asked her to return to NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, to help with return-to-flight efforts. During her tenure as Chief Scientist, Lucid had updated NASA science policy, a project that NASA had not undertaken since 1996. One of her most important tasks had been working with the Offices of Biological and Physical Research, Earth Science, Space Science, and Space Flight to develop a comprehensive plan for prioritizing research projects on board the ISS.(NASA, “Astronaut John M. Grunsfeld Succeeds Shannon Lucid as NASA Chief Scientist,” news release 03-280, 3 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03280_Grunsfeld.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
NASA awarded a US$9.7 million grant to Colorado State University to study radiation and cancer. The grant was one of three that NASA awarded to institutions as part of a new initiative to establish national centers studying risks associated with deep space travel. The grant established the NASA Specialized Center of Research (NSCOR) at Colorado State University, which would investigate the risk of the development of cancer associated with radiation exposureparticularly with the development of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), which has a direct correlation with radiation exposure. The research, which would study threats to astronauts from radiation in space, would directly benefit cancer patients who develop AML as a secondary cancer after radiation therapy treatments of the initial cancer.(Christiana Nelson, “NASA Grants CSU Almost $10 Million,” Rocky Mountain Collegian (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO), 22 October 2003.)
NASA released a flight-deck videotape, which the crew of STS-107 had recorded on 1 February between 8:35 and 8:48 a.m. (EST). NASA had recovered the videotape from the Shuttle’s crash site near Palestine, Texas. The video showed flight-deck activity as Columbia passed over the south central Pacific Ocean at an altitude of approximately 500,000 feet. Filmed with a small on- board camera, mounted to the right of Pilot William C. McCool and then passed to Mission Specialist Laurel B. Clark, the videotape showed Commander Rick D. Husband, Pilot McCool, Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, and Mission Specialist Clark on the flight deck during reentry. The astronauts were conversing among themselves as they worked through routine checklist activities with flight controllers at NASA’s Mission Control.(NASA, “NASA Releases Columbia Crew Cabin Video,” news release N03-23, 28 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_n03023.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
