The National Research Council (NRC) issued a report calling for NASA to send a Space Shuttle mission to service the HST. The report challenged Administrator Sean O’Keefe’s earlier decision that NASA would not conduct a Shuttle servicing mission for the HST because of potential safety risks. According to the NRC report, if NASA did not service the orbiting telescope, it would eventually become dysfunctional and fall out of orbit. Although the report acknowledged that a Shuttle mission would pose some risks for astronauts, the NRC stated that the scientific value of continuing HST operations merited a mission, both to maintain the orbiting telescope and to upgrade its components. The report recommended that NASA should consider sending a robotic servicing mission for the HST instead of a Shuttle mission, but should not rule out sending a Shuttle servicing mission, if NASA determined that the robotic option was too costly or complex.(Guy Gugliotta, “Scientists Say Shuttle Can Service Telescope; Report Counters NASA Stance on Repairing Hubble,” Washington Post, 14 July 2004; Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board and Space Studies Board, “Assessment of Options for Extending the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope” (letter report, National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 13 July 2004), http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=11051#toc (accessed 28 April 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, O’Keefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 11, a six-month mission set to launch in April 2005. Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would serve as Station Commander, and American astronaut John L. Phillips would serve as Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer. In 2000 Krikalev, who had experienced the most spaceflights of any Russian cosmonaut, had served as a member of the first ISS crew for Expedition 1. Phillips also had ISS experience as a member of Mission STS-100 in 2001. The backup crew members for Expedition 11 were American astronaut Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin.(NASA JSC, “Next International Space Station Crew Named,” news release H04-383, 23 November 2004.)
NASA announced that astronaut Leroy Chiao would replace William S. McArthur Jr. as Commander of Expedition 9, the next mission to the ISS. NASA had disqualified McArthur from Expedition 9 because of an unspecified medical issue. Chiao, who had trained as McArthur’s substitute, would join Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev for the mission, scheduled to launch in April 2004.(NASA, “Chiao Replaces McArthur as Next Space Station Commander,” news release 04-019, 12 January 2004. 581 Mark Carreau, “Leak on Space Station Stopped,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the immediate appointment of James B. Garvin as NASA’s new Chief Scientist. Garvin had previously served as Chief Scientist for NASA’s lunar and Mars exploration programs. As Chief Scientist for all of NASA, Garvin would be responsible for ensuring the scientific merits of NASA’s programs, including formulating the programs’ scientific requirements. Garvin replaced former astronaut John M. Grunsfeld, who had served in the post since September 2003. NASA had selected Grunsfeld to train as an astronaut for a future long-duration mission.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Chief Scientist,” news release 04-349, 21 October 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe presented the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to the families of the crew members of Space Shuttle Challenger. O’Keefe presented the honor in the name of the U.S. Congress and on behalf of President George W. Bush. The seven astronauts on board Challenger had died when the Shuttle exploded soon after launching on 28 January 1986.(NASA, “Challenger Crew Honored with Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” news release S04-238, 23 July 2004.)
The Expedition 9 crew of the ISS launched at 11:19 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on the Russian Soyuz TMA-4/ISS-8S. The crew members consisted of Russian cosmonaut, Expedition 9 Commander Gennady I. Padalka; NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke; and ESA astronaut André Kuipers of the Netherlands. Padalka and Fincke would remain at the ISS for nearly six months, while Kuipers would spend nine days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew members of Expedition 8―NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri.(NASA, “Expedition 9 on the Way to Space Station,” news release 04-133, 18 April 2004; National Space Science Data Center, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 605, 1 May 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx605.html. 629 Thomas H. Maugh II, “Einstein’s Theory Rockets into Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 21 April 2004; NASA, “The Gravity Probe B: The Relativity Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ gpb/index.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
Major media reported details of a NASA internal document, which stated that a proposed plan to use the ISS as a safe haven for Space Shuttle astronauts would likely have a high risk of failure. The NASA document was a response to a proposal that the ISS should temporarily house the Shuttle crew if a problem arose that prevented an orbiting Shuttle from returning its crew to Earth safely. In the internal document, NASA objected that the ISS had neither sufficient supplies nor support systems to keep both ISS and Shuttle crew members alive longer than a few months. NASA officials responded to the publication of the document, stating that the provisional contingency plan had been one of many ideas considered for improving Space Shuttle safety.(John Schwartz, “NASA Rescue Plan Is Reported To Have High Risk of Failure,” New York Times, 9 July 2004.)
After more than six months in space, the crew members of ISS Expedition 8 returned to Earth, safely landing in Kazakhstan at 8:12 p.m. (EDT). The crew of Expedition 8 consisted of NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri. During their tenure at the ISS, Foale and Kaleri had conducted scientific research. Expedition 8 had been the second- longest expedition to the ISS, with the two men spending a total of 194 days, 18 hours, and 35 minutes in space. Returning with them to Earth was ESA astronaut André Kuipers, who had spent nine days on the space station conducting research as part of ISS Expedition 9. The other two members of Expedition 9, Gennady I. Padalka and E. Michael Fincke, remained at the ISS for a mission scheduled to last nearly six months.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-007, 29 April 2004. 195)
The company Scaled Composites launched the first privately developed piloted vehicle to travel beyond Earth’s atmosphere. The vehicle, called SpaceShipOne, departed from Mojave Airport in California at 6:45 a.m. Pacific Standard Time (PST), attached to another aircraft. Upon reaching an altitude of 46,000 feet (8.7 miles or 14 kilometers), the aircraft released SpaceShipOne. Propelled by a fuel containing rubber and nitrous oxide―laughing gas―SpaceShipOne eventually attained an altitude of 328,491 feet (62 miles or 100 kilometers), achieving suborbital spaceflight. After SpaceShipOne had remained in suborbital flight for nearly 31⁄2 minutes, the vehicle’s pilot Michael W. Melvill―who became the first civilian astronaut with this flight―safely landed the craft at Mojave Airport. Burt Rutan, the founder of Scaled Composites, had designed SpaceShipOne, and Microsoft cofounder Paul G. Allen had financed the project.(Peter Pae, “Private Spaceflight Is a Public Success,” Los Angeles Times, 22 June 2004; Scaled Composites, “SpaceShipOne Makes History: First Private Manned Mission to Space,” news release, 21 June 2004.)
NASA and the ISS partners announced crew assignments for the next two expeditions to the space station. NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka would serve on Expedition 9, and NASA astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov would provide the crew for Expedition 10. In addition, Chiao and Sharipov would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 9, while NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 10. Although NASA and its partners had previously scheduled Tokarev to pair with Chaio on Expedition 10, the ISS partners had decided to replace Tokarev with Sharipov, because Sharipov had previously trained with Chiao.(NASA, “New Crews Named for 2004 Space Station Missions,” news release 04-056, 6 February 2004.)
Representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States―the nations participating in the ISS project―met to discuss their cooperative activities for the station. At the meeting at ESA’s Technical Centre in the Netherlands, ESA officials reviewed ISS operations and plans, unanimously endorsing a new technical configuration for the space station that would incorporate components from each of the ISS partner space agencies. Upon completion, the ISS would have improved research capabilities and would accommodate more crew members than the current maximum of three.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 04-237, 23 July 2004; Warren E. Leary, “More Astronauts Approved for Space Station,” New York Times, 24 July 2004.)
ISS crew members repaired an air leak in the space station. Astronaut C. Michael Foale and cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri fixed a leak in a flex hose located in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. The orbiting space station had begun to lose air on 22 December 2003. After examining the station’s air pressure readings, NASA’s Mission Control had informed ISS crew members of the leak on 5 January 2004. The air leak had not endangered either the ISS crew or operations. By systematically isolating the ISS’s compartments and using an ultrasound device to determine the location of a hissing sound emitted by the faulty hose, Foale and Kaleri had discovered the source of the air loss.
ISS crew members Alexander Y. Kaleri and C. Michael Foale conducted a spacewalk, leaving the station vacant. The spacewalk marked the first time that the ISS crew had left the station without another crew member remaining on board to assist in case of emergency. The purpose of the spacewalk was to service experiments located on the station’s exterior and to prepare the orbiting structure for future assembly work. The astronauts were unable to complete all of the planned tasks, however, because a problem with Kaleri’s spacesuit prompted Russian flight controllers to end the spacewalk early.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Is Cut Short; Malfunction in Cosmonaut’s Suit Cited,” Washington Post, 27 February 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 10 left for the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-5/ISS-9S, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 11:06 p.m. (EDT). The crew members were American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonauts Yuri G. Shargin and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Chiao and Sharipov would stay at the ISS until April 2005, and Shargin would spend eight days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew of Expedition 9.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-035,” news release SS04-035, 13 October 2004. 212)
NASA announced the selection of 11 individuals for the astronaut class of 2004the first astronaut trainees since 2000. In June 2004, the new class would begin training at NASA’s JSC as educator astronauts, engineers, pilots, and scientists, eventually working on NASA’s next- generation space vehicle and other projects. The trainees for the class of 2004 included Joseph M. Acaba, Richard R. Arnold II, Randolph J. Bresnik, Christopher J. Cassidy, James P. Dutton Jr., José M. Hernández, Robert S. Kimbrough, Thomas H. Marshburn, Dorothy M. Metcalf- Lindenburger, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Shannon Walker.(NASA, “NASA Introduces the Next Generation of Explorers,” news release 04-152, 6 May 2004; Patty Reinert, “11 Space Hopefuls Get NASA’s Good News,” Houston Chronicle, 7 May 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 9 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:36 a.m., local time. American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka had spent 188 days at the ISS, where they had performed four spacewalks. Returning with them was Russian cosmonaut Yuri G. Shargin, who had traveled to the ISS on 13 October 2004 with the crew members of Expedition 10.(Mark Carreau, “Station Crew Returns to Earth,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2004; Stefano S. Coleman, “Two Safely Back After 6 Months on Space Station,” New York Times, 24 October 2004.)
An independent panel of experts provided its interim assessment of NASA’s efforts to meet the CAIB’s requirements for resuming Space Shuttle flights. NASA had chartered the Stafford- Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) to assess independently its implementation of the CAIB’s preflight recommendations―mandatory for NASA’s resuming Space Shuttle flights. The 26-member Task Group, headed by former astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, stated that it had approved NASA’s compliance plans for eight of the CAIB’s 15 requirements. The task force did not see any major obstacles to NASA’s resuming Shuttle flights by May or June of 2005. The Task Group also noted, however, that NASA continued to have difficulty developing methods to repair the exterior heat tiles and thermal-resistant carbon-fiber material damaged during Shuttle flights.(Warren E. Leary, “Panel Sees Shuttle Flights Resuming Soon,” New York Times, 17 December 2004.)
American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka successfully completed repairs to the ISS during a much-delayed spacewalk lasting 6 hours. Among the numerous repairs that Fincke and Padalka completed were the replacement of a faulty circuit breaker and the restoration of power to a gyroscope that helped stabilize the ISS. The ISS partners had rescheduled the spacewalk from 24 June 2004 because of problems with the crew members’ spacesuits.(Mark Carreau, “Finally, Spacewalk a Success,” Houston Chronicle, 1 July 2004; NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-018, 1 July 2004.)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASA’s first Director of Manned Space Flight Safety, died at the age of 101. Lederer, an aviation-safety expert, had introduced notable aviation-safety technologies, such as blinking anticollision lights and flight-data recorders. Lederer had started his career in aviation safety in 1926 as an aeronautical engineer for the U.S. Air Mail Service, where he had redesigned the service’s airplanes to prevent them from igniting after crashes, a frequent cause of death of the pilots. In the 1950s, he had helped establish the agency that later became the FAA. In 1967, after a fire on Apollo 1 had killed three astronauts during a launchpad test, NASA had asked Lederer to establish an Office of Manned Space Flight Safety. In 1970 NASA had appointed Lederer as the safety director for all NASA activities. Lederer had retired two years later. Later, Lederer had taught at the University of Southern California and had served two three-year terms on the Advisory Council for the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations.(Stuart Lavietes, “J. F. Lederer, 101, Dies; Took Risk Management to the Sky,” New York Times, 9 February 2004.)
Former astronaut Robert D. Cabana became Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Brock R. Stone, who had retired after a 36-year career with NASA. Cabana had previously served on four Space Shuttle missions and in many management positions supporting the Astronaut Office and the ISS Program. Before becoming Deputy Director of JSC, Cabana had served as Director of Flight Crew Operations. NASA had appointed former astronaut Kenneth D. Bowersox to fill that position.(NASA JSC, “NASA Fills Key Space Flight Positions,” news release I-I04-080, 3 March 2004.)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the station’s management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASA’s other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISS’s hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the station’s operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the station’s exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program,” New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Safety Problems Noted,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
The National Research Council (NRC) issued a report outlining recommendations for servicing the HST. The issue of servicing the HST had initiated a public discussion in January 2004, when NASA had decided to cancel a Shuttle mission to service the HST because of concern for astronaut safety. The debate had erupted again after April 2004, when NASA had announced that it would conduct an unpiloted servicing mission for the HST. In response to criticism for those decisions, NASA had requested that the NRC evaluate servicing options for the HST. The NRC recommended that NASA service the HST using a piloted Shuttle mission, because a robotic mission would be too complex for NASA to complete before 2007, when NASA anticipated that the HST’s machinery would wear out. According to the guidelines recommended by the CAIB, astronauts would be able to service the HST by 2007. The NRC also reported that, if NASA carefully planned and conducted the piloted Shuttle mission, the mission would be far more likely to extend the telescope’s operational life at a relatively lower cost.(Guy Gugliotta, “Astronauts Acceptable, Panel Says,” Washington Post, 9 December 2004; National Research Council, Assessment of Options for Extending the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope: Final Report (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2005).)
Former astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper died at age 77 in Ventura, California. One of the original seven astronauts for the Mercury program, the United States’ first human spaceflight program, Cooper was born in Shawnee, Oklahoma, on 6 March 1927. He had joined the U.S. Air Force in 1949, and NASA had selected him as a Mercury astronaut in April 1959. In May 1963, Cooper had piloted the program’s last mission, which lasted 34 hours and 20 minutes―longer than all the combined duration of all previous Mercury missions. Cooper had made his second and final trip to space on Gemini 5 in August 1965, in a two-person mission that had set a record for space endurance of 191 hours. The mission had demonstrated that humans could survive in a weightless environment and, therefore, that a trip to the Moon was feasible. In addition, Cooper had been the first American astronaut to make two spaceflights, to sleep in space, and to appear in a televised broadcast from space. After retiring from the Air Force in 1970, he had run several companies, including a consulting firm specializing in projects ranging from aerospace to hotel development.(John Johnson, “Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr., 77,” Los Angeles Times, 5 October 2004; Matthew L. Wald, “Gordon Cooper, Astronaut, Is Dead at 77,” New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
