The China National Space Administration (CNSA) launched its second piloted spacecraft, the Shenzhou 6, on a Long March 2F rocket from Jiuquan, China, at 1:00 a.m. (GMT). The Shenzhou 6 carried taikonauts Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng. The CNSA planned for them to remain in low Earth orbit for five days. The CNSA provided few details about the mission and declined to publicize information, such as the taikonauts’ names and the spacecraft’s scheduled return date, until hours before the launch. According to a CNSA spokesperson, Junlong and Haisheng would conduct scientific experiments while in orbit.(Howard W. French, “On Live Television, 2 Chinese Astronauts Begin 5 Days in Low Orbit of Earth,” New York Times, 12 October 2005; China National Space Administration, “Shenzhou-6 To Take Off Wednesday Morning,” news release, 11 October 2005.)
Russian cosmonaut and ISS crew member Sergei K. Krikalev set a world record of 748 days for total time spent in space. Krikalev had begun his cosmonaut training in 1985 and had first served as a crew member of Russia’s Mir space station in 1988. Krikalev had served on the Mir crew again in 1991 and had later become a member of the first ISS crew comprising both Russian cosmonauts and U.S. astronauts. In addition, he had been the first Russian to travel on a NASA Space Shuttle, achieving that distinction on Shuttle Discovery in 1994. The ISS partners had scheduled Krikalev’s return to Earth for October 2005―by then he would have spent 814 days in space.(Mark Carreau, “Russian Cosmonaut Sets a World Record of 748 Days in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 17 August 2005.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-112, the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which effectively allowed U.S. astronauts to continue flying on Russian spacecraft, thereby maintaining the United States’ access to the ISS. The terms of the original act, passed in 2000, did not permit U.S. government agencies to make “extraordinary payments” to Russia, including purchasing space on Soyuz spacecraft, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. However, at the time that Congress had passed the original act, Russia had an agreement with the United States to provide 11 free voyages on Soyuz spacecraft to U.S. astronauts, so that NASA did not have to purchase space on Soyuz. In September 2005, American astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. had become the 11th U.S. passenger on a Soyuz, and, subsequently, Russia had required payment for any carriage of U.S. astronauts. Therefore, NASA had asked Congress to amend the act so that it could buy space on Russian spacecraft.(Guy Gugliotta, “U.S. Access to Space Station Is Preserved,” Washington Post, 11 November 2005.)
Northrop Grumman Corporation announced that it had finalized an agreement with the Boeing Company to compete as a team to develop NASA’s new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) and related human lunar-exploration systems, in anticipation of NASA’s formal request for proposals (RFPs). NASA intended the CEV to serve as the central human space-transportation system within the Project Constellation, which would incorporate human and robotic space systems, ferrying astronauts to the Moon and beyond. According to the agreement, Northrop Grumman’s Integrated Systems sector would serve as team leader and prime contractor during the initial development phase, Spiral 1. During the Spiral 1 phase, the team hoped to demonstrate the CEV’s ability to operate safely in low Earth orbit with astronauts aboard. Boeing NASA Systems, an operating unit of Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, would serve as principal subcontractor. The two companies’ roles would reverse to implement the second phase, Spiral 2. During the Spiral 2 phase, NASA intended to begin to expand human space exploration to the Moon and beyond.(Northrop Grumman, “Northrop Grumman, Boeing Finalize Space Exploration Teaming Agreement,” news release, 24 January 2005, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=71298 (accessed 17 August 2009); Los Angeles Business Journal, “Northrop, Boeing Finalize Deal To Team for NASA Contract,” 25 January 2005.)
The Soyuz TMA-6 crew arrived at the ISS. After greeting the new arrivals, the Expedition 10 crew held a safety briefing to familiarize the Expedition 11 crew and Roberto Vittori, the Italian astronaut visiting the ISS, with emergency escape procedures. The mission was Commander Sergei K. Krikalev’s third long-term space assignment and his second aboard the ISS. Krikalev was the first person to serve more than one tour at the station.(NASA, “11th Crew Arrives at Space Station” (International Space Station Status Report SS05-020, 17 April 2005), http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, “New Crew Arrives at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2005.)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns,” news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, “NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
During a hearing of the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics―Live from Space: The International Space Station―NASA astronaut John L. Phillips became the first person to provide congressional testimony while in space. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics had convened the hearing to gather information on numerous topics concerning the ISS, such as current activities on the ISS, scientific and research accomplishments resulting from ISS operations, and long-term human spaceflight. At the time of the hearing, Phillips was aboard the ISS serving as a member of Expedition 11, along with Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev. Former ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Peggy A. Whitson also provided testimony at the hearing.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Gives First Congressional Testimony from Space,” news release 05-152, 14 June 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Live from Space: The International Space Station, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 14 June 2005, 3.)
In the journal Geophysical Research Letters, researchers studying data from the Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) reported their determination that a strange flash over the Indian Ocean, which had occurred on 20 January 2003, was not related to lightning. The researchers named the mysterious reddish glow Transient Ionospheric Glow Emission in Red, or TIGER. Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon, a crew member of the ill-fated STS-107, had recorded the glow while aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, using an infrared video camera. During the Shuttle flight, Ramon had collected data about dust particles in the atmosphere for the MEIDEX Sprite campaign at the Open University in Ra’anana, Israel. Researchers for MEIDEX had analyzed Ramon’s video, including a single frame that showed a mysterious reddish glow 150 kilometers (93.2 miles) above the ocean near Madagascar. Like blue jets and elves, sprites are emissions―transient luminous events (TLEs)―that occur above thunderstorms. Airline pilots had first reported TLEs several decades ago. The TIGER phenomenon contrasted with typical TLEs because of its shape and its lack of any direct relationship to thunderstorm activity.(Maggie McKee, “Columbia Crew Saw New Atmospheric Phenomenon,” New Scientist, 20 January 2005; Michael Schirber, “High-Altitude Mystery Flash Recorded by Space Shuttle,” LiveScience.com, 19 January 2005, http://www.livescience.com/environment/050118_tiger_flash.html (accessed 18 August 2009).)
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate had confirmed the nomination of Michael D. Griffin as NASA’s 11th Administrator. Griffin replaced Sean O’Keefe, who had resigned in February to become Chancellor of Louisiana State University. Since 2004, Griffin had served as the Space Department Head at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Baltimore, Maryland. Before holding that position, he had served as President and Chief Operating Officer of In-Q-Tel and had held several positions within Orbital Sciences Corporation. Earlier in his career, he had served as Chief Engineer at NASA and as Deputy for Technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. Griffin held a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and five master’s degrees, credentials that had led Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Subcommittee, which oversees NASA, to introduce Griffin as the ideal person to lead NASA. During his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, Griffin had stated that, as Administrator, he would reevaluate NASA’s decision not to send astronauts to repair and service the HST. He had named his priorities for NASA, including the Space Shuttles’ safe return to flight. Furthermore, he had stated that he planned to speed up NASA’s development of a replacement craft for the Shuttle, so that the United States could continue to send humans into space. Griffin had stated that the United States’ dependence on other nations to ferry astronauts to space was unacceptable in terms of national security. Griffin had also testified that he supported President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, which included returning humans to the Moon and, ultimately, sending human explorers to Mars and beyond.(NASA, “Michael D. Griffin To Become NASA Administrator,” news release 05-250, 13 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05250_griffin_confirmed.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Warren E. Leary, “NASA Nominee Says He’ll Reassess Decision Not To Send Astronauts To Fix Hubble Telescope,” New York Times, 13 April 2005.)
NASA scientists led by Karel J. Schrijver announced the results of their research on the development of better methods of forecasting solar storms. Radiation from solar storms―extremely powerful explosions in the Sun’s atmosphere―can affect unprotected astronauts and airplane passengers, as well as satellites. In the past, scientists had usually analyzed changes in solar magnetic fields to forecast solar storms (also called solar flares), but this method had demonstrated limited reliability. However, a team of NASA scientists using NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) had found that strong electrical currents in the solar atmosphere―currents associated with changes in solar magnetic fields―are the primary drivers of solar flares. Therefore, observing the electrical currents is a more reliable method of forecasting solar flares than the method previously used. The researchers had also discovered that solar flares are strongest and most likely to occur in regions of the Sun where electrical currents accumulate until they have reached an explosive threshold. According to Schrijver and the other researchers, these findings would enable scientists better to forecast periods of potentially hazardous space weather.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Closer to Timely Space Weather Forecasts,” news release 05-226, 16 August 2005; Carolus J. Schrijver et al., “The Nonpotentiality of Active-Region Coronae and the Dynamics of the Photospheric Magnetic Field,” Astrophysical Journal 628, no. 1 (20 July 2005): 501–513.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts, Stephen K. Robinson of NASA and Soichi Noguchi of JAXA, completed a spacewalk during which they tested new prototype methods to repair heat- resistant tiles on the orbiter’s exterior. Robinson applied an experimental compound inside cracks in damaged panels, and Noguchi applied a thick, dark-colored paint to thermal protection tiles, to replace cracked or missing black surface coatings. NASA had developed the repair techniques in response to recommendations from the Columbia Accident Investigation Board. During the spacewalk, the two astronauts also performed several tasks to upgrade the ISS, such as replacing a broken GPS antenna and installing a bracket designed to hold a toolbox and parts kit for use during future spacewalks.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Test Repair Methods on Heat Tiles,” New York Times, 31 July 2005; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Adds One Day to Shuttle’s Mission,” Washington Post, 31 July 2005.)
James D. Wetherbee, the only U.S. astronaut to command five Space Shuttle flights, announced his plans to retire from NASA. Wetherbee had participated in six Space Shuttle missions since becoming an astronaut in 1984, serving as pilot aboard Mission STS-32 in 1990 and commanding STS-52 in 1992, STS-63 in 1995, STS-86 in 1997, STS-102 in 2001, and STS-113 in 2002. His missions had included flights both to the Russian Mir space station, including the first Shuttle–Mir rendezvous, and to the ISS. Just before retiring, Wetherbee had worked as Space Shuttle Lead in the Independent Technical Authority at NASA’s JSC, a group responsible for identifying and analyzing possible hazards and determining launch readiness. Wetherbee had also served for two years as Director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC and for five years as Deputy Director of JSC.(NASA, “Veteran NASA Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” news release 05-017, 11 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/archives/2005-all-archives.html (accessed 13 August 2009); Associated Press, “Veteran Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” 12 January 2005.)
NASA researchers announced the possible discovery of oxygen sources on the Moon, which astronauts might be able to use in future human explorations. Using NASA’s HST, the researchers had examined the first high-resolution ultraviolet images of the Moon ever captured. The images had revealed high concentrations of a mineral called ilmenite in an area called the Aristarchus Plateau. Human visitors to the Moon could conceivably use ilmenite―composed of iron, oxygen, and titanium―as a source of oxygen, by extracting the oxygen from the mineral through chemical or heating processes. However, the NASA scientists stated that they would continue evaluating the findings, as well as their potential usefulness for future lunar missions.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Telescope Turns to Moon and Sees Possible Oxygen Source,” New York Times, 20 October 2005; Mark Carreau, “Lunar Observations Yield Signs of Oxygen-Bearing Minerals,” Houston Chronicle, 20 October 2005.)
NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate issued a request for proposals (RFP) for the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) that NASA intended to use to transport astronauts beyond low Earth orbit and to the Moon by 2020. NASA had set the deadline for submissions for 2 May 2005 and planned to select two contractors in September 2005. The two contractors would develop competing prototypes with a December 2008 completion date, at which time NASA would select the prime contractor. NASA stipulated that the minimum specifications for the CEV were that the craft weigh 20 tonnes (18.14 tons) or less; house as many as four astronauts, for as long as 16 days; have the ability to rendezvous and dock with future lunar landers and interplanetary modules; and allow a safe abort throughout all phases of its flight. NASA stipulated that it would permit contractors to design spacecraft that exceeded these specifications. For instance, the RFP permitted the design of craft that could maintain a crew in space for longer than 16 days or accommodate a crew of six. The RFP also gave contractors the flexibility to decide whether the CEV would be able to dock with the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Issues Solicitation for Crew Exploration Vehicle,” news release 05-063, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05063_crew_exploration.html (accessed 2 September 2009); Robert Zimmerman for United Press International, “Space Watch: Spacefaring by Bureaucrats,” 18 March 2005. 753 NASA, “NASA Research Aids UNESCO Global Conservation Efforts,” news release 05-061, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05061_unesco-global.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
The Expedition 10 crew, American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov, returned to Earth from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-5 after almost 193 days in space. Together with Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, who had conducted scientific experiments at the ISS after his arrival on 17 April with Expedition 11, the crew landed on target in north-central Kazakhstan. Although the crew and recovery team encountered no major problems, weeks of heavy snow and rain had caused flooding in the steppes, complicating the recovery. Only three of the 10 recovery helicopters were able to land in the wet conditions. During their mission, Chiao and Sharipov had maintained ISS systems and conducted scientific research. They had replaced critical hardware in the Joint Quest Airlock, repaired U.S. spacesuits, completed two spacewalks to prepare the ISS for the arrival of a new European cargo spacecraft during the next year, and submitted a scientific research paper on the use of ultrasound in space. Chiao had voted in the U.S. presidential election the previous November, the first astronaut to do so in space. Vittori had spent 10 days in space, eight of them aboard the ISS, and had performed 22 experiments, including tests of astronaut fatigue, research on the durability of components of microsatellites, research into the electromagnetic waves that emanate from Earth and may be related to earthquakes, and experiments growing shoots as a potential food source for people in orbit.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report SS05-020a, 24 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020a_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Shamil Zumatov for Reuters, “Russian, U.S., Italian Space Crew Return to Earth,” 25 April 2005; Agence-France Presse, “Astronauts Home Safely from International Space Station,” 26 April 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi of JAXA and Stephen K. Robinson of NASA performed the second of three scheduled spacewalks for STS-114. The two astronauts conducted tests on materials designed to service the orbiter’s heat-shielding tiles and replaced a 600-pound (272.2-kilogram) gyroscope on the exterior of the ISS. The device was one of four gyroscopes that help maintain the station’s orientation in space.(NASA, “STS-114 MCC Status Report #13,” 1 August 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/ news/STS-114- 13.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
Former NASA astronaut Michael L. Coats became Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Jefferson D. Howell Jr., who had left to become a visiting professor at the University of Texas in Austin. Coats had begun working at NASA in 1978 and had flown three Space Shuttle missions before retiring from NASA in 1991. Before becoming JSC Director, Coats had worked for Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names Former Astronaut New Johnson Center Director,” news release J05-055, 7 November 2005; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” 14 April 2009, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 21 July 2009).)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
ISS Expedition 10 Commander Leroy Chiao and Flight Engineer Salizhan S. Sharipov completed the second and final spacewalk of their mission 1 hour ahead of schedule, returning into the ISS after 4.5 hours. To help in navigation, Chiao and Sharipov installed a set of space-to- space antennas around a section of Zvezda, the Russian service module that would aid in the docking operations of Europe’s Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) during a future cargo mission. The crew also attached a GPS unit to the Zvezda module to help the ATV. The ATV, scheduled to arrive during the next year, had the capability to deliver up to 8.5 tons (7,711 kilograms or 7.71 tonnes) of cargo, including 10,000 pounds (4,536 kilograms or 4.54 tonnes) of propellant. After the crew finished connecting the antennas, Sharipov returned to the Pirs docking compartment to retrieve a small satellite called NanoSputnik. The satellite, which weighed just 11 pounds (5 kilograms) and measured only 1 foot (0.31 meter) long, carried a transmitter designed to test control and orientation systems for small spacecraft during its 100- day mission. Sharipov released the satellite into a retrograde orbit by hand, while Chiao photographed the launch.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalking Astronauts Outfit ISS for New Cargo Ship,” Space.com, 29 March 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_eva2_050328.html (accessed 3 September 2009); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Two Astronauts Complete Spacewalk Work,” 29 March 2005.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
Both crew members of the ISS, NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the first assembly work since the 2003 accident of Space Shuttle Columbia, which had led to the suspension of construction on the station. The two removed broken and disused equipment and installed a new television camera, designed to aid in the assembly of additional truss segments for the ISS. McArthur and Tokarev were performing these tasks to prepare the ISS for the future installation of a new solar power module, planned for 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-051,” status report SS05-052, 8 November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/nov/HQ_SS05052_station_status-html (accessed 19 July 2009); Mark Carreau, “Camera Installed, Despite a Few Snags,” Houston Chronicle, 8 November 2005.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the crew of ISS Expedition 12 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 11:55 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 12 were American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 11, comprising Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to remain at the station for nearly six months. The launch also included American executive Gregory Olsen, who would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with the Russian Space Agency. Olsen planned to return to Earth with the Expedition 11 crew on 10 October 2005.(NASA, “Expedition 12 on the Way to International Space Station,” news release 05-292, 30 September 2005. 843 NASA, “Langley Center Director Lesa B. Roe,” 3 October 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/ about/roe_bio.html (accessed 13 July 2009); NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-042, 13 June 2003.)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASA’s workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administration’s 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASA’s efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttle’s retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASA’s failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASA’s ability to accomplish this, such as NASA’s near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the President’s Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement” (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 1–19, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
The crew of Expedition 11 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 9:09 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 11 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The two men had spent 179 days in space, during which time they had performed a variety of scientific experiments and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Accompanying Krikalev and Phillips on their return was American contractor Gregory Olsen, who had spent eight days on the ISS performing research under a commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency.(NASA, “Expedition 11 Safely Returns from International Space Station,” news release 05-340, 10 October 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson completed a final spacewalk during which Robinson performed an unprecedented maneuver to complete a critical operation of the orbiter’s thermal protection system. The principle objective of the spacewalk was to remove two pieces of protruding heat shielding―called gap fillers―from the bottom of the orbiter. NASA was concerned that the fillers might add extra heat to the orbiter’s heat- shielding tiles upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere, thereby threatening the mission. Astronauts James M. Kelly and Wendy B. Lawrence used the robotic arms of the Shuttle and those of the ISS to lower Robinson to the underside of Discovery, while Noguchi monitored the operation. Despite concerns that Robinson might lose communication with the other astronauts, the operation was a success. The maneuver was the first time that an astronaut had worked on the underside of an orbiter while in space. During the spacewalk, Noguchi and Robinson also installed an external stowage platform and a new iteration of an experiment to test materials in the environment of space.(NASA, “NASA’s Spacewalking Astronaut Completes Unique Repair,” news release 05-212, 3 August 2005; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-114.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
