Four teams competed at NASA’s Regolith Excavation Challenge to dig a minimum of 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of simulated lunar soil—regolith—within 0.5 hours, using no more than 30 watts of power. However, none of the teams succeeded in winning the US$125,000 first prize. The top performer was the entry from Technology Ranch of Pixmo Beach, California, the only machine to run for a full 30 minutes in its first attempt and to scoop up 75 kilograms (165 pounds) of regolith. The Regolith Excavation Challenge was the seventh centennial challenge NASA had held since 2005. However, the only person who had won any of the competitions was Peter K. Homer, who had won US$200,000 for his entry in the Astronaut Glove Challenge on 3 May. Kenneth Davidian, Program Manager of NASA’s Centennial Challenges Program, stated that NASA would add the unawarded prize money to the winnings for the 2008 Regolith Excavation Challenge, increasing the value of the prize for that competition to US$375,000. Davidian said that he expected the number of teams competing in the challenge would double and that many more NASA engineers would observe the competition in the future.(Dana Mackenzie, “No One Scoops the Prize at Moon Digger Contest,” New Scientist, 14 May 2007.)
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronauts—a Russian, an American, and a Malaysian—to the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysia’s first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, “Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station,” 11 October 2007.)
NASA announced the conclusion of the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) mission. FUSE had become inoperable in July 2007 when it became incapable of pointing steadily. NASA had launched FUSE in 1999 to study how chemicals disperse throughout galaxies, as well as the composition of interstellar gas clouds. FUSE’s mission was to help answer important questions about the conditions in the universe immediately following the Big Bang. However, FUSE’s reaction wheels, designed to turn and aim the telescope, holding it on target, had malfunctioned. To operate correctly, FUSE required three reaction wheels, but in November and December 2001, two of the four wheels had stopped operating. FUSE flew too high for the Space Shuttle to carry astronauts to repair it. Therefore, NASA scientist Jeffrey W. Kruk had devised a way to use FUSE’s magnetic torquer bars, designed to act as a weak break against Earth’s magnetic field, as a third wheel to help FUSE’s remaining wheel and backup wheel turn and aim the telescope. This solution had worked until December 2004, when the third reaction wheel had broken down, leaving FUSE with only one working wheel and the torquer bars. The FUSE project team had required 11 months to devise a new pointing system for the telescope. Once the team had completed the repair, FUSE had explored the universe with few interruptions from November 2005 until July 2007. FUSE Project Scientist George Sonneborn, of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, remarked that the telescope had collected scientific data of high quality for eight years, longer than its five-year goal.(NASA, “NASA Concludes Successful FUSE Mission,” news release 07-227, 17 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07227_FUSE.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Frank D. Roylance, “8-Year Space Vigil Goes Dark,” Baltimore Sun, 19 October 2007.)
NASA announced that it had selected proposals for future lunar-science activities and had established two new programs to enhance the research that the Vision for Space Exploration had made possible. Under the Lunar Sortie Science Opportunities (LSSO) Program, NASA had selected seven from among more than 70 proposals to develop simple, autonomous instrument packages that future astronauts could deploy on the lunar surface. Scientists planned to use these packages, known as suitcase science studies, to study the Moon’s interior; to examine lunar dust, which creates problems for astronauts; to search for natural resources on the lunar surface; and to use lasers to provide precise information about the position and features of the Moon. The studies complemented two new programs already established in the Science Mission Directorate’s Planetary Science Division at NASA Headquarters—the Lunar Advanced Science and Exploration Research (LASER) Program and the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Participating Scientist Program. The LRO mission, scheduled to launch in 2008, would help NASA prepare for long-duration human operations on the Moon. For that program, NASA planned to fund researchers analyzing data from the orbiter’s six instruments. Under the LASER program, NASA intended to solicit proposals for research investigating the lunar environment to determine how to enable humans to live and work on the Moon in the future.(NASA, “NASA Prepares for Performing New Science on the Moon,” news release 07-141, 21 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07141_moon_science.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, “NASA Sets New Lunar Science Programs,” Aviation Week, 28 June 2007, http://www. aviationweek.com/aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/lro062707.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski and Douglas H. Wheelock conducted the third EVA of STS-120, which lasted 7 hours and 8 minutes. With the assistance of an orbital crane, the two astronauts installed the P6-truss segment, which had a 17.5-ton (15.9-tonne or 15,900-kilogram) solar-power girder. They also installed a 40-foot (12.2-meter) radiator, to dissipate heat generated by station systems, and a spare main-bus switching unit on a stowage platform, for future use. The astronauts deployed the first solar array without incident, but discovered a 2.5- foot (0.76-meter) tear in a solar blanket during deployment of the second array. With solar-array deployment at 80 percent, Mission Control decided to halt the process to allow engineers the opportunity to analyze the situation and to recommend next steps. Despite its 80 percent 160 deployment, the array was already producing 97 percent of its power-generation capability.
The Soyuz craft carrying Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Oleg V. Kotov, and Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor landed at 6:36 a.m. (EDT), more than 200 miles (322 kilometers) west of the designated landing site in Kazakhstan. The craft, returning from the ISS, had veered off course, causing the crew to experience higher than normal gravity load during the descent. The steep off-course landing was similar to the Soyuz incident in May 2003. However, this time, Russian crews were able to locate the Soyuz crew quickly. Medical tests showed that none of the three space travelers had experienced injuries and that all were in good condition. The two Russian cosmonauts were returning from a six-month assignment at the ISS, and Muszaphar, Malaysia’s first astronaut, was returning from 10 days aboard the station conducting scientific research.
Mission Specialists Richard A. Mastracchio and Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams undertook the first EVA of STS-118, marking the first time that either astronaut had spacewalked. Over the course of 6 hours and 17 minutes, the pair worked to install and activate the 1.58-ton (1.4-tonne or 1,433-kilogram), 11-by-14-foot (3.33-by-4.3-meter) S5-truss segment and to retract the forward heat-rejecting radiator from the P6 truss. NASA planned to relocate the forward heat-rejecting radiator to the end of the port truss during the upcoming STS-120. Pilot Charles O. Hobaugh assisted Williams and Mastracchio from inside the ISS, operating the ISS’s robotic arm, which held the truss.(NASA KSC, “STS-118”; Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Begin Spacewalk as NASA Analyzes Shuttle Damage.”)
South Korean Vice Minister of Science and Technology Chung Yoon announced the selection of Ko San, a 30-year-old expert on artificial intelligence, to visit the ISS as South Korea’s first astronaut. Ko San had been one of two finalists. The other finalist, Yi So-yeon, was a 29-year- old female doctoral student in biotechnology. More than 36,000 South Koreans had applied to become the first person in South Korea to travel in space. Ko and Yi had been training in Russia when South Korean authorities selected Ko as the winner. They appointed Yi as his backup, in the event Ko was unable to participate in the mission. They selected Ko over Yi because he had performed better in certain experiments and had demonstrated a stronger capability of communicating with Russian cosmonauts. As backup, Yi would continue to train with Ko and would serve as a consultant in planning Ko’s mission.(Kurt Achin, “S. Korea Names Astronaut for the Country’s First Voyage into Space,” Voice of America, 6 September 2007; “Space Mission To Help Boost Aerospace Research,” Korea Times, 6 September 2007.)
“Alvin” Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffe’s backup during NASA’s teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavour’s payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavour’s 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavour’s time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavour’s heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, “STS-118: Endeavour,” NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, “Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter,” NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, “Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off,” New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
NASA to present a credible plan and accompanying timetable for implementing the NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee’s recommendations, including the most controversial one, related to the allegations that some astronauts had drunk alcohol shortly before flight. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had compared the alcohol allegations to urban legends, testified that NASA was already in the process of addressing the committee’s concerns. At the time of the hearing, NASA was preparing an anonymous survey to assist in identifying its employees’ continuing concerns about safety issues and about other review committee findings.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “Subcommittee Questions NASA on Health Care of Astronaut Corps,” news release, 6 September 2007, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science+ and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&packageId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA’s Astronaut Health Care System—Results of an Independent Review, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2007; Eun Kyung Kim, “Fear May Be NASA Problem,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 September 2007.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California after weather concerns prevented the crew from landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. Sunita L. Williams returned home with the STS-117 crew, having surpassed Shannon W. Lucid’s 1996 record of 188 days and 4 hours. Williams had set a new 195-day record for the longest spaceflight by a woman. U.S. astronaut Clayton C. Anderson remained at the ISS, scheduled to return home aboard Discovery in October. The STS-117 mission had successfully increased the power capability of the ISS, preparing the station for the future delivery of European and Japanese laboratories. Although Atlantis had sustained some damage soon after launch on 8 June, several inspections in orbit had revealed no critical damage, and Mission Control had declared the Shuttle’s thermal protection system safe for reentry on flight day 13. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to last 11 days, but had added extra days to allow time in case of the necessity of repairs to the thermal protection system. Olivas had stapled a thermal blanket back into place during the unscheduled fourth spacewalk on 17 June.(NASA, “Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-142, 22 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07142_Atlantis_landing.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Lands in California,” 25 June 2007.)
108NASA, “X-48B Blended Wing Body Research Aircraft Takes First Flight,” news release 07-165, 26 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07165_BWB_First_Flight.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Boeing Company, “Boeing Flies Blended Wing Body Research Aircraft,” news release, 26 July 2007, http://www.boeing. com/news/releases/2007/q3/070726c_nr.html (accessed 8 June 2010). committee recommended that NASA determine the scope of alleged alcohol-related incidents. The Review Committee had previously reported anecdotally that several astronauts had violated the rule prohibiting members of the flight crew from drinking alcohol or working under the effects of alcohol during the 12 hours before launch. Concurrent with the Review Committee’s study, Director of NASA’s JSC Michael L. Coats had led an internal assessment of behavioral medicine practices for astronauts. The JSC Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee had evaluated JSC’s extensive health care programs for astronauts and had recommended improvements to those programs, such as adding a more extensive behavioral health assessment to the annual flight physical examinations for all astronauts.(NASA, “NASA Releases Findings of Astronaut Health Review,” media advisory 07-92, 26 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_M07092_Astro_Reports.html (accessed 11 June 2010); NASA, “Opening Remarks: NASA Deputy Administrator Shana Dale,” 27 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 183223main_Shana_Dale%20_opening%20_statement_7-27-07.pdf (accessed 14 July 2010).)
NASA announced modifications to the ISS contract with Roskosmos. The US$719 million modified contract covered crew rotations for 15 crew members—six in 2009, six in 2010, and three in 2011—as well as the delivery and removal of 5.6 tonnes (6.2 tons) of cargo. The modification also included NASA’s purchase of a Russian Docking Cargo Module flight in 2010, which would carry 1.4 tonnes (1.5 tons) of NASA cargo to the ISS, and the purchase of a flight opportunity in 2009, which would allow an astronaut from one of the ISS partner nations to
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted a spacewalk outside the ISS, lasting 7 hours and 55 minutes, which exceeded the planned time of 6 hours and 30 minutes. The two astronauts moved half of the ISS’s coolant lines to a permanent cooling station on the station’s Port 6 (P6) Truss. Several flakes, either of toxic ammonia or of paint, floated away from a cooling-line cap as the astronauts disconnected two of the fluid lines connected to an ammonia reservoir, preparing to stow them away. Time constraints prevented the astronauts from stowing both of the fluid lines. Moreover, the astronauts failed to accomplish tasks that would enable them to “get ahead,” such as photographing a solar array that the ISS partners planned to retract during the next Shuttle mission in March. Because of the suspected leak during stowage of the fluid line, Mission Control required Lopez-Alegria and Williams to remain in their spacesuits for an additional 25 minutes once inside the ISS’s airlock, as a precaution against contaminating the station with ammonia.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06,” 4 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0706_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Spacewalkers st Start Switch of Station’s Cooling System,” New York Times, 1 February 2007; Mike Schneider, “Astronauts Take 1 of 3 Spacewalks,” Associated Press, 1 February 2007.)
of the ISS in preparation for the expansion of the space station.(Patrick Peterson, “Docking Port Relocated, Attached to Harmony,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010). 167 Xinhua News Agency, “Russia, India To Develop Advanced Military Aircraft, 13 November 2007; Agence France-Presse, “Russia, India To Join in Moon Mission,” 12 November 2007.)
Jeffrey P. Bezos, founder of Amazon.com and the commercial spaceflight company Blue Origin, released images of the 13 November 2006 test launch of the space capsule Goddard, the first vehicle of Blue Origin’s New Shepard program. Goddard was a vertical-takeoff, vertical-landing vehicle, shaped like a cone, with a square base sitting on four legs. During the successful test launch, which lasted 25 seconds, the craft ascended to 300 feet (91.4 meters) before descending to land gently on the launchpad, approximately 120 miles (193 kilometers) east of El Paso, Texas. Bezos, who had founded Blue Origin in 2000, planned for the craft eventually to carry several astronauts into suborbital flight. However, he clearly stated that he intended for these plans to proceed slowly, choosing as Blue Origin’s motto “Gradatim Ferociter” or “Step by Step, Fiercely.”(Jeff Bezos, “Development Flight, and We Are Hiring,” Blue Origin, 2 January 2007, http://www.blueorigin.com/ letter.htm (accessed 9 November 2009); Aero-News Network, “Bezos Releases Details of November’s Goddard Launch,” 5 January 2007; Stefanie Olsen, “Bezos Unleashes Space Rocket Prototype,” New York Times, 4 January 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani conducted their third spacewalk in 15 days, to connect a second set of ammonia-coolant lines to the Harmony module, to finish reconnecting the station-to-Shuttle power-transfer system, and to carry out a second inspection of the ISS’s right-side SARJ. According to ISS Flight Director J. Derek Hassmann, the SARJ inspection revealed significant and widespread “race ring damage and particulate that was consistent with the damage Daniel M. Tani observed” in late October. The astronauts also prepared Harmony’s right-side port for the upcoming attachment of the Columbus laboratory. On the ground, JSC flight controllers checked out electrical- and cooling-system connections in preparation for fully activating Harmony.(William Harwood, “Successful Spacewalk Ends as Harmony Activation Proceeds,” Spaceflight Now, 26 November 2007.)
Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Oleg V. Kotov restored two of the three data channels on each of the two computers that had failed on 12 June during the deployment of the solar arrays on the ISS’s new power module. Russian engineers had determined that backup- power supplies for the computers had also failed. While Yurchikhin and Kotov worked on restoring the computers, U.S. astronauts James F. Reilly II and John D. Olivas conducted the third scheduled EVA of the Atlantis Mission STS-117. During a spacewalk lasting 7 hours and 58 minutes, Reilly installed a hydrogen vent on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory, and Olivas repaired a 4-by-6-inch (10.2-by-15.2-centimeter) piece of thermal blanket on Atlantis’s left orbital- maneuvering-system pod. The thermal blanket had loosened during launch. Together, Olivas and Reilly also finished retracting the old solar panels.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Thomas H. Maugh II, “Cosmonauts Reboot Space Station Computers,” Los Angeles Times, 16 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Complete To-Do List on Shuttle, Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 16 June 2007.)
Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski and Douglas H. Wheelock embarked on the first EVA of STS-120. The astronauts installed the Harmony module in a temporary location; prepared the P6 truss for relocation, a task that NASA had scheduled for the second EVA; retrieved a failed radio-communications antenna; and secured one of Harmony’s window covers, which had opened during launch. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 14 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120 (23rd Space Station Flight) Discovery,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/216375main_ STS-120.pdf (accessed 29 September 2010).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely at NASA’s KSC after the 13-day STS-118 assembly mission to the ISS. Although the Shuttle had sustained damage during launch, including a small gouge in the protective tile on the orbiter’s underside, inspections during orbit had revealed no critical damage to the craft, and NASA managers had declared Endeavour’s thermal protection system safe for reentry. Endeavour had landed a day early because of NASA’s concern about Hurricane Dean. The hurricane had ultimately followed a track that did not threaten Houston, the home of NASA’s Mission Control. During the mission, Canadian astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams had undertaken three of the four spacewalks of STS-118, setting a new spacewalking record for Canada. Williams had surpassed the record held by Canadian Chris A. Hadfield, who had performed two EVAs during a single mission in 2001.(NASA, “Shuttle Endeavour Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-177, 21 August 2007; Andy Blatchford, “Canadian’s Record Spacewalk,” Toronto Star, 19 August 2007; Traci Watson, “Shuttle Coming Home Early as Dean Nears,” USA Today, 20 August 2007.)
STS-118 Mission Specialist Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson made the fourth and final spacewalk of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours, the pair installed the antenna of the External Wireless Instrumentation System, attached a stand for the extension boom of the Shuttle’s robotic arm, and retrieved two materials experiment containers for return to Earth aboard Endeavour. Mission Control had cancelled approximately 2 hours worth of tasks from the EVA to enable the crew to close the hatch between the ISS and the Shuttle in preparation for an early departure. NASA managers had rescheduled the return flight to enable Endeavour to land a day early, in case Hurricane Dean headed toward Houston. The hurricane could have forced an emergency relocation of flight controllers from Houston to a makeshift control center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. A temporary control center would have been neither as organized nor as large as the Houston operation.(NASA KSC, “STS-118”; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Hurriedly Complete Spacewalk,” 19 August 2007.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from KSC in Florida at 11:38 a.m. (EDT) on STS-120, a 14- day mission to continue ISS construction. The STS-120 crew consisted of Commander Pamela A. Melroy; Pilot George D. Zamka; and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, Stephanie D. Wilson, Daniel M. Tani, and ESA astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli. Mission Specialist Tani would join Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Yuri I. Malenchenko, replacing Clayton C. Anderson, who had lived aboard the ISS for five months. Mission goals included installing the Harmony connecting module (Node 2) and moving the P6 segment of the ISS truss, with its solar arrays, to a permanent position at the end of the
Timothy Shank, a researcher on board the Alvin submersible, located 2.5 kilometers (1.5 miles) deep in the Pacific Ocean, placed a telephone call to Sunita L. Williams, a NASA astronaut
NASA astronauts Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Sunita L. Williams undertook their third spacewalk outside the ISS in nine days. Over 6.5 hours, the astronauts accomplished their primary task—jettisoning two large thermal covers, folding them with smaller shrouds that had covered an electronics box, and tossing them away from the ISS, so that they would eventually burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. The astronauts also connected cables to a new system that would allow the ISS to share power with a docked orbiter; added a platform intended to hold a storage container; and photographed the docking port. Lopez-Alegria set a new U.S. spacewalking record of 61 hours and 22 minutes. The all-time record of more than 82 hours belonged to Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyov. Sunita L. Williams extended the spacewalking record she had set on 4 February to 29 hours and 17 minutes. The series of spacewalks that had begun on 31 January marked the first time that ISS crew had conducted three spacewalks within such a short time, without a Space Shuttle docked at the ISS.(Mike Schneider, “Astronaut Sets U.S. Spacewalking Record,” Associated Press, 9 February 2007. 8)
U.S. astronauts Patrick G. Forrester and Steven R. Swanson conducted a fourth unscheduled spacewalk outside the ISS, to wrap up incomplete tasks. During the spacewalk, which lasted 6 hours and 29 minutes, Forrester and Swanson completed their primary task of activating the SARJ, a rotating joint on the ISS’s new power module; installed a new camera stanchion on the S3 Truss; and linked a computer-network cable between the U.S. and Russian sides of the stations. The two astronauts were unable to bolt down the debris shields that Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov had installed on the Zvezda module during the spacewalk on 6 June. Instead, they opted to tether the two panels in place.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Mike Schneider for Associated Press, “Astronauts Complete 4th Spacewalk,” 18 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Finish Power Upgrades to Station,” Houston Chronicle, 18 June 2007.)
NASA announced the names of the committee members tasked with conducting a comprehensive review of the health care systems and medical policies that NASA provided for the benefit of astronauts, as well as the standards and certification NASA required of astronauts. The review included an examination of behavioral health care services available to astronauts. To chair the group of external experts, NASA named Richard E. Bachmann Jr. of the U.S. Air Force, an expert in aerospace medicine with experience providing medical support to people conducting operations in extreme environments. NASA appointed James M. Duncan, NASA Chief of Space Medicine, and Wayne R. Frazier, an executive from the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, to serve on the committee in an ex officio capacity. The arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February had prompted the review.(NASA, “NASA Announces Medical Review Team Members,” news release 07-75, 26 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07075_Medical_Review_Members.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Jeanna Bryner, “NASA Sets Team To Review Astronaut Mental Healthcare,” Space.com, 26 March 2007, http://www.space. com/news/070326_nasa_healthcare.html (accessed 27 January 2010).)
Over a period of 6 hours and 56 minutes, Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the 100th spacewalk for ISS construction. The astronauts focused on inspecting two devices related to the power-generating solar arrays—the SARJ and the beta gimbal assembly (BGA) on the starboard side. Both devices had malfunctioned. The spacewalk, a so-called fact-finding mission, sought to determine what had caused the SARJ to shed metal filings and the BGA to trip circuit breakers. Whitson and Tani found widespread contamination inside the gear that rotates the SARJ. They also retrieved a set of bearings—one of 12 on the joint—suspected of being a source of the contamination. They used orange Kempton tape to take samples of the metal filings. The astronauts found no damage to the cables and other hardware on the BGA joint, which had suffered triple electrical failures on 8 December. During this EVA, Whitson, who had already made history as the first female commander of the ISS, surpassed Sunita L. William’s spacewalking record to set a new record for women in space, at 32 hours and 36 minutes.
Florida police released on bail Lisa M. Nowak, a NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy captain. The police had arrested Nowak the day before, after she threatened Colleen M. Shipman, a captain in the U.S. Air Force. Nowak had perceived Shipman as a romantic rival. NASA placed Nowak on 30-day leave and removed her from her mission duties. Nowak had flown her only mission as a crew member on STS-121 in July 2006, aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. NASA spokesperson Nicole Cloutier-Lemasters explained that, according to its past policy, NASA had screened crew members assigned to the ISS, before, during, and after missions, but had not screened Shuttle crews flying for two-week stints. Although Cloutier-Lemasters said that NASA did not plan to conduct an investigation of Nowak, NASA’s Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that NASA had begun a review of its screening policy. NASA hoped to determine whether it had overlooked indications for concern in Nowak’s case. Dale explained that NASA intended the review process to reveal whether or not astronauts were receiving adequate psychological and medical care and attention.(Mike Schneider and Erin McClam, “Astronaut Charged with Attempted Murder,” Associated Press, 7 February 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronaut’s Arrest Spurs Review of NASA Testing,” New York Times, 8 February 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani conducted a spacewalk to connect power and heater cables, as well as the coolant lines that would carry ammonia between the Harmony module and the ISS. The astronauts took turns carrying the 18.5-foot (5.6 - meter), 300-pound (136-kilogram) tray containing the coolant lines to Harmony, where they bolted the tray to the adjacent lab module. After securing the tray, Whitson and Tani worked ahead of schedule, routing the coolant lines and other cables. The spacewalk lasted 7 hours and 16 minutes.
NASA released safety-review findings that showed no evidence of astronauts using alcohol improperly before spaceflight. NASA Chief of Safety and Mission Assurance Bryan D. O’Connor had conducted the review to evaluate allegations included in the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee’s report, released in late July. For the safety review, which covered the past 20 years of spaceflight, NASA had interviewed approximately 90 participants in and witnesses to the activities that had occurred during the last few days before Shuttle and Soyuz launches. In addition, NASA had reviewed more than 40,000 records, from as far back as 1984, including reports of mishaps and close calls, anonymous safety reports, safety-hotline reports, and alcohol- and drug-related disciplinary actions, as well as NASA’s relevant policies and procedures. The review had also included an inspection of crew quarters at NASA’s JSC in Houston and NASA’s KSC in Florida. O’Connor remarked that the investigation had been much more exhaustive than NASA’s usual response to an anonymous allegation concerning a matter of safety; therefore, he expressed confidence that NASA had sufficient safeguards to prevent an impaired crew member from participating in spaceflight.(NASA, “NASA Safety Review Finds No Evidence of Improper Alcohol Use by Astronauts Before Space Flight,” news release 07-184, 29 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07184_oconnor_alcohol_ study.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Warren E. Leary, “No Evidence of Drunken Astronauts, NASA Says,” New York Times, 30 August 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko undertook a spacewalk to prepare the space station for the relocation of the Harmony module, a pressurized compartment designed to serve as a docking port for European and Japanese laboratories. NASA had scheduled the Discovery astronauts to conduct this spacewalk as the fifth and final EVA of their mission to the ISS. However, the discovery and repair of tears in a critical solar-power module had taken precedence. During this EVA, Whitson and Malenchenko cleared cables from Harmony’s destined location and disconnected electrical and fluid connections. Mission STS- 120 had delivered the module to the ISS in October, and the crew had installed Harmony at a temporary location. Completion of Harmony’s transfer would require three spacewalks and extensive robotic work. Astronauts living aboard the ISS would need to reposition the module before NASA launched its next Shuttle mission, scheduled for early December 2010. That mission would carry Europe’s laboratory Columbus to the ISS.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk at Station,” 9 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Tackles Next Phase of Remodeling,” Houston Chronicle, 10 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010).)
NASA announced the winner of the first Astronaut Glove Challenge, one of NASA’s Centennial Challenges. Peter K. Homer of Southwest Harbor, Maine, won US$200,000 for his design of a glove that performed better overall than those his competitors had created, according to tests rating the glove’s strength, flexibility, and comfort. NASA stated that Homer had made innovations in finger dexterity that could enhance the gloves created for NASA’s astronauts in the future.(NASA, “Peter Homer Wins NASA’s Challenges for Improved Astronaut Gloves,” news release 07-101, 3 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07101_Winner_of_Astronaut_Glove_ Challenge.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
for designing the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon and, eventually, to transport human explorers to Mars. Gilbrech had joined NASA in 1991 and had played a key role in helping NASA solve the problem of the Shuttle’s dangerous foam debris, which had caused the Columbia tragedy in 2003. Griffin also named Robert D. Cabana, Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC in Houston since 2004, to replace Gilbrech as Director of NASA’s SSC, where he would oversee all operations of NASA’s primary center for rocket-propulsion testing and of the Applied Research and Technology Project Office. NASA had selected Cabana as an astronaut in 1985. He had flown twice as a Space Shuttle pilot and twice as a Shuttle commander, accumulating more than 1,000 hours in space.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Announces Senior Leadership Appointments,” news release 07-175, 10 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07175_Gilbrech_Cabana.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Mark Carreau, “NASA Names New Leader for Moon Exploration,” Houston Chronicle, 12 August 2007.)
Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the second EVA of STS-120, disconnecting cables from the P6 truss, to remove the P6 truss from the Z1 truss. Tani and Parazynski made progress outfitting the new Harmony module, mating the power and data grapple fixture, and reconfiguring connectors on the S1 truss, in preparation for the later deployment of the radiator on S1. Tani also inspected the SARJ, collecting fine metal shavings on part of a wheel with solar panels attached to it. The discovery of the metal shavings enabled engineers to identify the source of friction that had caused the wheel to begin slowing down in September. Engineers had designed the wheel to spin freely so that the solar panels pointed toward the Sun; the panels generated electricity to operate the ISS’s computers, oxygen- producing machine, and other systems. Tani reported that, in addition to collecting the metal shavings, he had observed that parts of the wheel’s surface appeared discolored, a possible sign of corrosion. To prevent further damage to the wheel, engineers stopped it from spinning, thereby reducing the amount of electricity that the panels generated. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 33 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120”; Traci Watson, “Damaged Component Could Thwart Space Station Plans,” USA Today, 29 October 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronauts Discover Damage to Space Station,” 29 October 2007.)
NASA issued a statement regarding the status of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak, the U.S. Navy captain charged with attempted kidnapping and related charges. Under a mutual agreement with the U.S. Navy, NASA was terminating Nowak’s detail as an astronaut, effective 8 March. Nowak, the first astronaut ever dismissed by NASA, had begun her detail with NASA following her selection as a member of the astronaut class of 1996. She had flown on her only mission, STS-121, in 2006. NASA had requested the U.S. Navy’s agreement to terminate Nowak’s detail because NASA lacked the administrative authority to address the criminal charges pending against Nowak. Because Nowak was a naval officer assigned to NASA, rather than a NASA civil servant, she was not subject to administrative action by NASA. NASA further stated that the decision to terminate Nowak’s detail did not indicate that NASA had taken a position on the criminal charges against her.(NASA, “Statement Regarding the Status of Lisa Nowak,” news release 07-26, 7 March 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07026_Nowak_Status.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Lianne Hart, “NASA Fires Astronaut Charged in Assault on Rival,” Los Angeles Times, 8 March 2007.)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to review the findings of two reports that NASA had made public on 27 July 2007. The reports examined NASA’s medical and behavioral health care system for its astronauts. The NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review had identified a number of issues related to NASA culture, communication, and behavioral concerns, including some astronauts’ alleged preflight alcohol abuse. However, NASA’s internal JSC review had contradicted the finding, stating that the investigators had been unable to verify any instance of alcohol abuse. At the hearing, Richard E. Bachmann Jr., Chair of the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee, stated that NASA’s rebuttal of reports and derision of the claims that astronauts had imbibed alcohol during the preflight alcohol-restriction period had discouraged open communication. Moreover, Bachmann expressed deep concern about NASA’s apparent disregard of mental health and behavior issues among astronauts and about the reluctance of flight surgeons and astronauts alike to report improper conduct. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) remarked that the findings of the two panels seemed to describe two different organizations. Udall instructed
Two U.S. astronauts, Mission Specialists John D. Olivas and James F. Reilly II, conducted the first extravehicular activity (EVA) of STS-117. During the 6-hour-and-15-minute spacewalk at the ISS, the astronauts made power, data, and cooling connections on a new 16-tonne (17.6-ton or 16,000-kilogram) truss segment containing solar arrays. One of STS-117’s objectives was to deliver the new US$367 million solar-power module to the ISS. The ISS partners intended for the arrays to increase the ISS’s power generation substantially and to serve future European and Japanese science modules. Mission managers decided to extend STS-117 two days, in case the crew needed to repair the fabric heat shield on the orbiter’s left tail section. Managers feared that Atlantis’s tail section had sustained damaged shortly after launch.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “US Atlantis Astronauts Step Out on Space Walk,” 12 June 2007; Houston Chronicle, “New Solar Array Being Unfurled on Space Station,” 13 June 2007.)
Astronauts Richard A. Mastracchio and Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams undertook the second EVA of STS-118, to install the 600-pound (272-kilogram) CMG on the Z1 segment of the ISS’s truss, and to remove and replace the gyroscope that had failed in late 2006. The defective gyroscope was one of four such devices controlling the ISS’s position. NASA announced it had added a new computer program, the Inductive Monitoring System, to assist in monitoring these four gyroscopes. NASA had begun using the system earlier in 2007. David L. Iverson, the computer scientist at NASA’s ARC who had led the five-year effort to develop the new system, explained that the purpose of the software was to alert ground controllers to anomalies, so that they could analyze the situation immediately and take any necessary preventive measures. During the test phase, the new software had identified problems with the gyroscopes long before the previous system would have flagged anomalies. Engineers had also used the software program in F-18 fighter planes and in the Space Shuttle’s leading-edge impact-detection system, as well as in monitoring electric-power plants and water quality.(NASA, “New NASA Software Monitors Space Station Gyroscopes,” news release 07-201, 13 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07201_ISS_Gyro_Software.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Traci Watson, “Endeavour Astronauts Replace Faulty Gyroscope,” USA Today, 14 August 2007.)
Aeronautical engineer Jerome B. Hammack, who was one of the seven inventors of NASA’s Mercury capsule and had been instrumental in creating the recovery team to retrieve Mercury astronauts from the ocean, died of cancer at the age of 85. After playing a key role in the Mercury program, NASA’s first human space program, Hammack had carried out similar duties in the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, and Shuttle projects. In 1958 Hammack had joined National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor organization, and, in the early 1960s, he had been one of the 35-member group that came to Houston to establish the institution that became NASA’s JSC.(Lynwood Abram, “Hammack, Helped [Design] Vehicles for Space Program,” Houston Chronicle, 24 August 2007.)
Former U.S. Navy pilot and astronaut Walter M. “Wally” Schirra Jr., one of the astronauts known as the Original Seven, died of a heart attack at the age of 84. Schirra was the only astronaut to participate in all three of the United States’ first human space projects—Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. Selected in 1959 as one of the first seven astronauts, Schirra had made his first spaceflight on 3 October 1962, piloting the fifth Mercury mission, in which Mercury orbited Earth six times in 9 hours and 13 minutes. On 15 December 1965, Schirra had flown aboard Gemini 6-A with Thomas P. Stafford II, in a mission that included the first rendezvous of maneuverable spacecraft. Gemini 6-A, carrying Schirra and Stafford, had flown in formation for 5 hours with Gemini 7, which carried astronauts Frank F. Borman II and James A. Lovell Jr. With his fellow Apollo 7 crew members Walter Cunningham and Donn F. Eisele, Schirra had tested the Apollo’s systems during an 11-day flight beginning on 11 October 1968, a test that proved that Apollo was ready to ferry astronauts to the Moon. The Apollo 7 flight, Schirra’s final mission for NASA, had been the first to provide televised images from orbit. Following his retirement from the U.S. Navy in 1969, Schirra had worked with Walter L. Cronkite Jr. as a news commentator for CBS. Schirra was also a founding member and director of the Mercury Seven Foundation. The U.S. military had awarded Schirra the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, three Distinguished Flying Crosses, three Air Medals, and the Philippines Legion of Honor. NASA had awarded him two Distinguished Service Medals and its Exceptional Service Medal.(NASA, “Veteran Astronaut Walter Schirra Dies,” news release 07-100, 3 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07100_Schirra_Dies.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Richard Goldstein, “Walter M. Schirra Jr., Astronaut, Dies at 84,” New York Times, 4 May 2007.)
NASA issued a statement in support of astronaut Daniel M. Tani and his family. Tani, stationed at the ISS, had lost his mother on 19 December when she died in an automobile accident. NASA spokesperson Eileen M. Hawley remarked that NASA believed this was the first time an American astronaut had lost a family member while on a mission in space. The statement indicated that NASA intended to provide Tani and his family with any assistance they needed. Hawley explained that NASA did not have a prescribed policy for emergencies such as this and would respond according to Tani’s wishes.(NASA, “NASA Statement on the Death of Astronaut Dan Tani’s Mother,” news release 07-282, 20 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07282_Mike_Coays_Statement.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Mark Carreau and Carol Christian, “Space Station Astronaut’s Mom Dies in Car Wreck,” Houston Chronicle, 20 December 2007.)
Associate Administrator for NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missions—STS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASA’s efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitz’s resignation, praising the former astronaut’s tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASA’s decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttle’s reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, “Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA,” news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, “Scott J. ‘Doc’ Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former),” http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family,” Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
NASA announced the completion of its Systems Requirement Review (SRR) of the Orion crew exploration vehicle (CEV), marking the first major milestone in Orion’s engineering process. In conducting the review of Orion’s requirements data set, NASA scientists and engineers had discussed more than 1,700 topics, covering all aspects of Orion’s performance, design, and qualifications. The SRR would provide a baseline for the design, development, construction, and safe operation of the spacecraft that NASA would use to carry astronauts beyond Earth orbit. In November 2006, NASA had completed an overall review of requirements for the Constellation Program, which also included the Ares launch vehicles and systems for the human exploration of planetary surfaces.(NASA, “NASA Completes Key Review of Orion Spacecraft,” news release 07-58, 7 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07058_Orion_SRR.html (accessed October 14, 2009); Jefferson Morris, “Baseline Requirements Completed by NASA for Orion,” Aviation Week, 9 March 2007; “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft One Step Closer to Assembly,” Aero-News Network, 9 March 2007.)
underwater telephone. The Atlantis had an on-board telephone connected to a satellite telephone, which could contact anyone on shore. Atlantis had telephoned NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where a high-powered dish transmitter had contacted the ISS directly. Oceanographers and astrobiologists were equally enthusiastic about the telephone call because much of the information oceanographers learn researching the sea floor applies to space exploration. Astrobiologist Richard Shand of Northern Arizona University described the feat of communicating with people who are not currently on Earth’s surface, using three different media—water, air, and vacuum—as an astonishing accomplishment. Apollo astronauts, who had called Houston from a distance of 384,400 kilometers (238,855 miles), retained the record for a long-distance call. The call from the Alvin submersible to the ISS was a 253-kilometer (157-mile) long-distance call.(Christina Reed, “Houston, We Have a Phone Call,” Science Now, 26 January 2007.)
In one of the most difficult and dangerous spacewalks ever attempted, NASA astronaut Scott E. Parazynski successfully cut loose a tangled set of wires that had prevented a solar array at the ISS from unfurling properly on 30 October. Parazynski rode on the end of the robotic arm extension, which at 90 feet (27 meters) barely reached the damaged solar wing. The extension placed Parazynski farther away from the ISS than any astronaut had ever been. After 1 hour riding the extension out to the power grid, Parazynski worked for 2 hours, cutting hinge wires and guide wires. Once cut, the 90-foot (27-meter) guide wire retracted smoothly into its reel at the base of the solar wing. Throughout the operation, Parazynski used an L-shaped Teflon stick wrapped in insulating tape to keep the solar wing away, protecting himself from electrical shock. The spacewalk was the fourth and final EVA for the Discovery astronauts.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Fix Ripped Solar Wing,” 4 November 2007; Liz Austin Peterson for Associated Press, “Astronauts Revel in Wing Repair Success,” 4 November 2007.)
NASA announced the assignments to NASA’s field centers of specific tasks related to lunar exploration, as part of the Constellation Program. NASA assigned lead responsibility for designing the lunar lander and other lunar-surface systems, such as rovers and astronaut habitats, to JSC in Houston. MFSC would lead the development of the lunar lander’s descent stage and the development of the Earth-departure stage of the Ares-5 rocket. NASA gave ARC lead responsibility for the integrated health-management systems of Ares 5, the lunar lander, and for other lunar-surface systems, as well as a supporting role in developing Ares 5’s payload shroud. DFRC would assist ARC in developing mission-operation simulations capabilities and supporting ground- and flight-test operations for lunar projects. NASA assigned GRC lead responsibility for developing the lunar lander’s ascent stage and Ares 5’s power system, thrust- vector control system, and payload shroud, as well as for testing the Earth-departure stage at Plum Brook Station in Ohio. GSFC would take the lead in developing an unpressurized cargo carrier for Orion and avionics for lunar landers. GSFC would also develop equipment and tools for lunar EVAs. JPL would have a variety of supporting roles in the lunar-lander project and lead responsibility for a particular robotic lunar-surface mobility system—the All-Terrain Hex- Legged Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (ATHLETE), a six-legged robot. KSC would have lead responsibility for final assembly of the human lunar lander, help integrate lunar-habitat modules, and prepare Ares 1 and Ares 5 for launch. NASA assigned LaRC a variety of supporting roles in the lunar-lander project, in addition to lead roles in developing the aerodynamics of Ares 5 and structures and mechanisms for lunar-surface systems. As NASA’s primary rocket-engine testing facility, SSC would continue that role for the Ares 1 and Ares 5 and would support the testing of the lunar-lander descent engine.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Center Assignments for Moon Exploration,” news release 07-234, 30 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07234_ESMD_Work_Assignments.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Brian Berger, “NASA Assigns Field Center Roles for Ares 5, Lunar Lander,” Space.com, 30 October 2007, http://www.space.com/news/071030-sn-ares-fieldassign.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC) and Virgin Galactic signed a MOU, providing a framework to explore potential collaborations, such as developing spacesuits, heat shields for spacecraft, hybrid rocket motors, and hypersonic vehicles. The press also reported that the MOU included provisions for training NASA astronauts, for NASA to buy seats on a Virgin Galactic flight, and for NASA to provide technical advice to Virgin Galactic; however; these provisions were not, in fact, part of the agreement. A newly formed organization in the NASA Research Park at Ames—NASA’s Space Portal—had enabled the negotiation with Virgin Galactic to help NASA promote the development of the commercial space economy.(NASA, “NASA, Virgin Galactic To Explore Future Cooperation,” news release 07-49, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07049_Virgin_Galactic.html (accessed 14 October 2009); NASA, “NASA Provides Additional Information on Agreement with Virgin Galactic,” news release 07-50, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07050_Virgin_Galactic_info.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Associated Press, “NASA, Virgin Galactic Sign Agreement,” 22 February 2007; Matthew Moore, “Virgin Galactic To Train NASA Astronauts,” Daily Telegraph (London), 22 February 2007.)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted their second spacewalk in four days, to finish connecting cooling lines to a permanent system of the ISS. Working for just over 7 hours, the astronauts rerouted a series of two electrical cables and four quick-disconnect fluid lines to the Destiny laboratory’s permanent cooling system; retracted the aft heat-rejecting radiator on the P6 Truss; and finished disconnecting and stowing the second of two fluid lines for the Early Ammonia Servicer. Lopez- Alegria photographed the starboard solar array and the blanket box into which it folds, so that engineers could analyze the photos and finalize plans for its retraction during the Shuttle Mission STS-117, scheduled for March 2007. He also removed a sunshade that the crew no longer needed from a data-relay box, folding the sunshade to bring it inside the ISS, so that the crew could dispose of it later. At the conclusion of the spacewalk, Williams and Lopez-Alegria again followed precautionary decontamination procedures in the ISS’s airlock, as they had on 31 January, because they had seen ammonia flakes early in the spacewalk. Williams set a record for spacewalking time accrued by a woman—22 hours and 37 minutes—surpassing the record that NASA astronaut Kathryn C. Thornton had set in 1993.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06”; Marc Carreau, “Spacewalkers Finish Job; Astronauts Sets Record,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2007.)
NASA released the findings of two reviews examining the medical and behavioral health assessment of astronauts. Following the arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February 2007, NASA had requested that an independent external committee conduct a comprehensive review of the health services available to astronauts. Commander of the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine Richard E. Bachmann Jr. had chaired the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee, composed of representatives from eight federal agencies. The Review Committee suggested that NASA examine the structure of the Astronaut Office. In addition, the
U.S. astronauts Patrick G. Forrester and Steven R. Swanson undertook a 7-hour-and-16-minute spacewalk to assist with the retraction of a 115-foot-long (35-meter-long) solar panel that crew had installed on the ISS seven years before. The retraction was essential to the successful activation of the new solar power module because the old solar array was preventing the pair of arrays on the new module from rotating as they tracked the Sun. Shuttle Commander Frederick W. Sturckow and the ISS crew attempted to initiate the retraction using remote commands, but the panel failed to fold correctly. During the spacewalk, Forrester and Swanson rode on the tip of the ISS’s robotic arm to the top of the space station, carrying tools that enabled them to smooth the array folds and to straighten obstructing wire guides. Although, after 2 hours, the panel had only retracted partially, Forrester and Swanson returned to the new power module to work on the 2,500-pound (1,134-kilogram) solar alpha rotary joint (SARJ). The astronauts planned to resume their efforts to retract the panel the following day. Because another Shuttle crew had encountered difficulties retracting an array in December 2006, Forrester and Swanson had trained extensively before their mission, learning to address problems with the solar-array retraction.(John Johnson Jr., “Spacewalkers Face Workaday Glitches,” Los Angeles Times, 14 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Solar Panel Keeps Shuttle Spacewalkers Busy,” Houston Chronicle, 14 June 2007; Robyn Shelton, “Astronauts Tame Stubborn Solar Array,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 14 June 2007.)
