Space Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of seven astronauts landed safely at 10:48 a.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC, concluding a 16-day mission to the ISS. The mission had delivered to the ISS the final piece of JAXA’s Kibo laboratory, as well as the new ISS crew member Timothy L. Kopra. Koichi Wakata was returning to Earth with the Endeavour crew after living at the ISS for more than four months. When the seven-member Shuttle crew joined the six-member Expedition 20 in residence at the ISS, the mission featured the largest number of people aboard the ISS to date— and the largest human gathering ever to take place in space. Over the course of five spacewalks, STS-127 crew had transported and assembled the final two sections of the US$1 billion Japanese Kibo laboratory, resupplied the station, and upgraded its power supply.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-179, 31 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_179_Shuttle_landing_success.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Eric Berger, “Endeavour Ends Historic Mission,” Houston Chronicle, 1 August 2009; Scott Powers, “Shuttle Landing: Space Shuttle Endeavour Lands at KSC,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 August 2009.)
Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiment’s purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASA’s LaRC.(Diane Tennant, “NASA Opens Suitcase from Space,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, “MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening,” LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev launched aboard Soyuz TMA-16 from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 a.m. (CDT), to become the next residents of the ISS. Also aboard was spaceflight participant Guy Laliberté, the Canadian founder of Cirque du Soleil, who was flying to the ISS under an agreement with Space Adventures and the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Laliberté had paid US$35 million to travel to and from the ISS and to reside at the ISS for nine days. He planned to use his experience to publicize a growing global problem—the shortage of clean water.(NASA, “New Space Station Crew Launches; In-Orbit News Conference Set,” news release 09-226, 30 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-226_Soyuz_Exp21_Launch.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Canadian Circus Billionaire Heads to Space Station,” 30 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC at 2:28 p.m. (EST) on STS-129, carrying nearly 30,000 pounds of replacement parts for use at the ISS. NASA had packed the spare parts inside two Express Logistics Carriers (ELCs). Astronauts would install the ELCs outside the space station on the central truss during one of the three scheduled spacewalks. Most of the spare parts, which included two steering gyroscopes, a group of tanks, pumps for the ISS cooling system, and a hand for a robotic arm, would remain packed indefinitely until a need for them arose. The STS-129 crew was composed of Commander Charles O. Hobaugh; Pilot Barry E. Wilmore; and Mission Specialists Leland D. Melvin, Michael J. Foreman, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Randolph J. Bresnik.(NASA Space Shuttle Mission Archives, “Mission STS-129: Delivering the Goods,” 4 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/sts129/launch/129_overview.html (accessed 21 November 2011); James Dean, “A ‘Picture-Perfect’ Start: Atlantis Hauls Spare Parts to International Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 November 2009.)
JAXA’s HTV 1 arrived safely at the ISS. NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott used the ISS’s robotic arm to capture the 18-ton (16.33-tonne, or 16,329-kilogram) cargo craft as it hovered at a distance of 30 feet (9.14 meters), marking the first time that the ISS had captured a robotic craft from orbit. Russian and European supply craft used a docking method to arrive at the space station, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk berthed the craft at NASA’s Harmony module. The space agencies had scheduled HTV 1 to remain berthed at NASA’s Harmony module until November, when the ISS would release it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Crew Grabs New Cargo Ship From Orbit,” 18 September 2009; “ISS Crew Snares Robot Ship,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 September 2009.)
NASA announced that, in 2012 and 2013, it had signed a US$306 million modification to its ISS contract with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos for crew transportation and related services. According to Alexei B. Krasnov, Director of Human Flight Programs at Roscosmos, NASA would pay US$51 million per astronaut aboard the Soyuz craft. The modification covered all necessary Soyuz training and preparation for launch, crew rescue, and landing of a long- duration mission for six individual ISS crew members. The agreement covered four Soyuz launches—two in the spring of 2012 and two in the fall of 2012, with landings scheduled for the fall of 2012 and the spring of 2013—as well as postflight rehabilitation, medical exams, and services. The agreement allowed for limited cargo per person, to and from the station: 110 pounds (49.9 kilograms) launched to the ISS, 37 pounds (16.8 kilograms) returned to Earth, and 66 pounds (29.9 kilograms) of trash disposal.(NASA, “NASA Extends Contract with Russian Federal Space Agency,” contract release C09-024, 28 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_C09-024_Soyuz_Con_Mod.html (accessed 20 June 2011); RIA Novosti, “Russia To Charge NASA $51 Mln for Seats on Soyuz Spacecraft,” 29 May 2009.)
NASA announced that its Centennial Challenges program had awarded US$350,000 to a pair of designers who had won first and second place for the designs they had entered in the 2009 Astronaut Glove Challenge. Peter K. Homer of Southwest Harbor, Maine, won US$250,000 for his design, and Ted Southern of Brooklyn, New York, won US$100,000 for his. The 2009 competition required that gloves meet all the basic requirements of NASA’s current spacesuit gloves but exceed NASA’s flexibility requirements. NASA had asked all teams to develop a complete glove, including the outer, thermal-micrometeoroid-protection layer and the inner, pressure-restraining layer. Homer and Southern had tied in several categories, but Homer, who had won US$200,000 in the first Astronaut Glove Challenge in 2007, won first prize again by outscoring his rival in the joint-flexibility and pressure tests. The joint-flexibility tests involved 30 minutes of pinching and gripping tests, as well as other tests requiring finger flexing and the manipulation of small objects. The pressure test involved filling the glove with air in a tank of water until it burst. Homer’s glove had held out without bursting until pressure reached 20 pounds per square inch (9 kilograms per square centimeter), whereas Southern’s glove had made it to 17 pounds per square inch (7.7 kilograms per square centimeter). Engineers from NASA’s JSC and KSC, as well as NASA’s spacesuit manufacturer ILC Dover of Dover, Delaware, had measured and evaluated the designs.(NASA, “NASA Awards $350,000 to Winning Astronaut Glove Designers,” news release 09-277, 20 November 2009; Nicholos Wethington, “Astronaut Glove Challenge Winners Announced,” Universe Today, 20 November 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at NASA’s KSC at 9:44 a.m. (EST), successfully ending an 11-day mission to the ISS. Atlantis crew delivered and equipped the ISS with nearly 30,000 pounds (13,608 kilograms, or 13.6 tonnes) of critical spare parts. Atlantis crew also conducted three spacewalks in which astronauts completed extra tasks. The Shuttle crew also worked with five U.S., Russian, and European astronauts on board the ISS, to establish power, cooling, and airway connections ahead of the scheduled February arrival of the Tranquility module. The Shuttle and ISS crews also installed new external communications systems to facilitate future maintenance of the space station. Atlantis returned with ISS resident Nicole P. Stott, who had spent 91 days in space. NASA expected that Stott’s return would be the Shuttle’s last rotation of a station crew member.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Crew Returns Home After 11-Day Mission,” news release 09-279, 27 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-279_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Mark Carreau for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Lands Back on Earth,” 30 November 2009.)
NASA announced the award of an interim letter contract to Oceaneering International of Houston, to begin designing, developing, and producing a new spacesuit system for the Constellation Program. The interim contract required Oceaneering International to begin work on the basic period of performance, while NASA and the company negotiated the final terms. The interim contract, valued at US$9.6 million, would be in effect from 2 March 2009 until NASA and Oceaneering had defined the full contract—no later than 29 August 2009. NASA had initially awarded this contract to Oceaneering International and to five subcontractors in June 2008. However, a losing bidder, Exploration Systems and Technology, had protested the award. Exploration Systems and Technology was a joint venture between Connecticut-based Hamilton Sundstrand and Delaware-based ILC Dover, the two companies that had developed the spacesuits worn by NASA’s Shuttle and ISS astronauts. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) had evaluated the protest, which had led to the termination of NASA’s contract with Oceaneering International in August 2008. NASA had reopened the competition in November 2008, at which time Hamilton Sundstrand and ILC Dover had joined Oceaneering International to submit a single proposal.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Constellation Spacesuit for the Moon,” news release C09-008, 27 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-008_Constellation_Spacesuit_ Contract_Letter.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Mark Carreau, “Houston’s Oceaneering International Inc. Wins Once Disputed NASA Space Suit Contract,” Houston Chronicle, 2 March 2009.)
NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, and spaceflight participant Charles Simonyi, who had visited the ISS for the second time, landed safely in a Soyuz spacecraft in the steppes of southern Kazakhstan after undocking from the station on 7 April. The Russian federal space agency Roscosmos had delayed the landing for one day after discovering that spring flooding had affected the original landing site. Roscosmos had moved the landing to a location further south. Fincke and Lonchakov were returning from Expedition 18. During that expedition, the ISS had gained full power and had begun water-supply recycling in preparation for the station’s first six-person crew. In addition, the crew of Expedition 18 had performed scientific experiments, including many experiments designed to gather information about the effects of long-duration spaceflight on the human body.
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 11:59 p.m. (EDT) on STS-128, to deliver supplies, equipment, and a new crew member to the ISS. The STS-128 crew comprised Commander Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow; Pilot Kevin A. Ford; and Mission Specialists Patrick G. Forrester, Jose M. Hernandez, John D. “Danny” Olivas, and ESA astronaut A. Christer Fuglesang. Also aboard was Nicole P. Stott, who would begin a three-month mission in residence at the ISS, replacing NASA’s Timothy L. Kopra. Discovery carried in its cargo bay the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module, a pressurized “moving van” that the crew would temporarily install at the ISS. Leonardo would deliver storage racks, materials and fluids science racks, a freezer to store research samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air purification system, and a treadmill named after comedian Stephen Colbert. Colbert had received the most entries in NASA’s online poll to name the station’s Node 3, but NASA had named Node 3 “Tranquility.” As a consolation prize for Colbert, NASA had decided to name the treadmill COLBERT (Combined Operational Load Bearing External Resistance Treadmill).(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Enhance Space Station Science,” news release 09-196, 29 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-196_STS-128_Launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
Astronauts Steven R. Swanson and Richard R. Arnold II successfully completed a 6-hour spacewalk, installing the 31,000-pound (14,061-kilogram, or 14-tonne), 45-foot-long (13.7- meter-long) girder with solar arrays, to complete the final piece of the ISS’s structural backbone. Swanson and Arnold helped align the truss while, inside the station, astronaut John L. Philips used a robotic arm to lower the truss into place on the starboard end of the station. Then, Arnold used a high-technology ratchet wrench to link the two pieces of the station. With the new addition, the solar power truss measured 356 feet (108.5 meters). The ISS crew had assembled the truss from nine large segments that the Space Shuttles had delivered between 2000 and 2009. Before reentering the ISS, Arnold and Swanson disposed of four thermal covers from the new framework by tossing them out into space, and then watched the accordion-style radiator on the segment unfold.(Robert Block, “Discovery Astronauts Install Solar Wings,” Los Angeles Times, 20 March 2009; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Go Spacewalking, Install Last Set of Solar Wings at International Space Station,” 20 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “First Space Outing a Walk in the Park,” Houston Chronicle, 20 March 2009.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched on STS-127 at 6:03 p.m. (EDT) from NASA’s KSC in Florida, on a 16-day mission to the ISS. The mission would include five spacewalks, deliver the final segment to the JAXA Kibo laboratory, and deliver a new crew member for the ISS. The launch was STS-127’s sixth attempt—NASA had aborted two earlier attempted launches of the mission in June, after poor weather and the discovery of potentially hazardous fuel leaks had caused three scrubs since 11 July. The crew was composed of Commander Mark L. Polansky; Pilot Douglas G. Hurley; and Mission Specialists Christopher J. Cassidy, Thomas H. Marshburn, David A. Wolf, Timothy L. Kopra, and CSA astronaut Julie Payette. Kopra would replace ISS crew member Koichi Wakata, who had been aboard the ISS for more than three months. Kopra would return to Earth with STS-128, which NASA had scheduled to launch in August 2009.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Launches To Complete Japanese Module,” news release 09-160, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-160_STS-127_Launches.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Blasts Off from Cape Canaveral,” 16 July 2009.)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), an independent group of experts that had evaluated NASA’s safety performance since 1968, released its 2008 annual report. ASAP agreed that continuing to operate the Shuttle fleet would minimize the gap between Shuttle retirement and the first Orion flights, but the panel did not favor that approach because of NASA’s diminished Shuttle manufacturing and support capabilities. NASA had been closing out contracts with Shuttle component manufacturers and supporting vendors since 2004. According to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), operating the fleet beyond 2010 would require NASA to recertify the entire Shuttle system and to draw funds from the Constellation Program, thereby impeding its effort to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. ASAP saw little likelihood that NASA could field Ares-I rockets and Orion spacecraft before March 2015, even if Congress provided additional funding. ASAP had concluded that no evidence indicated that the commercial sector could develop cargo and crew transport services in time, or that commercial spacecraft were appropriate to transport NASA personnel, or that commercial spacecraft could safely dock with the ISS. In addition to ASAP’s annual report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) had released a report analyzing budget scenarios for fulfilling President George W. Bush’s 2004 space exploration plan. Each scenario predicted schedule slips requiring additional congressional funding. The CBO had found that, at current funding levels, NASA must delay development of Ares I’s and Orion’s initial operating capabilities until late 2016, delay the return of humans to the Moon for three years, and delay 15 out of 79 science missions beyond 2025.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel Releases Annual Report,” media advisory M09-061, 16 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_M09-061_ASAP_Annual_Report.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Todd Halvorson, “Independent Safety Experts Call for Shuttle Shutdown,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009; Eun Kyung Kim, “Report: NASA Needs Extra Billons To Maintain Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009. See also U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, “The Budgetary Implications of NASA’s Current Plans for Space Exploration” (report, Washington, DC, April 2009), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/ doc10051/04 -15-NASA.pdf.)
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino, a mechanical and robotics engineer on this third spacewalk, and Michael T. Good, a former U.S. Air Force test pilot on his first space mission, undertook the second of five planned spacewalks to repair the HST. The spacewalk agenda consisted of the most important task of the 11-day mission—to replace the gyroscopes that kept the telescope pointed in the correct direction—and to replace three batteries. Working from inside the telescope, Good and Massimino had difficulty installing the second set of new gyroscopes and resorted to using a spare that did not initially fit either. The extra work extended the spacewalk to 8 hours—1.5 hours longer than scheduled—making it the tenth longest spacewalk on record.(Dennis Overbye, “Astronauts Work on Replacing Hubble’s Gyroscopes,” New York Times, 16 May 2009.)
NASA astronauts Randolph J. Bresnik and Robert L. Satcher Jr. undertook the third and final spacewalk of STS-129. The pair began their spacewalk an hour late because of difficulty with a valve on the drink bag of Satcher’s spacesuit. However, the team quickly worked to get ahead of schedule, finishing at 2:06 p.m. (EST), just after the originally scheduled ending time. With the assistance of a robotic arm, the pair installed a 1,200-pound (544-kilogram) oxygen tank at a NASA air lock on the ISS, the main objective of the spacewalk. They filled it with high-pressure oxygen for future spacewalks, connected the gas line, and conducted a check for leaks. The pair also installed science experiments on the outside of the station, including the MISSE, which would help NASA scientists understand how substances and coatings react to direct sunlight, radiation, atomic oxygen, and extreme temperatures. NASA intended to use the results of these experiments in the design of future spacecraft. Additionally, Bresnik and Satcher removed two orbital-debris shields from the air lock, making room for the oxygen tank; loosened a bolt on an ammonia tank; and worked on fluid jumper lines.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk No. 3 After Suit Snag,” 24 November 2009; Ryan Flinn, “Spacewalker’s Final Sortie Tests Materials for Future Craft,” Bloomberg News, 24 November 2009.)
Five hours into the third of five scheduled spacewalks, Mission Control instructed STS-127 crew members Christopher J. Cassidy and David A. Wolf to return to the inside of the ISS, after a canister for removing carbon dioxide from Cassidy’s suit apparently stopped functioning properly. Because of the curtailed spacewalk, the astronauts had to leave two of four new, uninstalled batteries outside the station. When Mission Control told them to stop work, the two astronauts were behind schedule because they had been unable to remove some stubborn bolts. They had removed three of the nine-year-old batteries, which NASA had installed in 2000, and had plugged in two new ones. The large nickel hydrogen batteries stored the power that the ISS solar wings had collected. NASA had designed the batteries to last six-and-a-half years and wanted to replace them before they stopped working. Mission Control planned to complete work on the batteries during one of the next two spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Cut Spacewalk Short Due To Suit Trouble,” 23 July 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Add New Batteries to Space Station,” Space.com, 24 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7051- spacewalkers-add-batteries-space-station.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Former science teachers and rookie NASA astronauts Richard R. Arnold II and Joseph M. Acaba undertook the third and final spacewalk of STS-119 at the ISS. The spacewalk, which lasted nearly 6.5 hours, was the second spacewalk for both astronauts, their first spacewalk together, and their first without Steven R. Swanson. One of their priority tasks was to free the pin that had prevented Swanson and Acaba from deploying an equipment-storage platform during the previous spacewalk on 21 March. Arnold managed to free the pin, but the platform remained stuck. Mission Control ordered them to use four straps to secure the partially deployed platform to the port side of the ISS’s central truss and then to move on to other tasks. Acaba, riding on the end of the ISS’s robotic arm, moved a rail cart from one side of the station’s central truss to the other, in preparation for future assembly and maintenance work. Arnold and Acaba also performed maintenance work on the robotic arm, including lubricating the grappling end of the arm with grease.(Houston Chronicle, “Spacewalkers Leave One Item for Next Team,” 24 March 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Platform Causes Trouble in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Space Teachers Team Up in Spacewalk,” Space.com, 23 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6478-space-teachers-team-spacewalk.html (accessed 13 May 2011).)
Soyuz TMA-16 docked with the ISS Zvezda service module at 4:35 a.m. (EST), safely delivering to the ISS NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams, Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev, and Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté. Williams and Suraev were joining ISS Expedition 21 as flight engineers. The docking marked the first time that three Soyuz craft had docked at the space station at one time. The automated docking system worked flawlessly.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: Crew Docks Safely at Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 October 2009. 147 NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Impacts Lunar Crater in Search for Water Ice,” news release 09-236, 9 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-236_LCROSS.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Moon Crash: Public Yawns, Scientists Celebrate,” 10 October 2009.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed retired U.S. Marine Corps general and former astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. as NASA’s twelfth Administrator, marking the first appointment of an African American as NASA’s Administrator. During his 34-year career with the Marine Corps, Bolden had spent 14 years as a member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, which he had joined in 1980. As an astronaut, he had traveled to orbit four times aboard the Space Shuttle, between 1986 and 1994. On two of those trips he had served as Commander of the Shuttle. His missions had included the deployment of the HST and the first joint U.S.-Russian Shuttle mission. While he was an astronaut, Bolden had fulfilled many technical assignments, serving as Astronaut Office Safety Officer; Technical Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations; Special Assistant to the Director of JSC; Lead Astronaut for vehicle test and checkout at KSC; Chief of the Safety Division at JSC, where he oversaw safety efforts for the return to flight after the 1986 Challenger accident; and Assistant Deputy Administrator at NASA Headquarters. In May 2006, NASA had inducted Bolden into the Astronaut Hall of Fame. The Senate also confirmed Lori B. Garver as NASA’s new Deputy Administrator. Like Bolden, Garver was returning to NASA for a second period of service. Between 1996 and 2001, she had served as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and Senior Policy Analyst for the Office of Policy and Plans, before becoming Associate Administrator of that office.(NASA, “Bolden and Garver Confirmed by U.S. Senate,” news release 09-165, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-165_Bolden_and_Garver.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Bolden Confirmed as NASA Administrator,” 16 July 2009.)
The astronauts of STS-119 unfurled the 115-foot (35-meter) blue and gold solar panels from the US$298 million girder they had attached to the ISS on 19 March, encountering none of the problems that had challenged previous missions when unfolding the solar arrays. For example, in 2007, the last time NASA had unfurled solar panels, one wing had caught on a guide wire and had ripped, requiring additional spacewalks to make emergency repairs. To avoid similar problems, NASA had instructed the crew to unfold the wings in stages. The crew opened each wing halfway and then waited nearly an hour before proceeding. They allowed the partially opened wings to soak up sunlight, thereby rendering them less likely to jam. The array, which stretched 240 feet (73 meters), from tip to tip, brought full electrical power to the space station and doubled the amount of power available to perform scientific experiments, from 15 kilowatts to 30 kilowatts.(Robert Block, “Space Station’s New Solar Wings Unfurl,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 21 March 2009; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Space Station’s New Solar Wings Open Easily,” 21 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “Panels Unfold Without Incident,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 2009.)
With the assistance of K. Megan McArthur, who operated the robotic arm, astronauts John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel undertook a spacewalk to upgrade HST for the first time in seven years. The mission was Grunsfeld’s third visit to HST and Feustel’s first space mission. The team’s primary task was to replace the 16-year-old Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 with the new Wide Field Camera 3. Feustel and Grunsfeld struggled with a pair of bolts on the old camera, setting them 30 minutes behind schedule. However, Feustel managed to work the bolts loose without breaking them, which would have blocked installation of the new US$132 million camera.(Mark Carreau, “Spacewalkers Equip Hubble with New Computer,” Agence France-Presse, 15 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Hubble Repair Passes ‘Speed Bump’,” USA Today, 15 May 2009.)
NASA announced that its twin STEREO (Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory) spacecraft had provided scientists with their first view of the speed, trajectory, and three-dimensional shape of solar coronal mass ejections (CMEs). The spacecraft’s capabilities had dramatically improved scientists’ ability to predict the impact of CMEs on Earth, enabling them to determine when CMEs would occur. In addition, scientists could now predict whether a CME would merely cause an auroral display or would produce a type of cosmic ray that is potentially hazardous to astronauts, spacecraft, and Earth technologies such as GPS signals and power grids. NASA had launched the two spacecraft in 2006 on a mission to make simultaneous observations of CMEs from different vantage points. The successful production of three-dimensional observations had enabled solar physicists to determine when a CME would reach Earth and to predict how much energy the CME would deliver to Earth’s magnetosphere. Because of the two vantage points of the twin STEREO spacecraft, the craft were able to provide data that Earth-based observatories were unable to capture, regarding the direction and speed of solar storms. STEREO could also sample the contents of solar storms and gauge the magnetic properties of the eruptions. Before the STEREO mission, scientists could not make measurements or collect subsequent data about CMEs until the ejections had arrived at Earth—typically three to seven days after their occurrence.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Show Three Dimensional Anatomy of a Solar Storm,” news release 09-083, 14 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-083_STEREO.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Anne Minard, “First 3-D Pictures of Solar Explosions Created,” National Geographic News, 15 April 2009.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a follow-on contract to Computer Sciences Corporation of Fort Worth, Texas, to support NASA’s aircraft used for astronaut training and flight research. The follow-on, potentially valued at approximately US$163 million, continued services provided under a previous contract, which had been in effect from 1 March 2004 through 31 August 2009. The new contract would be in effect 1 September 2009 through 28 February 2010. Under the Aircraft Maintenance and Modification Program, Computer Sciences Corporation would continue to provide flight-line, intermediate, and depot-level maintenance, repairs, modifications, and engineering support for NASA aircraft.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Aircraft Maintenance,” news release C09-040, 25 August 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of nine candidates, from among 3,500 applicants, to form the 2009 astronaut candidate class. The six men and three women made up the first group of astronaut recruits in five years and the twentieth class since the selection of the original Mercury astronauts in 1959. With ages ranging from 30 to 43, the group represented a mix of military and civilian recruits, including a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) technical intelligence officer, two NASA flight surgeons, a space station flight controller, a molecular biologist, two Navy test pilots, a U.S. Air Force test pilot, and the special assistant to the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the Pentagon. NASA had scheduled the start of the class’s two-year training for August 2009. With the SSP slated to end in 2010, the likelihood that any member of the 2009 class would fly aboard the Shuttle was extremely low. Therefore, the new astronauts would likely train only for ISS missions and for flight aboard the Russian Soyuz vehicles, as well as aboard the Shuttle’s replacement spacecraft.(NASA, “NASA Selects Nine New Astronauts for Future Space Exploration,” news release 09-149, 29 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-149_New_Astronauts.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA Unveils Astronaut Class that Will Never Fly on Shuttle,” Space.com, 26 June 2009, http://www. space.com/6900-nasa-unveils-astronaut-class-fly-shuttle.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
ISS Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov successfully completed all scheduled tasks in a spacewalk lasting almost 5 hours. Fincke and Lonchakov installed EXPOSE-R (studies of exobiological processes in outer space), a joint European-Russian scientific experiment involving biological materials. They placed the experiment outside the Zvezda service module, which astronauts had been unable to activate during a December spacewalk because of an internal cable problem. NASA astronaut Sandra H. Magnus assisted in the installation of EXPOSE-R from inside the ISS. Fincke and Lonchakov also rotated a container holding a scientific experiment involving Russian materials and trimmed a set of six straps positioned near the Pirs docking compartment, to prevent their interference with incoming Russian vehicles needing to dock. In addition, they photographed the Zvezda module, as part of a survey to assess its condition after nine years in orbit. The spacewalk was Lonchakov’s second, Fincke’s sixth, and their second spacewalk as a team. Fincke had undertaken all of his six spacewalks wearing a Russian spacesuit.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: ISS Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Upgrade Space Station,” Space.com, 10 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6396- spacewalkers-upgrade-space-station.html (accessed 12 May 2011).)
NASA astronauts David A. Wolf and Thomas H. Marshburn made the second of STS-127’s five scheduled spacewalks, transferring to storage a spare KU-band antenna, a backup 1,300-pound (590-kilogram) coolant-system pump module, and a robotic-arm-transporter drive motor. The tasks were part of an effort to stow critical spare parts, to ensure that the ISS had everything it needed when the Shuttle fleet retired. The 6-hour-and-53-minute spacewalk took longer than expected, causing flight controllers to instruct Wolf and Marshburn to defer their final planned task of installing a television camera on the new JEF platform. Instead, Marshburn installed insulation on cables used to route station power to the Shuttle, and Wolf packed up tools and equipment. Marshburn experienced one potentially dangerous incident during the spacewalk when he lost track of his 85-foot (26-meter) safety tether, but he remained safely attached to the ISS with his 55-foot (17-meter) tether.(Todd Halvorson, “Station Stocks Up on Parts,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 July 2009; William Harwood, “Spacewalk No. 2 Ends,” Spaceflight Now, 21 July 2009.)
ISS Expedition 20 and 21 crew members ESA astronaut Frank De Winne, cosmonaut Roman Y. Romanenko, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz TMA- 15 capsule. Soyuz TMA-15 landed in Kazakhstan at 2:15 a.m. (EST) in icy weather, ending a 188-day mission to the ISS. Although poor weather conditions had grounded the eight Mi-8 helicopters normally used in the recovery process, recovery crews in all-terrain vehicles were able to reach the spacecraft within 15 minutes of touchdown. Astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev remained on board the ISS, representing the smallest space station crew since July 2006.(William Harwood, “Space Station Crew Lands in Frigid Kazakhstan,” Spaceflight Now, 1 December 2009; James Dean, “Soyuz Makes Safe Return to Cold Earth,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 December 2009.)
SpaceX announced that it had conducted its first Dragon spacecraft operations training in October 2009 at its headquarters in Hawthorne, California, for a group of NASA astronauts and personnel. The training had focused on how the crew would interface with the spacecraft as it approached and docked at the ISS. NASA had assigned astronauts Tracy Caldwell Dyson, Shannon Walker, and Douglas H. Wheelock to be on board the ISS when the Dragon made its inaugural visit under the COTS program, scheduled for February 2010. The training had been the first time the NASA astronauts scheduled to interact with the Dragon were actually inside the flight vehicle. This first training session marked a key step toward SpaceX’s provision of the alternative craft that NASA would use to transport cargo to and from the ISS after the Space Shuttle program ended. In the session, SpaceX had briefed the NASA astronauts on all aspects of the Dragon related to cargo transport—how to open the spacecraft’s hatch, how to enter the craft, and how to send commands as the craft approached the station.(Space Exploration Technologies, “SpaceX Hosts Preliminary Training for NASA ISS Astronauts in Preparation for Dragon Spacecraft Rendezvous and Station Berthing,” SpaceX news release, 3 December 2009, http://www. spacex.com/press.php?page=20091203 (accessed 19 December 2011); Robert Block, “SpaceX Trains Its First Batch of NASA Astronauts,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 2009.)
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino and Michael T. Good undertook the fourth spacewalk at HST, attempting to fix the spectrograph and to replace worn insulation on the telescope. To fix the spectrograph, Massimino first needed to remove a handrail, but a stripped bolt hampered his work. Even using various specially designed tools, he was unable to remove the bolt for 2 hours. As a last resort, after engineers at GFSC conducted two tests on a mock-up, Mission Control in Houston instructed Massimino to “use his muscles.” After successfully pulling the bolt off, Massimino tried to install a special plate to remove 111 tiny screws that held the spectrograph’s cover in place, but the battery of one of the tools became depleted. Massimino returned to the Shuttle, swapped out the batteries, and recharged his oxygen supply, but this task set the spacewalk another half hour behind schedule. After Massimino had successfully replaced the spectrograph’s internal electronics power-supply card, the astronauts still faced more than 90 minutes of cleanup and closeout work. Therefore, spacewalk coordinators decided to delay the insulation task until the fifth and final spacewalk. The spacewalk lasted more than 8 hours, the sixth longest in NASA history.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Stuck Bolt, Dead Battery Bedevil Hubble Repairs,” 18 May 2009.)
Russia’s Soyuz TMA-17 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:52 p.m. (CST), carrying NASA astronaut Timothy J. Creamer, Russian cosmonaut Oleg V. Kotov, and JAXA astronaut Soichi Noguchi to the ISS. The three crew members, scheduled to remain at the ISS until May 2010, would join Expedition 22 crew members American Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian Maxim V. Suraev aboard the space station, bringing the station crew total to five. The mission was Creamer’s first. The launch marked the first time a Soyuz craft had launched at night in winter.(NASA, “Crew Lifts Off From Kazakhstan To Begin Science and Construction Work Aboard the International Space Station,” news release 09-295, 20 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09- 295_Soyuz_launch_ex22.html (accessed 16 December 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Astronauts Blast Off for Christmas Space Mission,” 21 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Launches Toward International Space Station,” Space.com, 21 December 2009, http://www.space.com/7693-crew-launches- international-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA successfully launched its PharmaSat nanosatellite at 7:55 p.m. (EDT) from its Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) aboard a four-stage U.S. Air Force Minotaur-1 rocket. The rocket also carried the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory’s TacSat-3 satellite, which was the primary payload, and other NASA CubeSat Technology Demonstration experiments—Aerocube 3, CP 6, and Hawksat 1—three 4-inch, cubed satellites developed by universities and industry to measure electron collection, radiation testing, and guidance and control systems. PharmaSat’s mission was to investigate the effects of antifungal agents on the growth of yeast in microgravity, to help scientists better understand how microbes might become resistant to drugs used to treat sick astronauts on long-duration flights. PharmaSat separated from the rocket approximately 20 minutes after launch and entered low Earth orbit at an altitude of 285 miles (458.7 kilometers). Following the checkout period, ground controllers planned to command PharmaSat to initiate its biological experiment, scheduled to last 96 hours. The satellite would transmit radio signals to Ground Control stations at two California locations and would send mission data to the NASA Mission Management Team at ARC. The satellite could continue to transmit this data for as long as six months.(NASA, “NASA Flight Facility Successfully Launches Nanosatellite,” news release 09-114, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-114_PharmaSat_Launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667; Matthew Jones, “Rocket May Launch a Promising Future for Wallops Island,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 20 May 2009.)
Three new ISS residents arrived at the space station aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, bringing the outpost’s full staff to six for the first time in its 10-year history. Also, for the first time, each of the major space station partners had a representative on board: Roman Y. Romanenko and Gennady I. Padalka of Russia, Michael R. Barratt of the United States, Koichi Wakata of JAXA, Belgian astronaut Frank De Winne of ESA, and Robert B. Thirsk of CSA. The first ISS crew had arrived in the year 2000, two years after the launch of the first part of the station. Since that time, the ISS had expanded to nine rooms, including three full-scale laboratories, five sleeping compartments, two toilets, two kitchens, and two mini-gyms, making the station 81 percent complete. The increased crew size also ushered in a new era of station operations that would allow astronauts and cosmonauts to focus on scientific research rather than on the assembly and maintenance of the ISS.(Marcia Dunn, “Space Station Crew Finally at Full Staff of 6,” Agence France-Presse, 30 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “At Space Station, the House Is Packed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 June 2009.)
NASA astronauts Nicole P. Stott and John D. “Danny” Olivas undertook the first spacewalk of STS-128, which lasted 6 hours and 30 minutes. The pair completed the EVA early, with all objectives accomplished. They removed from the ISS’s central truss an ammonia tank that had been in use since 2002. Olivas lifted the 1,300-pound (589-kilogram) tank, which measured 5 feet by 7 feet by 4 feet (1.52 meters by 2.13 meters by 1.22 meters), onto the end of the station’s robotic arm, where it would remain until the installation of a fresh pair of tanks during the next spacewalk. The pair also retrieved from ESA’s Columbus laboratory two sets of experiments, so that the Shuttle could return them to Earth. After removing the ammonia tank, Olivas noticed that the index finger of his right glove had begun to fray. Mission Control evaluated the problem and, after determining that the frayed stitching was minor, decided that Olivas could remain outside and continue the EVA. A few minutes later, Stott noticed a high reading of her carbon dioxide levels. She reported that she was not experiencing any symptoms. Mission Control decided that Stott’s suit was operating fine, and that she, too, could remain outside. The astronauts also experienced a 30-minute communication outage with Mission Control because of a thunderstorm at a satellite-relay station in Guam. The spacewalk was Stott’s first. She was KSC’s third employee to become an astronaut and the center’s first employee to embark on a spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Spacewalkers Tackle Hefty Tank Removal in Orbit,” 2 September 2009; James Dean, “Ex-KSC Engineer Works Outside ISS,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 September 2009; Stockton Record (CA), “Astronauts Embark on Their First Spacewalk,” 2 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at 3:14 p.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC in Florida, completing its 13-day mission to the ISS. The crew of STS-119 had delivered, installed, and deployed the space station’s final set of solar-array wings, thus completing the station’s truss and supplying full power; replaced a failed unit for a system that converts urine to potable water; and performed important tasks in preparation for future upgrades and additions. STS-119 spacewalkers had failed to deploy fully an external cargo carrier on the Port-3 truss segment but had secured it in place. Mission Control had cancelled the installation of a similar payload attachment system on the starboard side, tasking NASA engineers with evaluating the problem. NASA planned to complete the installation during future spacewalks. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata had remained aboard the ISS, replacing Flight Engineer Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the space station for more than four months.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-072, 28 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09072_STS-119_Landing.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Astronauts John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of the HST servicing mission. They successfully renewed the telescope’s batteries, which provide power when the solar panels are not receiving light; replaced a fine-guidance sensor; and fitted three thermal blankets to protect the craft’s electronics. The spacewalk was Feustel’s third and Grunsfeld’s eighth—with 58 hours and 30 minutes of spacewalking time, Grunsfeld became the world’s fourth most experienced spacewalker during the HST servicing mission.(BBC News, “Fifth Spacewalk Energises Hubble,” 19 May 2009; Tariq Malik, “Astronauts Give Hubble Telescope One Last Hug,” Space.com, 18 May 2009, http://www.space.com/6714-astronauts-give-hubble-telescope-hug.html (accessed 19 July 2011).)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA astronaut Michael R. Barratt, Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka, and U.S. software engineer Charles Simonyi launched aboard a Soyuz spacecraft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:49 a.m. (CDT), on a flight to the ISS. Barratt and Padalka would join JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata to form the Expedition 19 crew at the space station. The first space tourist to make a second flight to the ISS, Simonyi had previously visited the station in April 2007. He was flying under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Simonyi would return to Earth with Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, who had been aboard the station since October 2008. The Expedition 19 crew would continue conducting scientific investigations and preparing for the arrival of the station’s first six-person crew.
NASA astronauts David A. Wolf and Timothy L. Kopra successfully completed the first of the five spacewalks scheduled at the ISS for STS-127. Over the course of 5 hours and 32 minutes, the duo installed the 1.9-tonne (4,189-pound or 2.09-ton) Japanese Exposed Facility (JEF), with the assistance of four crew members, who operated the Canadarm2 from inside the ISS. Koichi Wakata and Douglas G. Hurley used the robotic arm to help remove the structure from the Shuttle’s cargo bay, and Julie Payette and Mark L. Polansky maneuvered it over to Kibo, the Japanese research module. NASA described the JEF as a “type of porch for experiments that require direct exposure to space.” After completing their work with JEF, Wolf and Kopra moved to the ISS truss, to work on attaching two spare-parts platforms. ISS crew had already set up one of the platforms, the Cargo Attachment System. However, during STS-119 the crew had experienced difficulty deploying a platform, when a jammed pin failed to release. Wolf and Kopra had used a new tool, built especially for the task, to unfold the platform successfully. The spacewalk was Kopra’s first and Wolf’s fifth.(Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Endeavour Astronauts Complete First Space Walk,” 19 July 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Astronauts Add Porch to Space Station,” Space.com, 18 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7007- astronauts-add-porch-space-station.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka and NASA Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt undertook a 4-hour, 54-minute spacewalk to install a pair of antennas for automated rendezvous equipment. The astronauts undertook the work to prepare for the arrival of the Russian Mini Research Module 2 (MRM 2), which would serve as an additional docking port for Russian vehicles. Padalka and Barratt also connected each antenna to a series of power cables and photographed them from aboard the long Strela extension pole. Padalka operated the Strela boom, while Barratt took pictures from multiple vantage points, to allow Russian mission control to analyze the antennas and to ensure that the crew had installed them correctly.
After receiving clearance to return home, astronauts aboard the orbiting Space Shuttle Endeavour successfully deployed two sets of small satellites. Endeavour had undocked from the ISS on 28 July in preparation for the return flight of STS-127. Endeavour’s crew first deployed a pair of small satellites from the Shuttle’s payload bay—the student-built DRAGONSAT (Dual RF Astrodynamic GPS Orbital Navigator Satellite), part of a study to demonstrate autonomous rendezvous and docking technologies, as well as GPS systems. The crew later jettisoned the two 19-inch (48-centimeter) spheres that comprised the Naval Research Laboratory’s ANDE-2 (Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment-2) mission. Although identical in size, each sphere had a different mass. Researchers planned to observe differences in the spheres’ orbits, as part of a study of the density of Earth’s atmosphere.(Tariq Malik, “Shuttle Astronauts Deploy Satellites Ahead of Landing,” Space.com, 30 July 2009, http://www. space.com/7078-shuttle-astronauts-deploy-satellites-landing.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Astronauts aboard the ISS operated the Japanese robotic arm for the first time, moving two experiments. One of the two experiments would study the effect of the station’s space environment on electronics and devices; the other was an x-ray observatory that would scan the night sky, using an inter-orbit communications system to send images, data, and voice communications to Japan’s Kibo mission control center at Tsukuba Space Center. The ISS’s robotic arm moved the three payloads from JEL to JEF, the porch attached to Japan’s Kibo laboratory. After some initial problems with its grappling device, the 33-foot (10-meter) robotic arm continued its day-long operation as planned. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata helped to drive the robotic arm. Wakata, Japan’s first long-duration ISS resident, had lived aboard the station since March 2009.(Tariq Malik, “Japanese Experiments Moved to Space Station,” Space.com, 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7043-japanese-experiments-moved-space-station.html (accessed 29 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis arrived at the ISS on mission STS-129. With the assistance of a robotic arm, NASA astronauts immediately unloaded one of two ELCs: a 16-foot-by-14-foot (5-meter- by-4-meter) platform, containing pumps, storage tanks, and other equipment weighing hundreds of pounds apiece. All of the equipment was too large to launch aboard any vehicle other than the Shuttle. With only five launches to go before the scheduled 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle program, NASA planned for the Shuttles to carry to the ISS as many spare parts as possible in the time remaining. In addition to spare parts sent to the ISS for storage, Atlantis had also carried thousands of microscopic specimens. NASA intended to use the specimens in experiments studying the effect of gravity on human muscle development and physiology. Upon the docking of Atlantis with the ISS, NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had been on board the ISS for approximately three months, became a member of the Shuttle crew. Stott would return home on board Atlantis at the conclusion of STS-129.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station, Unloads Parts,” 19 November 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Shuttle Atlantis Docks with Space Station,” 19 November 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 5:53 p.m. (PDT), ending a successful 14-day mission to the ISS. Weather prevented the crew from landing at KSC in Florida. STS-128 had delivered to the ISS NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had begun a three-month mission as a resident, replacing Timothy L. Kopra. Kopra had returned home with Discovery’s crew. Discovery had also delivered to the ISS 9 tons (8.16 tonnes, or 8,165 kilograms) of supplies, to sustain the six-person crew and to equip the station for more science experiments. The delivery had included two refrigerator-sized science racks for the station—one for conducting experiments on materials such as metals, glass, and ceramics, and the other for studying how fluids react in microgravity. In addition, Discovery had delivered a freezer for samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air-purification system, and a treadmill named for the comedian Stephen Colbert. The crew had undertaken three spacewalks, to replace experiments outside ESA’s Columbus laboratory and to empty an ammonia-storage tank.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery Returns to Earth After Successful Mission,” news release 09-212, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-212_Discovery_Lands.html (accessed 15 September 2011); James Dean, “Storms Prevent KSC Landing, Divert Discovery to California,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 September 2009; William Harwood, “Shuttle Glides to a California Landing,” New York Times, 12 September 2009.)
NASA announced that it had begun the process for testing in water a full-scale mockup of its Orion crew module, under simulated- and real-landing weather conditions. On 23 March, at the Naval Surface Warfare Center’s Carderock Division in West Bethesda, Maryland, NASA had begun the Post-Landing Orion Recovery Test (PORT), its goal to determine the types of motions the astronaut crew could expect to experience after landing, as well as conditions the recovery team could face outside at the landing site. The Carderock facility provided a controlled environment in which crew recovery personnel could familiarize themselves with the capsule before commencing with tests in the uncontrolled waters of the Atlantic Ocean off the Florida coast on 6 April. NASA expected that PORT would help in the design of landing recovery operations, including equipment, ship, and crew necessities.(NASA, “NASA’s Constellation Program Tests Orion Recovery Procedures,” news release 09-068, 25 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-068_Orion_PORT_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011). 47 NASA, “King Retires as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-071, 26 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-071_MSFC_King_Retires.html (accessed 4 May 2011). 48 NASA, “New Astronaut Crew Launches to International Space Station,” news release 09-069, 26 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-069_Exp19_Launch.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
NASA announced the successful conclusion of the third round of testing of the Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (CECE) technology, intended to return astronauts to the lunar surface safely. Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne in West Palm Beach, Florida, had conducted the tests to gather data on the concept engine. Engineers had designed the CECE with the flexibility to reduce thrust from 100 percent to 10 percent, allowing a spacecraft to land gently on the lunar surface. The test set a record, with the engine successfully throttled to 104 percent of its potential and then reduced to 8 percent. A careful assessment of test results from the first two rounds of testing had shown pressure oscillations in the engine at lower throttle levels, known as “chugging.” The vibrations from the chugging could potentially resonate with the structure of the rocket, causing problems for the lander and the crew. However, in the third round of testing, engineers successfully eliminated engine chugging. To achieve this, they controlled the flow of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen to the combustion chamber, using a new injector design and propellant feed system that carefully managed the pressure, temperature, and flow of propellants.(NASA, “NASA Tests Engine Technology for Landing Astronauts on the Moon,” news release 09-005, 14 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-005_Cryo_engine_test.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 7:43 p.m. (EDT). STS-119 carried the fourth and final set of solar-array wings, which would complete the ISS’s truss when installed. The schedule for the 13-day mission included three spacewalks to install the S6-truss segment on the starboard side of the ISS and to deploy the solar arrays. The seven-member crew was composed of Commander Lee J. Archambault, Pilot Dominic A. “Tony” Antonelli, and Mission Specialists Joseph M. Acaba, Steven R. Swanson, Richard R. Arnold II, John L. Phillips, and JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata. Wakata would remain at the ISS, replacing Expedition 18 crew member Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the station for more than four months. Acaba and Arnold, former teachers who had become fully trained NASA astronauts, were on their first mission, scheduled to undertake critical spacewalking tasks. STS-119 was one month behind schedule; NASA had delayed the launch four times because of fragile valves inside the Shuttle’s propulsion system. On 11 March, NASA had postponed Discovery’s launch because, during fueling, engineers had detected a leak associated with the gaseous hydrogen venting system. Because of the delays, NASA had shortened the STS-119 mission by one day and had dropped one of the four spacewalks originally scheduled.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Fully Power Space Station,” news release 09-060, 15 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-060_Discovery_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, “Discovery Heads to International Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 March 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael J. Foreman and Randolph J. Bresnik undertook the second spacewalk of STS-129. The spacewalk, which began late because of false alarms on the ISS overnight, was Bresnik’s first. The pair installed a set of antennas on the Columbus laboratory. The antennas would track ships at sea, relocate a device that measured the build-up of electrical charge outside the ISS, and deploy a cargo-storage platform outside the station. Working ahead of schedule, the astronauts also installed a wireless video system for the cameras used in the helmets of spacewalkers; completed a few odd jobs, such as reconnecting a power cable for a space-to- ground antenna that crew had installed on the previous spacewalk; and deployed a second storage platform outside the ISS, a task that NASA had scheduled for the third spacewalk of STS-129. The excursion lasted 6 hours and 8 minutes.(James Dean, “Second Atlantis Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Astronauts Speed Through Second Spacewalk,” Space.com, 21November 2009, http://www.space. com/7579-astronauts-speed-spacewalk.html (accessed 21 November 2011).)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the second spacewalk of STS-128, lasting 6 hours and 39 minutes. The pair collected a new 1,700-pound (771- kilogram) ammonia tank from Discovery, attached it to the ISS, and connected the electrical and fluid lines. The new tank contained 600 pounds (272 kilograms) of fresh ammonia, which would help cool the station’s electrical systems. Olivas and Fuglesang then anchored the old ammonia tank inside Discovery in preparation for its return to Earth on the Shuttle. They had removed the old tank during their spacewalk on 1 September. The pair also had a few “get-ahead” tasks to complete. Fuglesang installed protective covers over cameras on the ISS robotic arm and positioned a portable foot restraint on a solar-power truss, to assist future assembly crews. Olivas was unable to complete his get-ahead task because a cable that he needed was not where flight controllers had expected it to be.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Spacewalk Performed Despite Approaching Space Junk,” 4 September 2009; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Spacewalkers Install Bulky Coolant Tank: Space Junk Not a Threat,” 4 September 2009; William Harwood, “Spacewalk No. 2 Complete,” Spaceflight Now, 4 September 2009.)
NASA announced that it had concluded two weeks of technology-development tests on two prototype lunar rovers in the Arizona desert at Black Point Lava Point, as part of the decade-old program Desert RATS (Research and Technology Studies). The annual Desert RATS excursions allowed NASA to analyze and to refine technologies and procedures in extreme environments on Earth. For the lunar-rover test, two crew members—an astronaut and a geologist—had simulated a 14-day mission, living for more than 300 hours inside NASA’s prototype Lunar Electric Rover and scouting the area for features of geological interest. They had worn spacesuits to conduct simulated moonwalks in which they collected samples; docked to a simulated habitat; driven the rover across difficult terrain; performed a rescue mission; and made a four-day trip across lava. Before the test, NASA’s K10 scout robot had identified areas of interest for the crew to explore. NASA’s All-Terrain Hex-Legged Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (Tri-ATHLETE), a heavy-lift rover, had carried the simulated habitat to which the rover had docked.(NASA, “NASA Concludes Robotics Tests for the Moon in Arizona,” news release 09-214, 15 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-214_Desert_RATS_concludes.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Mission’s 3rd and Final Spacewalk,” 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission,” 5 September 2009.)
In the third spacewalk at HST, John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel carried out a set of unprecedented tasks—no astronaut had ever tried to take apart any of HST’s scientific instruments in space. The work proceeded smoothly, unlike the two previous spacewalks, and the astronauts completed all tasks within the allotted 6.5 hours. Grunsfeld and Feustel successfully connected the US$88 million Cosmic Origins spectrograph, a task that required them to remove the corrective lenses that had restored HST’s vision in 1993. The newer scientific instruments had built-in corrective lenses, rendering the 1993 lenses unnecessary. Grunsfeld then fixed the ACS using a set of specially designed tools. Working from a dark work site at an odd angle and wearing stiff, heavily padded space gloves, Grunsfeld cut off a grate and removed 36 tiny fasteners and four circuit boards. The new cards and the power supply pack slid smoothly into place.(Marcia Dunn, “Spacewalkers Pull Off Toughest Hubble Repairs Yet,” Agence France-Presse, 17 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Spacewalkers Easily Pull Off Tricky Hubble Fix,” USA Today, 17 May 2009.)
University of California at Irvine announced the publication of a NASA-funded study about bone strength among astronauts. Although previous studies had examined bone-mineral density, this study was the first to evaluate bone strength. Joyce Keyak, a professor of orthopedic surgery and biomedical engineering at University of California at Irvine, led the study. She and her research team used a novel computer program that Keyak had developed to identify hipbone fracture risk in people with osteoporosis. They analyzed hipbone CT (computed tomography) scans of one female and 12 male astronauts who had spent four to six months aboard the International Space Station (ISS). The researchers found that, on average, the astronauts’ hipbone strength decreased 14 percent. However, three astronauts experienced losses of 20 to 30 percent—comparable to those seen in older women with osteoporosis. The research team published its findings in the online version of Bone, the journal of the International Bone and Mineral Society.(University of California at Irvine, “Astronauts on International Space Station Lose Alarming Amounts of Hipbone Strength,” news release, 26 January 2009, http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/news/article/ 19371 (accessed 2 February 2011); Kristen Schott, “UCI Study Finds Astronauts at Risk for Bone Loss,” OC Metro (Newport Beach, CA), 27 January 2009.)
Using two robotic arms, astronauts moved a 1.2-ton (1.09-tonne, or 1,088-kilogram) experiment carrier, the Japanese Experiment Logistics (JEL) Module Exposed Section known as Jelly, from Endeavour’s cargo bay to the JAXA Kibo laboratory’s new porch, known as JEF. STS-127 crew members used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to remove Jelly from the cargo bay, handing it to the ISS robotic arm for installation on Kibo. The platform was a temporary addition. NASA had scheduled astronauts to move the experiments from the platform to JEF later in the week, using Kibo’s robotic arm. JAXA needed to ship its first experiments to the ISS on a separate carrier because the Kibo’s porch would have been too wide to fit into Endeavour’s cargo bay if the porch had shipped with the experiments attached to its side.(Tariq Malik, “Astronauts Tackle Tricky Crane Work in Space,” Space.com, 21 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7023-astronauts-tackle-tricky-crane-work-space.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
NASA announced that it had successfully demonstrated the Max Launch Abort System (MLAS), an alternative system enabling astronauts to escape their launch vehicle in an emergency. In a simulated launch at 6:26 a.m. (EDT), staged at NASA’s WFF in Virginia, NASA had tested the concept—a system that could safely propel a crew away from a launch vehicle during an emergency on the launchpad or during ascent. For the Orion spacecraft, NASA had selected an LAS that used a single solid launch-abort motor. By contrast, the MLAS used four solid rocket- abort motors. The motors were inside a bullet-shaped composite fairing attached to a full-scale mockup of a crew module. For the test, NASA launched the 33-foot-high (10-meter-high) MLAS vehicle to an altitude of 1 mile (1.6 kilometers), with the demonstration beginning after the four solid-rocket motors had burned out. The mock crew module separated from the launch vehicle approximately 7 seconds into flight and parachuted into the Atlantic Ocean. The test demonstrated the unpowered flight of the MLAS along a stable trajectory; the MLAS’s reorientation and stabilization; the separation of the crew module from the abort motors; and the stabilization and parachute recovery of the crew module. The test represented NASA’s first demonstration of a passively stabilized LAS using a vehicle of this size and weight class. This was also NASA’s first attempt to acquire full-scale aero-acoustic data from a faired capsule in flight. NASA planned to use data from the parachute element to help validate the simulation tools and the techniques for developing Orion’s parachute system. The test also provided staff of NASA’s Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) with experience flight-testing a spacecraft concept.(NASA, “NASA Tests Alternate Launch Abort System for Astronaut Escape,” news release 09-156, 8 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ09_156_MLAS_launch_successful.html (accessed 10 August 2011). 98 Michael Schwirtz, “Going to Mars, But Staying Close to Home,” New York Times, 15 July 2009; Agence France- Presse, “Crew ‘Back on Earth’ After Mars Mission,” 15 July 2009.)
Commander Scott D. Altman eased Atlantis up to within 30 feet (9.1 meters) of HST. Operating the Shuttle’s robotic arm, K. Megan McArthur captured the telescope at 1:14 p.m. (EDT), on her first attempt. An hour later, still using the robotic arm, McArthur successfully secured the telescope in its berth at the back of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. A communication glitch slowed the procedure—the astronauts had sent commands to the telescope to ease the capture, directing it, for example, to shut off the gyroscopes. However, the astronauts were unable to discern whether HST had obeyed their commands. Instead, the crew had to relay the information through the telescopes control room at NASA’s GSFC.(Dennis Overbye, “Astronauts Grab Hubble for Repairs,” New York Times, 14 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “What a Catch! Hubble Grabbed for Spacewalking Repairs,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn embarked on the fourth of the five spacewalks scheduled for STS-127. During the spacewalk, they finished replacing batteries, a task that they had begun during the 22 July spacewalk but had been unable to complete. Mission Control had terminated the 22 July spacewalk early because of rising levels of carbon dioxide in Cassidy’s spacesuit. During today’s spacewalk, which lasted 7 hours and 30 minutes, Cassidy and Marshburn successfully replaced the last four of the six batteries storing power generated by the ISS’s oldest set of solar arrays. These batteries provided power to the American laboratory Destiny when the station was orbiting in darkness.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Install Fresh Batteries on Spacewalk,” 24 July 2009; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Duo Keep Station Going and Going,” 25 July 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at 8:39 a.m. (PDT) at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending a successful 13-day mission to HST. Weather conditions had prevented Atlantis from landing at KSC. Astronauts had performed five spacewalks to repair, replace, and upgrade the instruments and computers on HST. These repairs and upgrades had not only restored the telescope, but had also expanded its capabilities. NASA considered the unprecedented mission historic, because of the complexity of the repairs and because the mission had been the last time human beings would go to space to repair an orbiting scientific instrument. NASA had placed HST in low Earth orbit at 600 kilometers (373 miles) to facilitate repair missions, but the location was suboptimal for space telescopes. NASA had planned to place HST’s successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) away from Earth, at L2, and, therefore, had designed JWST to function without repairs or upgrades. In addition to making HST repairs, astronauts had performed a commercial drug experiment aimed at finding a vaccine against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and other microbes.(NASA, “NASA’s Space Shuttle Returns to Earth After Hubble Mission,” news release 09-120, 24 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-120_STS-125_Landing_Edwards.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Houston Chronicle, “This Is Why We Fly: Hubble Repair Mission Showcases the Value of the Manned Space Program,” 26 May 2009; Daniel Holz, “The Last Fix,” Discover Magazine, 26 May 2009, http://blogs. discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2009/05/25/the-last-fix/ (accessed 21 July 2011); Frank Morring Jr., “Drug Experiment Performed on Atlantis,” Aviation Week, 20 May 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. Barratt and Kevin A. Ford used a robotic arm to remove the 13.5- ton (12.3-tonne, or 12,247-kilogram) Leonardo cargo module from Space Shuttle Discovery’s cargo bay. An hour later, the astronauts had successfully attached the module to the Harmony module’s Earth-facing port and had begun the process of checking for leaks and pressurizing a vestibule between Harmony and the cargo module.(William Harwood, “Cargo Module Mounted to Space Station for Unloading,” Spaceflight Now, 1 September 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of STS-127 at the ISS, focusing on odd jobs and unfinished tasks, which they completed in 4 hours and 54 minutes. The duo rewired power cables for the ISS’s American- built attitude-control system; secured loose insulation on a Canadian-built maintenance robot; and added to JEF a pair of television cameras, which would provide good views of Japan’s new unpiloted cargo ship, the H-2 Transfer Vehicle, scheduled to make its maiden flight in September 2009. The only task that the astronauts left unfinished was the installation of a cargo attachment system, a task that Mission Control had decided would require too much time. Instead, Mission Control instructed Cassidy and Marshburn to tend to some “get-ahead” tasks—attaching wire ties to external cables and installing new handrails and work-site attachments on the Kibo laboratory. The five spacewalks tied the record for the most EVAs (extravehicular activities) performed on the ISS while a Space Shuttle was docked at the station.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Wrap Up Space Station Service Call,” Space.com, 27 July 2009, http://www.space. com/7059-spacewalkers-wrap-space-station-service-call.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Astronauts Steven R. Swanson and Joseph M. Acaba undertook the second STS-119 spacewalk at the ISS, primarily to lighten the workload for future crews. As their first task, the pair loosened bolts holding down batteries at the end of the ISS’s power-grid framework, in preparation for the batteries’ replacement during the next Shuttle visit, scheduled for June 2009. As Swanson and Acaba finished that task, the gyroscopes maintaining the position of the ISS- Shuttle complex became overloaded, setting off an alarm in the ISS. Discovery quickly assumed control with its thrusters, and Mission Control ordered Swanson and Acaba to continue with their tasks. The two astronauts had trouble with their next task, deploying an equipment-storage platform, because Acaba accidentally inserted a pin upside down. Mission Control instructed them to move on to other tasks—installing a global positioning system (GPS) antenna and using an infrared camera to photograph a pair of radiators, one of which had a peeling cover. Before reentering the ISS, Swanson tied down the equipment-storage platform to prevent it from moving around. NASA assembled a team to determine a means of prying or hammering the pin loose during the spacewalk scheduled for 23 March.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Go on 2nd Spacewalk at Space Station,” 22 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “To-Do List Keeps Astronauts Busy on 2nd Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 22 March 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of Dina E. Contella, Scott Stover, and Edward Van Cise as new flight directors to manage and carry out Shuttle flights and ISS expeditions. John A. McCullough, Chief of the Flight Director Office at JSC, remarked that all three new flight directors were senior flight controllers with lead management experience and an average of 10 years of flight-control experience. McCullough added that this group would help NASA transfer the knowledge and experience from the existing human spaceflight programs into the development and execution of the next-generation exploration program with the new Orion spacecraft. Contella had worked for NASA since 1990, when she had begun working in NASA’s cooperative education program while she completed her bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering. She had served as Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Controller and Astronaut Instructor since 1995, responsible for planning, training for, and executing spacewalks. Since 2008, Stover had supported six Space Shuttle flights for ISS assembly and had led the team that managed the ISS electrical power system. Van Cise had worked with NASA since 2000 in a variety of roles. He had been a member of the Operations Support Officer (OSO) team that coordinated ISS repair, maintenance, and assembly operations; served as Special Assistant to the Director of Mission Operations; led the Mechanisms and Maintenance Training Group, training astronauts and flight controllers in skills and techniques related to the repair, maintenance, and assembly of the space station; served on staff in the Flight Director Program Integration Office; and worked as an ISS Flight Controller for the OSO and for the Telemetry, Information, Transfer, and Attitude Navigation (Titan) groups.(NASA, “NASA Chooses Three New Flight Directors To Lead Mission Control,” news release 09-133, 12 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-133_New_Flight_Directors.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Doug Messier, “NASA Chooses 3 New Flight Directors,” Parabolic Arc, 15 June 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael J. Foreman and Robert L. Satcher Jr. undertook the first spacewalk of STS-129. They installed a replacement communications antenna on the ISS’s central truss, connected cables and a handrail, and lubricated the wire snares of two devices that grab and move cargo. Because preliminary checks of tiles and panels covering the Shuttle’s wings, nose cap, and underside did not show any signs of serious damage from launch, NASA considered a more detailed inspection unnecessary. Finding themselves 2 hours ahead of schedule, Foreman and Satcher also released a cargo platform—a task that NASA had designated for the second spacewalk. The spacewalk lasted a few minutes longer than its scheduled 6 hours and 30 minutes.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Get Extra Work Done in 1st Spacewalk,” 20 November 2009; James Dean, “Astronauts Finish First Spacewalk,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 20 November 2009.)
