In press conference at Hyannis Port, Mass., U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Adlai Stevenson, said: “Russia’s scientific contribution to the conquest of outer space commands our admiration. Orbiting a new astronaut for a longer period of time is another step forward * * * this event [Vostok II] sharpens the need for some international action to regulate the use of outer space for peaceful purposes, and to keep the arms race from spreading to that field. The President has recently announced his proposal for cooperative sharing of communications and weather satellites. We hope the Russians won’t delay longer in joining us in cooperation.”
Astronaut Virgil Grissom was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal by Administrator Webb at conclusion of MR-4 press conference at Cape Canaveral.
The Freedom 7 Mercury capsule in which Alan B. Shepard, Jr., made the first suborbital space flight, was presented to the National Air Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. In his presentation, NASA Administrator Webb said: “To Americans seeking answers, proof that man can survive in the hostile realm of space is not enough. A solid and meaningful foundation for public support and the basis for our Apollo man-in-space effort is that U.S. astronauts are going into space to do useful work in the cause of all their fellow men.” “Such flights as those of Freedom 7 are not stunts. They are not antithetical to sober scientific and technological research. Interpreted properly, these dramatic events can add much to public understanding and excite creative interest in extending the base on which public support must rest.”
Freedom 7, manned Mercury spacecraft (No. 7) carrying Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as pilot, was launched from Cape Canaveral by Mercury-Redstone (MR-3) launch vehicle, to an altitude of 115.696 miles and a range of 302 miles. It was the first American manned space flight. Shepard demonstrated that man can control a vehicle during weightlessness and high G stresses, and significant scientific biomedical data were acquired. He reached a speed of 5,100 miles per hour and flight lasted 14.8 minutes.
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., commander, U.S. Navy, and Virgil I. Grissom, captain, U.S. Air Force, were awarded the first astronaut wings (almost identical design of a shooting star imposed on the traditional pilot’s badge) in a joint ceremony by their respective services.
Alexander Topchiev, Vice Chairman of the Soviet Academy of Science, stated in Moscow that Western reports that some Soviet astronauts had perished in space flight attempt were “a complete fabrication * * * entirely and absolutely unfounded.” Occasion was press conference at the Academy of Science on the subject of the imminent flight of man into space, at which four space dogs and six offspring were televised.
Reported from Cape Canaveral that Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had moved into “ready room” quarters. NASA had made no announcement whether a man would ride in the next Mercury capsule.
MR-4 Liberty Bell 7, manned by Mercury Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, made successful 15-minute, 118-mile-high and 303-mile-long flight down Atlantic Missile Range, premature blowout of escape hatch flooding capsule and making helicopter pickup of Grissom difficult. Capsule sank in 18,000 feet of water after warning light indicated helicopter engine was overheating and the capsule was cast loose. This was the second successful manned suborbital space flight.
Three astronauts selected for Mercury-Redstone flight (MR-3) were ordered to take refresher course in Navy centrifuge at Johnsville, Pa.
Mercury-Atlas 5 launch from Cape Canaveral placed Mercury spacecraft carrying chimpanzee “Enos” into orbit; retro-rockets were fired on second rather than planned third orbit because of developing malfunction of attitude control system. Mercury capsule was recovered 1 hour and 25 minutes after water landing by the destroyer Stormes, and well-performing “Enos” recovered in excellent condition. Project Mercury officials named John H. Glenn as prime astronaut for the first manned orbital mission with M. Scott Carpenter as backup, and Donald Slayton as prime astronaut for second manned orbital mission with Walter Schirra as backup.
Vice Adm. T. G. W. Settle (Ret.) stated in Washington that Navy blimps should have been used in recovery of Mercury capsule, a proposal submitted to Navy 2 years ago, and which would have avoided recovery difficulties of Liberty Bell 7 and Astronaut Grissom. Settle pointed out that Navy had announced the end of its lighter-than-air program in June 1961. During July: Langley Research Center simulated spacecraft flights at speeds of 8,200 to 8,700 feet per second in approaching the Moon’s surface. With instruments preset to miss the Moon’s surface by 40 to 80 miles, pilots with control of thrust and torques about all three axes of the craft were able to learn to establish orbits 10 to 90 miles above the surface, using a graph of vehicle rate of descent and circumferential velocity, an altimeter, and vehicle attitude and rate meters, as reported by M. J. Queijo and Donald R. Riley of Langley Research Center.
Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Mercury astronaut, was awarded NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal by President Kennedy in a special White House ceremony. It was followed by an informal parade to the Capitol by the seven astronauts for lunch, and a press conference at the State Department auditorium.
Ten Air Force pilots emerged from simulated space cabin in which they had spent the last month, participating m psychological test to determine how long a team of astronauts could work efficiently on a prolonged mission in space. Project director Earl Alluisi said the experiment had “far exceeded our expectations.”
nasa scientists concluded that the layer of haze reported by Astronauts Glenn and Carpenter was the little-understood phenomenon called “airglow.” Using a photometer and other instruments, Carpenter was able to measure the layer as being 2-degrees wide. Airglow accounts for much of the light of the night sky.
Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Captain, usaf) promoted to Major,
sigma 7 spacecraft with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., as pilot was launched into orbit by Mercury-Atlas vehicle at Cape Canaveral. Orbital data: apogee, 176 mi.; perigee, 100 mi.; period, 88.5 min. Schirra traveled 160,000 mi., nearly six orbits, returning to earth at predetermined point in Pacific Ocean about 9 hrs., 14 min. after blastoff. Within 40 min. after landing he and his spacecraft were safely aboard aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge. Highly successful MA-8 flight proved the feasibility of (1) prolonged weightless flight in space and (2) drifting in orbit without consumption of hydrogen-peroxide attitude control fuel and without physically endangering the astronaut. Schirra, who spent a total of hrs. in drifting flight, reported there were no unusual attitude control problems during drifting. Various other scientific experiments during MA-8 flight included astronaut’s sighting of luminous particles in space, also reported by Astronauts John H. Glenn and M. Scott Carpenter; and photographing cloud formations with a special hand camera. sigma 7 was sighted by observers on Indian Ocean tracking ship for five min. as the spacecraft made its third orbit more than 100 mi. high. The observers said sigma 7 appeared almost as bright as Venus. This was the first reported visual sighting of a manned spacecraft during orbital flight. Only technical difficulty of the entire operation was attaining proper adjustment of Schirra’s spacesuit coolant supply and failure of body temperature measurements in first orbit. However, desired suit temperatures were achieved early in second orbit.
British Broadcasting Corp. announced that 30% of Britain’s population—15,000,000 people—listened to its radio coverage of Astronaut Glenn’s three-orbit space flight on Feb. 20, comparable to the size of the audiences that listened to Sir Winston Churchill’s wartime broadcasts.
nasa announced that Mercury Astronaut Donald K. Slayton (Major usaf) would assume new operational and planning responsibilities. Extensive medical observation and examination of Slayton’s irregular heart action (atrial fibrillation) by msc medical staff, by groups of Air Force specialists, and Dr. Paul Dudley White agreed that he should not be considered for solo space flights.
aurora 7 with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) as pilot, launched on MA-7 orbital mission by Atlas booster from Cape Canaveral, the second U.S. manned orbital flight and the fourth U.S. manned space flight. Almost faultless countdown, launch was delayed only briefly by ground fog, and Mercury spacecraft was placed into orbit at 17,532 mph (apogee: 167.4 miles; perigee: 99 miles; period: 88.3 minutes). Astronaut Carpenter performed series of space science and technical development experiments including visual and photographic observations of star fields and “white particles,” consumption of solid foods, release of tethered multi-colored balloon to test sighting, and observation of separated Atlas booster. 81,200-mile flight featured attitude stabllization and control pilotage for completion of three orbits, and monitoring of control-systems fuel for proper retrofire attitude. Re-entry caused landing impact point over 200 miles beyond intended area and beyond radio range of recovery forces. After landing, Carpenter egressed through top of capsule and climbed on inflated raft awaiting rescue, to be joined by two usaf paramedics, Airman John T. Heitsch and S/Sgt. Ray E. McClure, who inflated Stulken collar to prevent capsule from sinking. After three hours on water, Astronaut Carpenter was picked up by a helicopter from U.S.S. Intrepid, and his capsule was retrieved by the destroyer Pierce. Astronaut Carpenter was reported in good physical condition, and flown to Grank Turk Island in the Bahamas for 48-hour debriefings and medical examinations.
Decision to sell Cape Colony Inn, partially owned by the seven Project Mercury astronauts, was announced by attorney C. Leo DeOrsey of Washington. He said the astronauts’ investment in the motel near Cape Canaveral “had become the subject of controversy in some quarters of the press and might become embarrassing to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. I believe it is in the best interests of all concerned to sell the motel.”
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would photograph cloud formations during his forthcoming orbital flight MA-8, it was announced. Cdr. Schirra’s special 2’(-lb. hand camera would be used to test techniques for the advanced Nimbus weather satellite.
In special ceremony at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and Walter Williams, Director of Operations for Project Mercury, were both awarded nasa Distinguished Service Medals by nasa Administrator Webb at the direction of President Kennedy.
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of Aerospace Medical Operations Office, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, reported that preliminary readings of a dosimeter indicated Astronaut Schirra had received much smaller radiation dosage than expected. Dr. Berry said post-flight examination of the astronaut determined that he was “in excellent condition and detected no physiological effects from the space flight.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before a subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Appropriations, said that 32 candidates for astronaut positions had been selected from the 200 applicants, and that by September 1 nasa would select 10 of these men to enter astronaut training.
nasa announced it would begin taking applications for additional astronauts now and continue until June 1, 1962. In July persons meeting the requirements would be interviewed, selected applicants given thorough physicals, and final selection of some 5 to 10 astronauts would be made in the fall. Qualifications were also announced; these were slightly less demanding in terms of test-pilot time, but more demanding in that they lowered the age limit to under 35 and required a college degree in science or engineering.
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded an honorary Master of Arts degree by Dartmouth College.
ucla scientists reported that they had developed training devices to allow men to contract individual muscles, which during the stresses of liftoff or re-entry in space flight would permit trained astronauts to operate controls by twitching single muscles.
U.S. submitted to the U.N. a supplemental list of U.S. space launchings, covering the period of Feb. 15 to March 15, 1962, updating the coverage of the first U.S. list submitted on March 5, 1962. This second official list did not include Astronaut John Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, since the U.S. contended that the U.N. roster was supposed to contain only those space objects still in orbit, not those that had already re-entered. U.S.S.R. listed all its space flights in its report to the U.N. on March 26. Although MA-6 flight was not registered, the U.S. submitted information on the Glenn flight to the U.N. on April 3.
Program testing astronaut tolerance to space flight conditions was initiated with order of motion-simulator platform from Textron Electronics, Inc., MB Electronics Div. The platform, to be installed at Wright-Patterson afb, will move in six directions— pitch, roll, yaw, up-and-down, side-to-side, and back-to-forward.
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded the Aero Club’s Godfrey L. Cabot Award in Boston, as America's first man in space.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., returned to his hometown, Oradell, N.J., for triumphal welcoming ceremonies in honor of his successful MA-8 six-orbit space flight for nasa Project Mercury, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Cdr. Schirra with the nasa Distinguished Service Medal.
Virgil I. (Gus) Grissom Day in Mitchell, Indiana, the hometown of the second Mercury astronaut into space.
National Aeronautic Association announced that U.S. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard wollid receive fai medal on September 28 for his suborbital space-flight records May 5, 1961. Also to receive medals: U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Gherman S. Titov, for their record-setting orbital flights in 1961. Another American, Lt. Col. R. G. Robinson (usmc), would receive award for closed-course, aircraft speed record of 1,606.5 mph in F4H over Edwards afb, Calif., November 22, 1961.
William L. Gill, Chief of Crew Systems Div. Radiation Branch, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said walls of Apollo spacecraft would provide most of radiation shielding required for crew. Astronauts would have special shielding devices only for their eyes.
Bell Aerosystems engineers, John N. Cord and Leonard M. Seale, recommended in paper to the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences meeting in Los Angeles that a U.S. astronaut be landed upon the moon with the means of survival, perhaps for as long as three years, until an Apollo vehicle could be sent to return him to earth. The astronaut could do valuable scientific work and would be on “a very hazardous mission but it would be cheaper, faster, and perhaps the only way to beat Russia.”
Walter C. Williams, associate director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, defended orbital flights by astronauts that apparently are duplicates of previous flights, saying that the only way the U.S. can have a space program in depth is to repeat some of the operations. He stated that new data were gathered from each flight, replying to critics of the second manned 3-orbit spaceflight mission (MA-7).	_
Mercury Astronaut Virgil I. (Gus) Grissom was presented the General Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, at the National Geographical Society in Washington. In his presentation remarks, Secretary Zuckert said: “. . . The National Aeronautics and Space Administration carries responsibility for the development of space technology and, in company 97317—63---8 with like-minded peoples of the world, the utilization of space for the benefit of men. Captain Grissom and the other astronauts are playing a vital role in the national space effort, nasa’s program is of vital importance to the Air Force. We must build the nation’s defense capability in space on the foundation which nasa lays . . . “The feat for which he [Capt. Grissom] is recognized,” said Secretary Zuckert, “is one step, a very, very early step, toward mastery of space for constructive purposes. The American people have launched a tremendous program to acquire the capability to master the aerospace just as we have mastered the seas and the air, and kept them free . . .”
In prepared press statement, Astronaut John H. Glenn commented on September 13 televised remarks by Astronaut Walter Schirra, and said: “I will continue to support his flight [Astronaut Schirra’s orbital flight MA-8] just as well as I possibly can. . . . I don’t want to add any more statements to a situation that has all the aspects of a tempest in a teapot. Scheduling of my time for maximum benefit from a technical and national space program standpoint has been continually reviewed by both Dr. Gilruth and the management of nasa.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, stated there was no real controversy over Col. Glenn’s position in the space program or on other questions raised by Cdr. Schirra.
Donald F. Conaway, national executive secretary of American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, announced he had requested a conference with European counterparts to discuss minimum pay scales for performers appearing on future Telstar satellite relays. He added: “Telstar is a great challenge. We cannot realistically set an international rate for performers until many problems are settled with the countries.” During July: Outfitted in pressure suits in a simulated space environment, five nasa scientists of msfc and msc completed study determining how an astronaut could work on J-2 rocket engine during actual space flight, at Rocketdyne. Maintenance, repair, replacement, and adjustment of components of the hydrogen-fueled J-2 were performed along with research on the design of special tools and pressure suits.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., after arriving in Houston after trip from Pacific landing of six-orbit MA-8 flight, held press conference at Rice University auditorium: “My intention was to use so little [attitude control] fuel that no one could argue that we [had not] had enough fuel aboard sigma 7 for eighteen orbits, if we wanted it. I think I proved that point.” He said MA-8 was a “textbook flight” and that ho was sorry to see it end. On the issue of space sickness, Astronaut Schirra stated that despite the prolonged weightlessness of this longest U.S. manned space flight, “there was no problem at all. There was no break-off phenomena, there was no uneasiness, there was no queasiness. I felt great. “The suit temperature problem . . . is a problem which we have solved. I have been much hotter in the tent at Cape Canaveral than I ever, ever thought of being in sigma 7.” He reported sighting the “fireflies” and believing they emanated from the spacecraft.
Astronaut Donald K. Slayton underwent physical examination by heart specialist Dr. Paul Dudley White in Boston.
X-15 No. 3 flown to record altitude of 58.7 miles (314,750 feet) by Major Robert White (usaf). Flight was programed for only 282,000 feet but maximum speed of 3,784 mph was 284 mph faster than planned. White’s flight made him eligible for astronaut wings, reserved for those who have flown over 50 miles high, previously held only by four Mercury astronauts. Flight was also the first to achieve the original design altitude of the X-15 of 50 miles.
telstar relayed two 20-minute live TV shows, the first formal exchange of programs across the Atlantic. The first U.S. program to the Eurovision network of stations in 18 nations included sequences on the Statue of Liberty, a major league baseball game in Chicago, President Kennedy’s news conference, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra from Cape Canaveral, and the Mormon Tabernacle Choir from Mt. Rushmore. Three hours later on another orbit, the Eurovision program was beamed to the U.S. where it was carried by all three networks. It included scenes of Big Ben in London, the Colosseum in Rome, the Champs Elys6cs in Paris, reindeer in the Arctic Circle region of Sweden, Sicilian fishermen tending their nets, and a scene in the Sistine Chapel of Vatican.
Reported that at nasa meeting of lunar scientists the view presented by astronomers, a geologist, and geophysicists that scientists can learn to become astronauts as well as an astronaut can make scientific observations. Which scientific discipline should be represented as a member of the 3-man Appollo crew did not receive a unanimous endorsement.
Official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug announced that U.S. Astronauts John Glenn and Alan Shepard would join U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin, Gherman Titov, Andrian Nikolayev, and Pavel Popovich at International Astronautical Congress in Bulgaria, September 23 to 29.
Civil Service Commission ruled that nasa was authorized to hire an “aerospace engineer and pilot,” one whom nasa would designate an astronaut, at maximum salaries for Government service grades GS 13, 14, and 15.
nasa announced new policy under which astronauts would be permitted to negotiate individually for the sale of their stories, the policy being “aimed at assuring equal access by all news media to the Astronauts’ stories of their flight missions.” Notable provisions of new policy were: (1) requirement for a second postflight news conference in which representatives of news media could question the astronaut “in depth” about his flight; and (2) prohibiting of any publication’s advertising “exclusive” stories purchased from astronauts, with requirement that the contracting publication provide a method to avoid this inference and with all such agreements subject to approval of the nasa Administrator. Inherent in the policy was that “all information reported by the Astronauts in the course of their official duties, which is not classified to protect the national security, wlli be promptly made available to the public.” New guidelines applied to all nasa astronauts, civilian and military.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., told newsmen he hoped Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper would be selected for Project Mercury flight MA-9. Astronaut selection had not yet been made for the 18-orbit 24-hour flight.
Space Technology Center of General Electric Co. said it was designing an escape system for astronauts to use if orbiting capsule malfunctioned and could not return safely to earth. Called “Moose” (Man Out Of Space Easiest), the system involved use of a “prepackaged spacecraft” consisting of plastic sack, folding heat shield, retrorocket pack, containers of foaming plastic, and a standard parachute. Astronaut, zipped into sack, would step out of faulty spacecraft, aim himself with special scope, and fire the retrorocket. Then his heat shield would unfold and sack would fill with rapid-hardening plastic foam, protecting him from re-entry heat. At 30,000-ft. altitude, he would open parachute and descend slowly to earth.
nasa Project Mercury officials postponed for three days the 6-orbit space flight of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (MA-8), now scheduled for September 28. Delay was to permit further time for flight preparation.
nasa’s nine new astronauts were named in Houston by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center (msc). Chosen from 253 applicants, the former test pilots who would join original seven Mercury astronauts in training for Projects Gemini and Apollo were: Neil A. Armstrong, nasa civilian test pilot; Maj. Frank Borman (usaf); Lt. Charles Conrad, Jr. (usn); LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn); Capt. James A. McDivitt (usaf); Elliot M. See, Jr., civilian test pilot for General Electric Co.; Capt. Thomas P. Stafford (usaf); Capt. Edward H. White, II (usaf) ; and LCdr. John W. Young (usn). Dr. Gilruth stressed that they wollid not all necessarily make actual space flights. “Assignment to flight crews will depend upon the continuing physical and technical status of the individuals concerned and upon the future flight schedllie requirements.”
At opening session of the Legal Subcommittee of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, U.S. delegate, Leonard Meeker, proposed that all members of the U.N. undertake to aid space vehicles or astronauts in distress, and to return to the launching countries any that are forced to land elsewhere.
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, addressed the Southern Governors’ Conference, Hollywood-by-the-Sea, Fla., on the role of the South in the Space Age, and remarked: “. . . our space activities are in no sense stunts— spectaculars, if you will—nor will the landing of U.S. astronauts on the moon be our ultimate objective. Rather, the national effort is broadly organized to accomplish rapid advances in science and technology that will make it possible for us to perform any space assignment—military or civilian—that the national interest might require. Furthermore, from lunar exploration, we will go on to wider exploration of the solar system, ventures whose end no man can foresee. ...”
John Glenn Day in Washington, D.C. An estimated 250.000	persons lined the rain-drenched parade route from the White House to Capitol Hill. In 20-minute address to the joint session of the Congress, Astronaut Glenn paid tribute to the Project Mercury team and pointed to the unbounded future of space exploration: “. . . I feel that we are on the brink of an area of expansion of knowledge about ourselves and our surroundings that is beyond description or comprehension at this time. “Our efforts today and what we’ve done so far are but small building blocks on a very high pyramid to come . . . “We’re just probing the surface of the greatest advancement in man’s knowledge of his surroundings that has ever been made . . . There are benefits to science across the board. Any major effort such as this results in research by so many different specialties that it’s hard to even envision the benefits that will accrue in many fields. “Knowledge begets knowledge. The more I see, the more impressed I am not with how much we know but with how tremendous the areas are that are yet unexplored . . .”
Announced at the Manned Spacecraft Center that a large “innertube” or “flotation collar” may be used to keep Mercury capsule afloat after a water landing. Collar would be installed by Navy frogmen. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard took part in proving tests conducted on Chesapeake Bay.
Dr. Sheldon J. Korchin of National Institutes of Health and Dr. George Ruff of Univ. of Pennsylvania reported at aaas conference that American astronauts are typically Protestants, natives of small towns, members of middle or upper-middle class families, and have average IQ of 135. Summing up results of testing astronauts, two psychiatrists concluded astronauts have normal anxieties but above normal ability to control them. Average astronaut prefers outdoor sports to indoor; is oriented to action rather than thought; prefers facts to speculation; has abiding belief in his own competence and wlliingness to strive for perfection.
In later nasa press conference at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut John Glenn described his three-orbit flight. He related his observation, his pilotage during almost two orbits, and his concern when burning fragments of the retrorocket package during re-entry appeared to indicate to him that the heat shield was breaking up. He referred to “weightlessness” as a “very pleasant” sensation to which he is becoming “addicted.” Administrator Webb and Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, Robert Gilruth, spoke briefly. This conference, like all events associated with the MA-6 flight, was fully covered in all detail by the entire American press, radio, and TV.
Project Mercury flight officials studied tropical storm “Daisy,” which continued moving westnorthwest about 300 mi. east of Puerto Rico, the general landing area for third orbit of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s six-orbit MA-8 flight planned Oct. 3. Mercury Operations Director Walter C. Williams, indicating continuing surveillance of “Daisy,” ordered preparations for the launch attempt to continue.
The seven Mercury astronauts were presented with Distinguished Service Awards from the Lower Virginia Peninsula in ceremonies at the Manned Spacecraft Center Hq. at Langley afb, Va. June 2; usaf announced that oscar ii satellite had been launched piggyback on an unidentified satellite on June 1, on behalf of the American Radio Relay League. With a 92-minute period, the 10-lb. satellite broadcasts “Hi” in Morse code on 144.993 megacycles for use by amateur radio operators. Unlike oscar i launched on December 10, 1961, advance notice was not given the Project Oscar Association on the launching of oscar ii.
Tropical storm developed 420 mi. east of Puerto Rico, traveling on path that would cross impact area for Astronaut Schirra’s third orbit, nasa flight officials were closely watching the storm to determine whether it would necessitate postponing Schirra’s MA-8 flight scheduled for Oct. 3. During September: Conclusion that wheel-shaped space station was technically feasible and identification of problems that still exist were revealed in nasa Technical Note D-1504, compilation of 11 papers by nasa Langley Research Center staff. Selection of this 150-ft.-diameter, 171,000-lb. structure was result of studies by Langley for more than 2 years and detailed analyses by North American Aviation, Inc., for past 6 months. The report indicated the space station primarily would provide a means of learning to live in space, where zero-gravity and variable-gravity experiments could be performed, closed life-support systems could be qualified, and rendezvous techniques and systems developed. Chosen model could support up to 38-man crew.
In a Pentagon ceremony, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., was awarded the Navy’s astronaut wings and a new Marine Corps device—a winged rocket superimposed on a globe—that would also be given to all future Marines who orbited the earth in a space capsule.
At American Rocket Society Honors Night Banquet in Los Angeles, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award, highest aes honor, for “general eminence in the field of rocket engineering and space flight.” Other 1962 ars awards: Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., nasa astronaut, received the aes Astronautics Award; Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Special Projects Office, received the James H. Wyld Memorial Award; Samuel K. Hoffman, president of naa Rocketdyne Div., received aes Propulsion Award; Dr. Howard S. Seifert, of Stanford Univ. and United Technology Corp., received the G. Edward Pendray Award; Theodore Forrester, director of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., Ion Physics Dept., received the aes Research Award; and John R. Winckler, prof, of physics at Univ. of Minnesota, received the first ars Space Science Award.
nasa announced that LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn) would be the pilot on the next Mercury orbital space flight (MA-7). Major Donald K. Slayton (usaf), the astronaut originally scheduled for the flight, was disqualified because of an “erratic heart rate,” after the medical findings had been reviewed by an Air Force medical board and a board of civilian cardiologists. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was named as Carpenter’s backup pilot.
nasa Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was greeted by cheering crowds in Honollliu, transferring from aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge to usaf jet at Hickam afb, for trip back to Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Texas.
Dr. Clarence P. Oliver of the University of Texas zoology department suggested to the House Space Committee that astronauts traveling through space “for any extended period” should refuse to have any more children. Radiation exposure exceeding normal dosage on earth would pose a “genetic risk,” he testified.
Maj. Gherman Titov in San Francisco press conference continued to chide U.S. space program. He said that if he was asked to join a U.S. astronaut in a cooperative space mission: “I would be a bit afraid because there have been quite a lot of failures in your program.” And, he remarked, the MR-3 capsule was “not even good enough for flying in orbit.”
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov visited the White House and toured the Mall in Washington, D.C. At joint press conference at the National Academy of Sciences, Glenn and Titov both spoke about possible international cooperation in manned space flight, Titov suggesting that the diplomats would first have to reach agreement on disarmament. Titov said that the Soviet press conference on August 14, 1961, held at Ludnicki, at which the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Matislav Keldysh discussed the rocket boosters of vostok ii, contained all useful information available on the Soviet rockets. Titov also said that the released photograph of vostok ii was of a mockup.
Position of Special Assistant for Astronaut Affairs created by nasa under the Director, Manned Spacecraft Center. Temporarily filled by Ford Eastman, the position provides central coordination of commitments to extra-program activities of the astronauts.
Reported that Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had received less than half the heavy primary cosmic radiation dosage expected during his 4.5-hr. orbital flight MA-6. According to Dr. Hermann J. Schaefer of usn Biophysics Branch, Pensacola, the MA-6 spacecraft walls and capsule instrumentation probably absorbed many of the rays and kept the total dosage lower than expected.
In an impromptu speech at opening of an Italian industrial exhibition in Moscow, Soviet Premier Khrushchev acknowledged that the U.S. had achieved “notable successes” in space and saluted the courage of Mercury astronauts Glenn and Carpenter. Commenting on M. Scott Carpenter’s MA-7 flight in aurora 7, Khrushchev declared: “I congratulate him especially because he gave proof of great courage in a situation in which he collid have been burned in his ship or drowned in the sea. All the scientists collid do from the earth was to advise him to drink water and to land. But he had the presence of mind and the courage to continue his flight.”
Editorial in the New York Times said: “Since the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is a civilian agency, it might be wiser to make all the astronauts civilians so that no questions of inequality or discrimination arise among them and also so that they might receive more adequate pay than is provided by the low military pay scales. . . . “In permitting the astronauts to cash in on their exploits, the Kennedy Administration is following an unwise precedent set by the Eisenhower Administration. “While the practice of profiting from memoirs of Government service is an old one, such memoirs are normally written by persons who have already left Federal employment. . . . “The government would be far wiser if it paid its astronauts a sufficiently generous salary so that it could in good conscience ask them to observe the same practices of discretion and modesty which have hitherto been considered normal for all other Government employees.”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on $3.7-blliion nasa authorization request. Administrator Webb, Robert R. Gilruth (Director msc), and Astronauts Glenn, Grissom, and Shepard appeared as witnesses. Mr. Webb outlined nasa’s projected program to be covered in detail in subsequent testimony: (1) total ten year program ahead may cost over $35 blliion; (2) new astronaut training program to include scientists wlli be announced shortly; (3) future manned spacecraft wlli be capable of landing on land or water; (4) nasa is opposed to using astronauts as goodwlli ambassadors, as they are needed on the current program; (5) 92% of nasa’s budget wlli be spent through industry and universities. Astronaut Glenn pointed out that the Nation “must be prepared” for failures in future manned space flights. “We don’t envision every flight,” he said, “coming back as successfully as the three we have had so far ... I hope we wlli always have the confidence in the program that we now have despite the fact there wlli be times when we are not riding a crest of happiness and enthusiasm as we now are.”
Astronaut John H. Glenn was awarded the Hubbard Medal of the National Geographic Society “for extraordinary contributions to scientific knowledge of the world and beyond as a pioneer in exploring the ocean of space.” Awarded only 20 times since it was struck in 1906, the Hubbard Medal honorees have included Adm. Robert E. Peary, Charles A. Lindbergh, Roald Amundsen, and Adm. Richard E. Byrd.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., made 6)(-hr. simulated flight in Sigma 7 spacecraft for Project Mercury flight MA-8. Worldwide tracking network of 21 ground stations and ships also participated in exercise, in which Cdr. Schirra and the tracking stations practiced solving emergency situations that could arise in actual orbital flight.
Astronaut John Glenn and Cosmonaut Gherman Titov appeared on abc-TV program, “The Nation’s Future.” Col. Glenn pressed Major Titov on possible Soviet space mishaps, but no new information was forthcoming.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, said that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., probably wollid make his orbital flight (MA-8) the middle or end of September. Speaking at the Lunar Exploration Conference in Blacksburg, Va., Mr. Holmes made it clear that the success of recent Soviet prolonged manned space flights would not change the six-orbit mission of Commander Schirra.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc), was chosen as Marine Aviator of the Year for 1962-63. This was the first annual award of the Alfred A. Cunningham Trophy.
At nasa news conference at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter gave a detailed chronological account of his three-orbit flight in aurora 7. He quoted Mercury training psychologist Dr. Robert B. Voas, who had told Carpenter that data-collection is the “heart and soul of science.” Carpenter said: “And that’s true. Isolated data points mean nothing. We now have two data points on nearly everything. His [John Glenn’s] flight confirms jmine [and [mine confirms his . . . .” Carpenter said of weightlessness that “there was the sensation of floating . . . Every function is easier when you are weightless. It’s the only time I’ve ever spent in that [space] suit that was comfortable.” He reported briefly on his launch into orbit, his scientific observation, re-entry, and recovery, full scientific reports of which would be forthcoming in future weeks.
First African showing of friendship 7, Astronaut John Glenn’s space capsule, drew record crowds, usia reported that over 40,000	persons had viewed the capsule in Accra, Ghana, in three days, more than at previous showings in London, Paris, Madrid, and Belgrade.
Dr. Joseph A. Conner, Jr., of nasa, said in aaas paper that there will be an arbitrary retirement age for astronauts, not in terms of years but in exposure to penetrating radiation in space.
Walter M. Schirra, aboard the recovery vessel U.S.S. Kearsarge, reportedly suggested to Project Mercury engineers that the ground communications stations should give the orbiting astronaut “more quiet time” in space. Extraneous conversation could interrupt the astronaut’s concentration on technical duties.
Maj. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) was first astronaut to pilot paraglider in test at Edwards, Calif., in development tests for Gemini manned spacecraft landings. Kite-like paraglider was towed aloft by biplane and released to glide downward. Maj. Grissom landed the paraglider upright, although the craft’s nose wheel crumpled upon hitting the ground.
Mercury capsule for orbital space flight MA-8 was named “Sigma 7” by Astronaut Walter M. Schirra. Sigma, the eighteenth letter of the Greek alphabet and an engineering symbol for “many,” symbolized the teamwork involved in the manned space flight; “7” referred to the seven-man Project Mercury astronaut team.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center conference on Project Mercury flight MA-7, stated that his May 24 orbital space flight demonstrated there was no problem associated with prolonged drifting flight, a procedure necessary in future long-duration space flights. Reporting on re-entry and landing, he said that his preoccupation with floating particles in space consumed time available for stowing loose gear, so that his attention to last-minute stowing and to difficulties in horizon pitch scanner circuit, coupled with shift to manual control of retrofire, resllited in 3-sec. delay of retrofire and 250-mi. overshoot of target landing point.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and his family were received by President Kennedy at the White House, then flew to New York for the city’s reception and to receive New York City’s highest award, the Gold Medal. The reception committee included, in addition to Mayor Wagner, former Presidents Herbert C. Hoover and Harry S. Truman.
The Television Academy announced annual Emmy Award nominations. The orbital flight of Astronaut Glenn and Mrs. John F. Kennedy’s tour of the White House—regarded as top TV events—were not considered because they had been cooperatively covered by the three major networks.
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, and the nasa astronauts were honored at Explorers Club’s Night of Exploration dinner in New York. Addressing the club on nasa programs and goals, Mr. Webb said: “Curiosity—the driving human thirst for knowledge—is only one reason, of course, for undertaking space exploration on the scale and at the pace which our country has established. . . . “First, we seek for mankind the benefits inherent in the scientific and technological knowledge and dexterity that will emerge from this dynamic effort to conquer the most hostile environment that man has ever entered—and to use that knowledge and technical skill as an important new resource for human progress. “Second, we seek to maintain our position as leader of the Free World, through continued superiority in science and technology. “And, finally, we seek space power as a deterrent to any potential adversary who might attempt to exploit space as an avenue of aggression against us . . . .”
In press interview in Houston, Astronauts Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn) said television pictures of Maj. Cooper would be transmitted to ground stations during MA-9 flight by means of miniature transmitter inside the Mercury spacecraft. Pictures could not be viewed live on commercial TV because transmissions would be on different scan speed. Astronaut Cooper also said that a rendezvous maneuver had been considered for MA-9 flight, but decision had been made not to attempt the maneuver. MA-9 is considered to be the last Project Mercury flight, to be followed by Project Gemini. November 23-December 2: Space Science Fair, held in Cleveland and cosponsored by nasa and Cleveland Plain Dealer, included extensive exhibit covering “virtually all topics of space technology” as well as series of lectures for junior and senior high school students by aerospace scientists and engineers Honorary co-chairmen of the fair were nasa Administrator James E. Webb and former nasa Administrator T. Keith Glennan, President of Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland.
Army launched Nike-Zeus missile in what was described as a successful intercept of a simulated icbm nose cone. Apriif!: nasa sponsored a day-long technical symposium in Washington on results of the MA-6 three-orbit space flight. Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and officials of Project Mercury reviewed the findings of the Feb. 20 flight and stressed the conclusion that the presence of the astronaut had been indispensable to successful completion of the three-orbit mission. On the Glenn effect—the firefly-like particles Glenn reported seeing outside Ms capsule during each of the three sunrises—Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief, Theoretical Division, Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that study had shown them to be flakes of paint from the spacecraft.
aec-dod-nasa announced that results of joint study of artificial radiation belt indicated Project Mercury flight MA-8 could be made with no change of plans and with no fear of harm to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn). Study showed that radiation on outside of capsule during Cdr. Schirra’s 6-orbit flight would be about 500 roentgen (R). Shielding, vehicle structures, and flight suit would cut this to 8 R on the astronaut’s skin. “This exposure is well below the mission limit previously established by nasa for the manned flight program,” the report said. Other results of the investigation: Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich (vostok iii and iv orbital flights in August) received very small radiation doses on their double-mission flight; radio interference caused by new radiation belt constituted “a significant problem to radio astronomy”; radiation doses caused rapid deterioration of solar cells aboard ariel, traac, transit iv-b satellites as previously reported, but telstar solar cells were apparently unaffected; future space missions were being reviewed “in light of the present information concerning the new belt.” It appeared likely that “a substantial number” of future space experiments would be changed to avoid possible damage from radiation.
Mercury spacecraft (Capsule 13), friendship 7, was launched into orbit by Atlas booster (109D), Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., (usmc), as astronaut. After three orbits (apogee: 162.5 mi.; perigee: 98.9 mi.), friendship 7 re-entered and parachuted into Atlantic some 166 miles east of Grand Turk Island in the Bahamas. Picked up by the destroyer Noa, Glenn remained inside capsule until on deck. Beyond being the first U.S. manned orbital space flight, MA-6 flight of friendship 7 provided aerospace medical data during 285 minutes of weightlessness, including consumption of solid and liquid food and disorientation exercises. Astronaut Glenn was forced to “fly by wire” (i.e., pilot the spacecraft) during 2nd and 3rd orbits due to troubles with the automatic pilot. Glenn was pronounced “hale and hearty” after his 81,000-mile flight of 4 hrs. 56 min.
Astronaut Gus Grissom was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Space Science degree by the Brevard Engineering College, Melbourne, Florida.
50 AM, Astronaut Glenn said: “I guess it was to be expected. We all knew the weather was marginal.”
Astronaut Scott Carpenter received a B.S. degree in aeronautical engineering from the University of Colorado, a degree he missed in 1949 by not taking the final examination in a course in heat transfer. He also received the school’s Norlin Award, given annually to an alumnus for outstanding achievement.
M. Scott Carpenter Day in Bollider, Colo. Presented with an engineering degree from the University of Colorado, Astronaut Carpenter said that he hoped the degree, which he missed in 1949 because he failed a course in heat transfer, collid be justified by the “unique” education in the subject received during his re-entry in aurora 7. At a news conference, Carpenter said: “All mankind stands to gain more as a resllit of these flights— and mark my words, man wlli be going to the moon and neighboring planets in the near future—than in any previous exploration in the history of the world.”
afsc announced it was testing electrocardiogram package in free-fall parachute jumps for possible applications in future manned space flight. Worn inside the astronaut’s pressure suit, the small, 14-oz. package could monitor heartbeat (and other physical reactions): Conditioning unit in package converts heartbeat to FM radio signal which is sent by transmitter in package to amplifier in cockpit, and then to ground receivers, where it is converted to electrocardiogram. Use of package would provide astronaut freedom of movement by eliminating need for connections from pilot to spacecraft. Developed by Hughes Aircraft Co., the package was being considered for use in X-15 program.
Reported that Hughes Aircraft Co. had developed special devices to determine radiation dosage an astronaut may absorb in space flight. Called “tissue-equivalent ionization chambers” and developed under usaf contract, the instruments would be installed in three usaf “plastinauts,” man-sized dummies of astronauts made of plastic simulating human tissue. The plastinauts were designed “to fly in any space vehicle capable of carrying a man.”
Wash. Evening Star reported that nasa’s Director’ofjMaimed Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, had announed in Cleveland that nasa X-15 pilot Neil A. Armstrong would become the first civilian astronaut as a part of the new selection of astronauts for Projects Gemini and Apollo.
Hughes Research Laboratories announced development of highpower amplifier tube that could eliminate spacecraft radio blackouts such as those experienced by astronauts during atmospheric re-entry. Tubes produce about 10 times the continuous power output of any previous tubes and could pierce heat-induced ion shields to transmit messages.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and Mercury team went through complete simulated MA-7 mission exercise.
Cosmonaut Titov wrote in Pravda on his arrival in Moscow: “I returned home, heaved in a breathful of clear spring air, and told the comrades welcoming me: Despite all the comforts of America, there is no land on earth better than our dear, wonderful Soviet homeland.” He indicated that American astronauts Alan Shepard and John Glenn have been invited to visit the Soviet Union.
Mercury astronauts visited the United Nations, and John Glenn, during an informal reception given by Acting Secretary-General U Thant, said: “To be here at the United Nations this morning and have all these tributes to our project and all the people that are working on it from people of this calibre, is indeed overwhelming all over again after yesterday. . . . “As space science and space technology grows stlli further and our projects become more and more ambitious, we will be relying more and more on international teamwork. “And the natural center for this teamwork is the United Nations . . . .” Colonel Glenn also expressed the gratitude of Project Mercury to those countries who had cooperated in the flight operations.
Announced that 140-million-candlepower lights would burn near Durban, So. Africa, for three minutes during fifth and sixth orbital passes of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra's Mercury space flight (MA-8).
John Glenn Day in New York City. An estimated four mlliion people lined the streets to cheer the Mercury astronauts. Mayor Robert Wagner presented the city’s highest award, the Medal of Honor, to Col. Glenn and Robert R. Gilruth.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and his family were welcomed by President Kennedy in brief visit at the White House. Also in Washington, Cdr. Schirra appeared before nasa Headquarters employees, later at the Pentagon receiving usn astronaut wings from Secretary of the Navy Fred Korth.
nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center was presented an Award of Honor by the National Safety Council for having logged nearly 4 million working hours without a disabling injury or fatality. During February: Astronaut John Glenn’s orbital space flight produced a great propaganda dividend for the United States, Mr. Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information Agency, said. “The contrast was immediately drawn around the world between the openness, the complete coverage of the flight, compared to the Russian efforts in this area . . . More newspapers normally hostile to the United States had to admit not only the scientific achievement but the fact that we were prepared to let our own people and the rest of the world see the entire operation from beginning to end.”
Hibernation of space crewmen was proposed for long-term space travel, by usaf surgeons Capt. T. K. Cockett and Capt. Cecil C. Beehler of sam, Brooks afb, Texas. Under their plan, one astronaut would work while the other would ride in state of suspended animation, with life processes slowed to the minimum. During simulated hibernation the body withstands stresses that would be harmful under normal body conditions, the surgeons said.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was welcomed in his home town of New Concord, Ohio, by a crowd estimated at 50,000 people (normal population of New Concord, 2,127).
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was selected as the National Father of the Year. Earlier this month, Ms mother had been selected as World Mother of the Year.
Mercury officials debriefing Astronaut John Glenn at Giand Turk Island announced that he was in “excellent physical condition.” Dr. Robert B. Voas, psychologist and training officer, said that it was “quite significant” that Glenn had been unable to detect any ill effects during almost five hours of weightlessness. Voas pointed out that longer flights such as the 17 orbits of Cosmonaut Titov are required to document the physical effects of prolonged weightlessness.
Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, headed by Rep. Victor Anfuso, opened hearings on the role of women in the space program. Jane B. Hart and Jerrie Cobb, representing the 13 women who completed unofficial space qualification tests at the Lovelace Foundation, testified that women had a real contribution to make and were qualified as astronauts. Jacqueline Cochran, well-known flier, said that “there is no doubt in the world that women will go into space.”
usaf announced special instruments on unidentified military test satellites had confirmed artificial radiation belt densities calculated from earlier injun and telstah data. Radiation of new belt, created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July, was composed primarily of electrons. Radiation sharply increases above 400-mi. altitude at the geomagnetic equator and reaches peak intensities of 100 to 1,000 times normal levels at altitude above 1,000 mi. Lt. Col. Albert C. Trakowski (usaf) stated in press conference that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., could have been killed if his MA-8 space flight had taken him above 400-mi. altitude. Answering questions about usaf report on the artificial radiation belt, Col. Trakowski said the lifetime of the belt “cannot be forecast at present—it wlli be long.”
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center released sketch of Project Apollo suit to be worn by astronauts making four-hour expeditions on lunar surface. Suit contains portable life support system to supply oxygen and pressurization, control temperature and humidity, and protect against solar radiation.
Piloting a nasa F-106 supersonic jet airplane from Pope afb, N.C., Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom notified Jacksonville, Fla., air route traffic control center that Ms Tacan radio navigation aid had gone out. Flying above clouds and around thunderstorms, Grissom began operating an emergency radio beacon signal and was directed to a safe landing under a thunderstorm at Patrick afb by Miami air traffic control center.
Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (usn), the first U.S. astronaut, and Lt. Col. R. G. Robinson (usmc) were awarded the fai DeLaVaulx Medal—Shepard for achieving 615,300-ft. altitude in his suborbital Mercury flight (MR-3) and Robinson for setting closed-course speed mark of 1,606.5 mph in McDonnell F4C aircraft.
In speech on the floor of the House of Representatives, Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, paid tribute to Astronaut Scott Carpenter, stating in part: “Science is the beneficiary of his operation. . . . Commander Carpenter’s success is a compliment to the program; it is a tribute to American ingenuity and American ability to solve the mysteries of outer space. . . “To Scott Carpenter, to Alan Shepard, to Gus Grissom, and to John Glenn, this House and the American people owe a great debt of gratitude. From a scientific standpoint, I am happy to announce to you today the great success of this orbital flight.”
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Mercury Astronaut Donald K. Slayton had been named “Coordinator of Astronaut Activities.” Slayton wollid be responsible for assignment of training and engineering duties of all the astronauts.
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc) was awarded the Alfred A. Cunningham Trophy for being selected as the Marine Aviator of the Year. Mercury Astronaut Glenn orbited the earth three times in first U.S. manned orbital flight MA-6, February 20, 1962.
Letter from President Kennedy defending Administration policy of permitting astronauts to sell their personal stories for profit was made public by M. B. Schnapper, editor of Public Affairs Press, in Washington, D.C. Replying to Mr. Schnapper’s criticism of the policy, the President said the “policy decision was reached only after most careful review of all the facts and lengthy consultation both within and without the Government. Efforts were directed toward removing specific controversial aspects of the original astronaut agreement, and we feel that this goal has been reasonably achieved.”
Estimated that over 60 million Americans witnessed the launch of friendship 7 on live TV. Voice of America carried live overseas radio coverage. The U.S. Senate recessed at 2:30 PM est just before the landing of Mercury spacecraft. The U.S. Post Office placed Project Mercury postage stamp on sale minutes after Astronaut Glenn stepped on the deck of Noa.
In ceremony at Cape Canaveral, President Kennedy thanked the Project Mercury team for the successful flight of friendship 7: “. . . it’s my great pleasure to speak on behalf of all our fellow Americans in expressing pride and satisfaction to those intimately involved in this effort. All of us remember a few dates in this century and those of us who were very young remember Col. Lindbergh’s flight, Pearl Harbor, and the end of the war, and remember the flight of Alan Shepard, Major Grissom and we remember the flight of Col. Glenn ...”	_ President Kennedy then awarded the nasa Distinguished Service Medal to Robert R. Gilruth and read the citation, “for his distinguished leadership of the team of scientists and engineers that carried Project Mercury, the U.S. initial manned space flight program, from its inception to the successful accomplishment of man’s flight in orbit about the earth ...” Lt. Col. John H. Glenn also was awarded the nasa Distinguished Service Medal by the President, the citation to which said:“ . . . made an outstanding contribution to the advancement of human knowledge of space technology and a demonstration of man’s capabilities in space flight. His performance was marked by his great professional skill, his skill as a test pilot, his unflinching courage. . . .” In his remarks, Astronaut Glenn thanked fellow astronauts and the entire Mercury organization: “we all acted literally and figuratively as a team. ... It goes across the board . . . sort of a crosscut of Americana, of industry, and military and civil service. . . . It was headed up by nasa, of course, but thousands and thousands of people have contributed as certainly much or more than I have to the project. . . .”
President Kennedy personally congratulated Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter by telephone shortly after the aurora 7 pilot arrived by helicopter aboard the carrier Intrepid, saying: “. . . I wanted to tell you we are relieved and very proud of your trip. I am glad that you got picked up in good shape and we want to tell you that we are all for you and send you the very best of luck to you and your wife.” Carpenter said: “My apologies for not having aimed a little bit better on re-entry.” President Kennedy: “Oh, fine and good. We want to congratulate you and I look forward to seeing you in Washington sometime soon . . . .”
nasa reported it had received more than 700 requests for personal appearances by the Mercury astronauts for the July 4th holiday, but there was little likelihood that any would be accepted. Astronaut John Glenn had received more than 8,000 requests for appearances since his orbital flight on Feb. 20, 1962.
Deadline for applications for nasa’s new astronaut positions; nasa began screening the more-than-250 applications received. The armed services supplied 53 of the applications while more than 200 civilians submitted applications. Once selected, the new astronauts would undergo intensive training at Manned Spacecraft Center for Projects Gemini and Apollo.
In Pentagon ceremony, usaf Chief of Staff LeMay pinned astronaut wings on Major Robert M. White, the first man to fly a winged aircraft, the X-15, into space.
Announced that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would study Eerful light sources in Australia and South Africa, during his -8 orbital flight, nasa said experiment was to determine how well a space traveler could see light sources of known density on earth. Three high-intensity flares would burn at Woomera, Australia, and electric lamps at Durban, So. Africa. Schirra would try to determine effects of atmosphere on light observed from orbital altitude and to establish which light source was more readily visible. Other scientific experiments of the MA-8 flight would be studies of cosmic radiation, search for rare particles in space, and effects of re-entry heating on new materials.
nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, announced that Mercury-Atlas 8 manned flight would be programed for as many as six orbits late this summer. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (Cdr. usn) was announced as prime pilot, with Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (Major usaf) as backup pilot. Capsule No. 16 was scheduled as the mission spacecraft. Holmes said: “We believe that another three-orbit mission wlli increase considerably our growing knowledge of space flight. Anything more than three orbits should be considered a bonus.” A four-orbit mission would bring the spacecraft down about 200 miles east of Midway Island in the Pacific, while a five or six orbit flight would cause it to land 300 miles northeast of Midway.
Astronaut Scott Carpenter flew simulated MA-7 mission in “Aurora 7” capsule mated to Atlas booster.
Scientists of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, at Boulder, Colo., after intensive interviews with Astronaut Scott Carpenter, concluded that the layer of “haze” reported on the horizon by both Carpenter and Glenn was in reality the phenomenon known as airglow—the emission of light of various colors and wavelengths, caused by chemical reactions in gas molecules in the upper atmosphere.
Astronauts John Glenn and Scott Carpenter, and George M. Low, nasa Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, testified before House Subcommittee on qualifications for astronauts. Low testified that qualifications would be raised rather than lowered for Project Apollo, that the sex of pilots had never been a requirement, but that if any resources were diverted for a woman in space effort “we would have to slow down on our national goal of landing a man on the moon in this decade.” Astronaut Glenn said on women astronauts: “I couldn’t care less who’s over there [in the next seat] as long as it’s the most qualified person. . . . I wouldn’t oppose a women’s astronaut training program; I just see no requirement for it.” nasa had not found one woman to date who met all astronaut requirements: American citizenship; excellent physical condition; degree in physical or biological sciences or engineering; and experimental jet flight-test experience.
President John F. Kennedy, in message to U.S.S.R. Premier Nikita Khrushchev, said: “I send to you and to the Soviet people the heartiest congratulations of the people and the Government of the United States on the outstanding joint flights of Maj. Nikolayev and Col. Popovich. This new accomplishment is an important forward step in the great human adventure of the peaceful exploitation of space. America’s astronauts join with me in sending our salute to Maj. Nikolayev and Col. Popovich.”
nasa would later select additional astronauts for Project Apollo, Dr. Robert Voas of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center told Virginia Psychological Association in Richmond. Dr. Voas said the nine new astronauts recently selected would participate in Project Gemini two-man, orbital rendezvous missions and Project Apollo, culminating in manned landing on the moon.
nasa announced Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, Jr. (usaf), had been selected for 18-orbit Project Mercury flight MA-9. The day-long space flight would be made no earlier than April 1963. Astronaut Cooper, youngest of original seven astronauts, was back-up pilot and technical adviser for Astronaut Walter M. Schirra in flight MA-8. Back-up pilot for MA-9 would be Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., who made first U.S. manned space flight (suborbital flight, MR-3) on May 5, 1961.
M. Scott Carpenter Day in Denver as an estimated 300,000 persons witnessed the Memorial Day parade honoring the Mercury Astronaut from Colorado.
usmc gold medal was presented to Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc) at usmc 187th anniversary dinner, Washington. Medal commemorated Astronaut Glenn’s Project Mercury orbital space flight Feb. 20, 1962 (MA-6).
Reported in the press that a 3-ft. by 2-ft. metal fragment found on a farm in South Africa on February 21 was identified by numbers stamped on it as a part of the Atlas booster that placed Astronaut John Glenn into orbit on February 20. Local reports of an explosion about 1 AM on February 21 indicated that the fragment came to earth after about 8 hours in orbit. Fragment was reported as 4 ft. by 2-ft. “stainless steel” in Capetown telegram to nasa Feb. 26, 1962.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, urged in speech before aaas that scientists be among the next group of astronauts selected for training. “I have a complete and utter conviction that we should take a scientist and make a flyer out of him rather than the other way around.” In interview, Dr. Newell outlined tentative nasa plans for 1963 launchings: 6-8 communications satellites, three weather satellites; 8 scientific satellites; at least one manned orbital flight; initial unmanned flight-test of Gemini capsule; three lunar impacts; Apollo capsule boilerplate tests of emergency flight conditions; three Saturn launch vehicle flight-tests; two electrical rocket-engine flight-tests; three re-entry heating tests.
nasa selected Chance-Vought Corp. as contractor to study rendezvous of space vehicles. A primary part of the contract would be a flight simlliation study exploring the capability of an astronaut to control an Apollo-type spacecraft.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., on board aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge, began debriefing and medical check. Schirra would arrive in Honolulu Oct. 6 and then fly to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston.
nasa announced that friendship 7, the Mercury capsule in which Astronaut John Glenn orbited the earth three times, would be lent to usia for a world tour, with some 20 stops on the itinerary and touching all continents. In mid-August the capsule would be displayed at the Century 21 Exhibition in Seattle, Washington, before being presented to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., for permanent exhibition.
Soviet cosmonauts held news conference in Moscow, revealing they had parachuted to earth from their space capsllies, landing about 124 mi. apart. Maj. Nikolayev reported that he and Col. Popovich had unstrapped themselves and floated weightless in their cabins for an hour, maintaining communications with each other at the same time. He also stated that the flight program had not called for rendezvous of vostok iii and iv, and that the closest the two capsules had come to each other was 5 kilometers (a little over 3 mi.). Col. Popovich reported they both had observed the glowing particles seen by Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov and by U.S. Astronaut John Glenn. Popovich said they believed the particles had been “merely the exhaust of the rocket motors.” It was stated that the results of the cosmonauts’ flights would be published after the collected data had been processed.
Reported that usaf had offered to train nasa’s “second generation” astronauts at its Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, California.
In answer to question on Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter’s history of motion sickness, John Powers, Mercury information officer, said that Carpenter had no such history. He noted that Cosmonaut Titov had reported that he had only 350 hours of pilot flight time before his space flight, which compares to at least 1,000 hours for each of the seven Mercury astronauts. “Titov never saw his space capsule until 60 days before he flew it,” Powers said, “whereas the astronauts have become familiar with their capsules over a period of three years.”
Reported that nasa was conducting a study to determine what effect Soviet nuclear test series might have on forthcoming orbital flight (MA-8) of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Final evaluation was expected within a week.
afsc announced development of “self-maneuvering unit” (smu), a 160-lb. pack which converts a pressure-suited spaceman into a one-man space vehicle. Designed to position and stabilize an astronaut or crewman outside a spacecraft and to give him mobility in an orbiting assembly area, smu contains its own stabilization, control, propulsion, and power systems.
Reported that, if Astronaut Schirra’s six-orbit flight (MA-8) is fully successful, nasa would conclude Project Mercury with one 18-orbit, 24-hour flight. Present plans called for four 24-hour flights with the one-man Mercury capsule; new plan under consideration would cancel three of these and assign their mission to two-man Gemini capsule.
Mercury astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn appeared before both the House Science and Astronautics Committee and the Senate Aeronautics and Space Committee, answering a variety of questions on future manned space flight. Dr. Robert Seamans, nasa Associate Administrator, summarized specific nasa program, manpower, and money requirements before the House Committee.
At sam symposium on aerospace medicine, Lt. Col. Burt Rowen (usaf), Chief of Bioastronautics at afftc, presented heartbeat and breathing records of Maj. Robert White during X-15 record speed flight of November 9, 1961. “When the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee first became aware of the high heart and respiration rates [of pilots in high-performance aircraft] they became concerned with the question of success of the Mercury program. . . . But now this has come to be regarded as normal.” Dr. Charles Sandhous of the University of California warned that an astronaut caught in space during a solar flare might age three years or more as a result of the radiation received.
Faulty valve in MA-8 spacecraft was replaced by technicians, a repair which required removal of Mercury capsule from the Atlas booster. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s orbital space flight was planned for October 3.
usaf revealed that three “plastinauts,” plastic dummies of human astronauts, were undergoing tests at Kirtland afb preparatory to being sent into space. Plastinauts in space would be used to determine radiation hazards to astronauts. During early October: J-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine successfully completed its first full-duration static firing (more than four minutes) at Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. J-2 engines will be clustered to power S-II stage of Advanced Saturn vehicle.
nasa postponed MA-7 flight attempt until at least May 22, 1962, because of modification of altitude-sensing instrumentation in the parachute deployment system. Project Mercury Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter was pronounced in “excellent condition” for his orbital flight after a 5-hour physical examination.
nasa announced that nine new astronauts for Projects Gemini and Apollo would be named at Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, on September 17.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter returned to work at Langley afb facilities of the Manned Spacecraft Center after a four-day trip to Colorado. All seven Mercury astronauts were scheduled to receive Peninsula Distinguished Service Awards, a tribute from several civic groups on Virginia’s lower peninsula, on June 1.
nasa graduated first group of Project Mercury tracking personnel completing new course at Wallops Station, the seven graduates representing personnel from nas a and dod contractors. Directed by gsfc, the Mercury Network Training Program consists of specialized courses to support the man in space mission, one requiring that the subsystems at all 18 sites in a global network are continuously monitored and provide precise data concerning the spacecraft’s location, altitude, and operational status as well as the astronaut’s condition. Real-time data must flow between the sites, the Computer Center at gsfc, and the Mercury Control Center at Cape Canaveral.
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, announced construction of $12.3-mlliion space radiation effects laboratory wollid begin in March and wollid be completed in about two years. Facility, to be operated by nasa and three -Virginia colleges, wollid be used to study effects of radiation on space vehicle materials and components; it wollid simulate radiation hazards astronauts and spacecraft wollid encounter in space. Facility wollid be used also in graduate studies program in conjunction with the three colleges—Univ. of Virginia, College of William and Mary, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
Reported that two radio hams of Ann Arbor, Mich., J. Schmidt and E. Nuttle, recorded the voice transmissions of Astronaut Glenn during the three-orbit flight of friendship 7.
nasa Administrator Webb introduced Robert R. Gilruth and Astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn to nasa Headquarters’ personnel assembled in fob No. 6, Washington.
nasa was studying the problem of falling fragments from orbital objects and the possibility of injury or damage to persons or property on earth. Four fragments from the Atlas booster that put Astronaut John Glenn into orbit were recovered on earth, the first pieces known to have re-entered from an orbiting object without burning up. Statistically the chances of injury to anyone on earth would be extremely small, especially since the orbits are over water about 80% of the time, nasa pointed out that some 100 meteorites weighing two pounds or more struck the U.S. every year, yet there had never been a report of anyone being struck by one.
First full-scale research model of an inflatable space station was displayed at nasa Lewis Research Center. Developed by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for nasa, the doughnut-shaped, three-story-high structure was made of rubberized fabric and equipped to accommodate three to ten astronauts.
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, director of President Kennedy’s Office of Science and Technology, was asked in Voice of America interview whether an attempt to land astronauts on Mars in 1971 or 1973 “could be considered.” Dr. Wiesner replied: “I think it could be considered, but I don’t think it would be done. I think it is a very major effort, even considerably larger than the moon effort. We have made estimates of a Mars program cost and a round number like one hundred billion dollars seems to be a reasonable figure. It is obviously technically possible, [but] I doubt whether one could do it in the time period between now and 1970 without just an unbelievable crash program. I think that before the century is out we will probably have done just that, and it would be interesting to do, but I don’t believe anyone can deny the vital reason for undertaking the program of the kind you are talking about.” (Transcript)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., repeated in Washington press conference that he was not planning a career in politics. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/63)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said in nationwide TV interview that U.S. could and would land a man on the moon: “We need no big, new scientific breakthroughs to complete this, we feel. We do not need the discovery of something as large as atomic power or anything like this in order to make the moon flight. Most of the technical details are known. It is now a lot of veiy hard and long engineering spade work and test procedure to prove out all these details and put them all together on the lunar mission.” (“Meet the Press,” nbc-TV, 4/21/63; AP, Wash. Post, 4/22/63)
Astronauts on the five-day manned lunar landing trip would not only pilot the Apollo but would make repairs to malfunctioning systems out of a stock of spare parts carried along for that purpose. This would be one means of upgrading the reliability of the entire system and reduce the need for redundancy of systems, saving weight and space. (Finney, NYT, 10/15/63, 22)
Perth, Australia, was ablaze with Christmas lights far into the night. Perth was celebrating its new tradition as “City of Lights” begun Feb. 20,1962, when its lights were a beacon for Astronaut John H. Glenn’s orbital Mercury space flight. (Lukas, NYT, 12/28/63,_6) _	_	__
nasa announced it would negotiate with Lear-Siegler, Inc., of Anaheim, Calif., for an extension of the company’s present $3,753,059 contract for design, manufacture, and installation of equipment for testing subsystems of the Saturn V launch vehicle at msfc. The additional work would include design, manufacture, and installation of instrumentation for a dual liquid-hydrogen test position and an acoustical-model test position at msfc. (nasa Release 63-222) World Conference on Space Communications opened in Geneva with delegates from 70 countries present. U.N. Secretary General U Thant was to have addressed the delegates via Telstar communications satellite, but a technical problem prevented the broadcast. Principal purpose of the conference was to reallocate radio frequencies to provide growth room for future satellite communications needs. (NYT, 10/8/63, 16) Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, received Harry E. Salzberg Memorial Medal for his “distinguished contribution to the field of transportation” and became the 1963 Salzberg Lecturer at Syracuse Univ. (Ltr. of Invitation, 4/18/63) Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., would decide during the week whether he would seek the Senate seat now occupied by Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio), according to George Clifford of the Washington Daily News after an interview with C. Leo DeOrsey, adviser to the astronauts. (Clifford, Wash. Daily News, 10/7/63) nana reported Lufthansa sources in Germany claim that U.S.S.R. is farther along on supersonic transport development than either Britain-France or the U.S. Being designed and built by the famous Ilyushin and Tupolev teams, the Russian entry is reported to be in the same speed class as the British-French Concorde— mach 2.2 (1,500 mph)—and carry about the same passenger load of 100, and to land at quite low speeds, probably through the use of variable-sweep wings. First version of the supersonic transport would be a freight carrier, not only because it can be introduced with a lower safety factor than a passenger version but because the increased friction between Soviet Russia and Communist China dictates a fast priority freight system to eastern Russia, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63) Atlas D icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., but exploded shortly after launch, (upi, NYT, 10/8/63, 28) Lewis awarded study contracts totaling $576,000 to General Dynamics/Astronautics and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation to investigate the possibilities of using “flox”—a mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen—as the oxidizer in the Atlas space launch vehicle. Preliminary studies indicate the combination could result in an 88 per cent increase in payloads for 100-mile high orbits, (lrc Release 63-78, Lewis Chronology, 9) Early October: faa Deputy Administrator Gordon M. Bain said that nasa’s studies of a supersonic commercial air transport (scat) were not in accord with faa thinking—that they derived too much from the B-70 work of some years ago and that they recommended the technical desirability of a mach 3 aircraft, while faa leaned toward a mach 2.5 aircraft as the one economically feasible for airline operation. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,38)
Eclipse of the sun visible across Canada and Northeastern U.S. nasa joined other scientists and astronomers in scientific studies during the eclipse, with emphasis on ionosphere and on sun’s corona. At Churchill Research Range, usaf oar facility located at Ft. Churchill, Can., six Nike-Apache sounding rockets equipped with instruments to measure electron density, electron temperature, and solar radiation in ultraviolet and x-ray regions were launched for nasa Goddard Space Flight Center; Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with spectrophotometric instruments to measure absolute intensity of spectral features in ultraviolet region was launched for Johns Hopkins Univ.; and Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket with instruments to measure variations in D and E layers of ionosphere was launched for usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, gsfc and afcrl scientists said preliminary results indicated collected data confirmed previous predictions of composition of the ionosphere. At White Sands Missile Range, gsfc project for eclipse was Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with coronagraph to photograph sun’s corona, ultraviolet spectrometer aimed at sun’s center, and camera to photograph Lyman-Alpha rays. At Wallops Station, gsfc project was measurement of electron and neutral particle temperatures in the ionosphere using instrumented payload launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket to 207-mi. altitude. At Pleasant Pond, Me., gsfc team photographed eclipse with specially made instrument for photographing stars and comets near the sun. DC-8 flying observatory flew north from Edmonton, Can., to meet eclipse at Great Slave Lake, following path of moon and flying above much of atmospheric-haze layer. Sponsored by Douglas Aircraft Co. and National Geographic Society with 11 other participating organizations, expedition included nasa Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nasa astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill studying various scientific details of the phenomenon. Also onboard were Sheldon Smith and Ray Torrey of nasa Ames Research Center, photographing rays of sun’s corona, (nasa Release 63-148; msc Release 63-113; Goddard News, 7/15/63, 1, 8; oar Research Review, Vol. II, No. 11; dod Release 978-63; Wallops Release 63-70; M&R, 7/29/63,24)
nasa announced that it would recruit 10 to 15 new astronaut trainees this summer. ( msc Space News Roundup, 1 /8/64,2)
Soviet Cosmonaut Major Andrian Nikolayev, speaking over Radio Moscow in a “Cosmonautics Day” broadcast, called U.S. Project Mercuiy spacecraft sigma 7 an “unreliable American contraption. . . . To be frank, I would not like to find myself in his [Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s] place. You have no idea how cramped and uncomfortable this capsule looks in comparison with the cabins of our remarkable Vostok cosmic ships.” Nikolayev had seen sigma 7 during his recent visit to Sao Paulo, Brazil, where the spacecraft was on display. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/13/63)
Reorganization of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Michoud Operations was announced by Michoud General Manager Dr. George N. Constan. (Marshall Star, 6/26/63,7) Jwm 27: X-15 No. 3 piloted by Maj. Robert A. Rush worth (usaf) to 285,000-ft. altitude and 3,425-mph speed (mach 4.89) in 13-min. flight. X-15 was launched from B-52 mother ship over Delamar Lake, Nev., its engine burning 80 sec. Maj. Rushworth qualified for military astronaut wings by piloting the rocket research aircraft to altitude higher than 50 mi. Purpose of flight was to familiarize 38-year-old Major Rushworth with comparatively high-altitude flight, (frc Release 14—63; nasa Release 63142)
Activities at Kitty Hawk, N.C., commemorating 60th anniversary of powered flight (Dec. 17,1903) : Youth Seminar on Flight, with 200 state delegates, observers, and representatives of youth attending, was moderated by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc) . Panel members were Max Conrad, pilot of stock-model business aircraft; Capt. Harold Blackburn, twa jet pilot; James Nields, business pilot; Jacqueline Cochran, record-holding aviatrix; and Maj. Robert Rush worth (usaf) , X-15 pilot. Full-scale replica of the Wright Flyer, built by volunteers from National Capitol Section of aiaa, was installed in museum at Wright Brothers National Memorial. Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges was featured speaker at annual banquet of Kill Devil Hills Memorial Society at Nags Head, N.C. Soaring Society of America presented to Wright Memorial Museum and Visitor’s Center a plaque commemorating Wright Brother’s glider flights. Presentation was made by Floyd Sweet of nasa Hq., past president of the Society. (60th Anniv. Committee Release; Wash. Post, 12/15/63; Soaring Society of America^ Inc. Release, 12/16/63)
Air Force Association presented Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper the David C. Schilling trophy for the year’s most significant aerospace achievement m field of flight—his 22-orbit Project Mercury space flight MA-9.	(msc Space News Roundup, 9/18/63,8)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, accompanied by nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, and msc Deputy Director for Flight Operations Walter C. Williams, held press conference at Cape Canaveral carried on nation-wide TV. Major Cooper presented orbit-by-orbit account of his MA-9 space flight. Asked about possibility of MA-10 flight, Dr. Seamans said: “It is quite unlikely that we will have another Mercury flight,” but final decision on MA-10 would be made “within a week or so.” (NYT, 5/20/63, 24; New York Herald Trib., 5/20/63)
Dr. E. C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke before the Georgetown University Forum: “In brief I would list some solid reasons for the moon trip: “1. [There is] No other place so near in space where we can test the equipment and the men for future space travel. “2. A clear objective gives impetus, order, and efficiency to a program. “3. The lunar project requires the development of powerful rocket engines, sophisticated spacecraft, trained astronauts, tracking systems, and capability to protect man against the multiple hazards of space. “4. Success in this venture gives prestige essential at negotiating tables. “5. It will give an impetus to our standard of living, to education and employment, and to new methods and materials for the productive process. “6. There will be substantial defense spin-offs, in addition to the political and economic benefits which also tend to deter aggression. For example, rendezvous technique, life-protective measures, control and guidance systems, improvement in rockets, etc. “7. The moon is an excellent platform for mounting astronomical instruments, without atmospheric handicaps. “8. The moon can be a relay point for communications and a refueling point for space travels.” (Text)
The lunar landing research facility was nearing completion at Langley Research Center. A gantry structure 400 ft. long and 250 ft. high with a 50 ft. clearance would suspend a model of the Lunar Landing Module (lem), sustaining % of the model’s weight to simulate the % lunar gravity and enable astronauts to practice lunar landings. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,83)
Richard N. Thomas, professor of astrophysics and chairman of Faculty Committee for Astrophysics of Dept, of Physics and Astrophysics, Univ. of Colorado, was awarded Dept, of Commerce Gold Medal for Exceptional Service. (Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, 5/63,9) During March, April, and May: Total of 227 nasa appearances at 70 hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, involving 246 hours. This involved 546 man-hours of primary witnesses, not including backup witnesses, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/88) Jv/ne 1: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., returned to U.S. after vacationing in Japan with his family since shortly after MA-9 manned space flight, during which he had been stationed aboard Pacific tracking ship Coastal Sentry. Glenn’s candidness and openness during visit was said to have “boosted U.S. image” in Japan. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/2/63)
One-year anniversary of orbiting of tiros vi meteorological satellite, its year-long operational lifetime setting new record for weather satellites. On July 31, 1963, tiros vi discovered first hurricane (Arlene) of 1963 season in tropical Atlantic ; altogether, tiros vi photographed two hurricanes in Atlantic, two tropical storms in eastern Pacific, eight typhoons in central and western Pacific, as well as sand storms in Saudi Arabia and ice conditions in southern and northern hemispheres. Along with tiros v it supported Mercury space flights of Astronauts Schirra and Cooper. National Weather Satellite Center issued about 600 weather advisories around the world based on some of the 63,000 cloud-cover pictures from tiros vi. (nasa Release 63209; Commerce Dept. Release WB 63-11)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke before the Society of Experimental Test Pilots in Washington: “. . . it occurs to me that perhaps some of our best known astronauts took greater risks, with less thoroughly tested equipment, when they were, flying aircraft in the atmosphere than when they went into space .... I simply want to mention that our astronauts, just as all test pilots, had done many courageous things before the Space Age descended upon us and too few were recognized as heroes for those feats.” (Text)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received 1962 Gold Medal of French Association Pour l’Etude et la Recherche Astronautique. Colonel Glenn accepted the award “on behalf of myself and the thousands of persons here and abroad who have made these space flights possible.” {Av. Wk., 8/12/63,109)
Little Joe II launch vehicle left General Dynamics/Convair plant en route to White Sands Missile Range, N.M., where test launch would be made next month. Purpose of flight would be to qualify Little Joe II launch vehicle for later flights with boilerplate Apollo payload and Apollo spacecraft built to production standards; Little Joe II tests would provide engineering information for use on manned Apollo orbital flights, (msc Release 63-115) 1 .D Axj JJpCCU 60,000-ft. altitudes at He du Levant launch center. {M&R, 7/15/63, 9) By this deadline, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center received 271 applications for astronaut openings. 71 applicants were military pilots recommended for possible astronaut duty; remaining 2(X) were civilians, including three women. {Av. Wk., 7/22/63, 325) Sen. Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) inserted in Congressional Record a letter from physics prof. John H. Gardner, Brigham Young Univ., criticizing “the trend in nasa and in the Department of Defense toward the development of inhouse capability for the performance of basic research and other scientific tasks which can and, under our private enterprise system, should be performed by the private sector of the economy with a secondary role being played by the university .... “It is far from evident that the creation of new Government laboratories in competition with and at the expense of existing laboratories will help us to achieve our goals in space any faster. Appropriate utilization of the private scientific resources of the country would seem to be faster and more in keeping with our traditions. The statement that nasa has too much money is frequently heard among scientists and it is indicative of the widespread fears and misgivings scientists have about the ominous changes taking place in the kind of role they play in our society. These fears and misgivings may underlie much of the growing opposition to our lunar landing goal . . . .” (Letter, CR, 7/15/63,11884)	_
On 36th anniversary of Lindbergh’s historic transatlantic flight, Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper was presented nasa Distinguished Service Medal by President Kennedy in White House ceremony. Also presented were nasa Medals for Outstanding Leadership to: G. Merritt Preston, Manager of Project Mercury Operations at nasa Launch Operations Center; Floyd L. Thompson, Director, nasa Langley Research Center; Kenneth S. Klein-knecht, Manager of Project Mercury Office, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center; Christopher C. Kraft, Director of Flight Operations Div. of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center; and Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis, commander of afmtc, Cape Canaveral, nasa Group Achievement Awards were presented to: dod Recovery Forces; and Air Force Space Systems Div. Following ceremony, Astronaut Cooper was hailed by thousands in motorcade to the Capitol, where he addressed special joint session of Congress:	. .1 don’t think I have ever been with a team that was more dedicated, or striving harder, or was more completely sold on their product than the total space effort and particularly the manned flight effort in which I am involved .... “I named my spacecraft faith 7 for three reasons: First, because I believe in God and country; second, because of the loyalty to organization, to the two organizations, actually, to which I belong; and, third because of the confidence in the entire space team .... “I think of all things that I am constantly amazed at is the public’s response to this program ... it is tremendously impressive.” The parades and activities following each flight “show tlist Americans want to express tlieir fsslin^s and tlieir confidence-that we . . . can conduct peaceful research programs; that we can conduct them openly, and under the surveillance of every man, woman and child in the entire world.” (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2; CR, 5/28/63, A3420-21)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Life Magazine announced signing of four-year contracts with 16 nasa astronauts for their personal stories; Field Enterprises acquired newspaper syndication and book rights, Life, the magazine rights. (AP, NYT, 9/18/63,15)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., officially opened Chicago and Midwest Space Month with his televised dinner address in the Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago. Dinner marked the opening of “America in Space” exhibit in the museum, largest space display ever made available by nasa in the midwest. Space Month activities would be climaxed by third national conference on the peaceful uses of space in Chicago, May 1-9. {Chicago Trib., 4/9/63)
At regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “Did the astronauts raise with you . . . their desire for another Mercury flight? Do you have any opinion yourself, tentative or otherwise, as to the desirability of another Mercury flight?” President Kennedy replied: “I think they feel that it’s worthwhile. I haven’t discussed it with Mr. Webb, nasa should make the judgment and will make the judgment, and I would not intervene. But they do feel that a flight is useful and that the experience of Major Cooper has indicated that the time between the last Gemini flight as scheduled—the Mercury flight and the new Gemini flight, which is a period of almost 18 months—they feel may represent a gap which could be filled very usefully by another Mercury flight. “This will be a matter which I think they’re going to be talking about this week with Mr. Webb and which I will discuss with him next week. But the final judgment must be nasa’s.” (Transcript, NYT, 5/23/63,18)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter addressing the usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Texas, said: “The main goal of Project Mercury is to prove the design and engineering concept and the usefulness of Man in space, but the capabilities of the Mercury system can be streched only so far. I had hoped that the flight of “Aurora Seven” would be a humble beginning in the gathering of scientific data from space about . the universe in which we live. In the three short months that preceded the flight, we developed many special instruments for this purpose. . . . There is untold wealth of information to be gained as a result of space flight if we turn our talents and curiosities in that direction. “I have worked closely with scientists from many fields, but perhaps most closely with those in medicine. “There have been some wonderful intangibles I attach to working with these men. They are more than vein probers, brain pickers and pulse takers. I am continually challenged by their curiosity and insight, and fascinated by their research. I respect their intelligence and I treasure their friendships. “It is this intelligence, this special education and innate curiosity scientists of all types have in common that demands they be included in future space flights. “Perhaps one day the astronaut will be the least important person aboard as he ferries a cargo of astronomers, geologists, biologists, and flight surgeons to Mars.” (Text)
Sen. Ernest Gruening (D.-Alaska) criticized nasa on the Senate floor for its indifference to training and use of women astronauts in the manned space program. Also he inserted in the Congressional Record a recent article in Life by Clare Boothe Luce, in which she said: “The astronaut of today is the world’s most prestigious idol. Once launched into space he holds in his hands something far more costly and precious than the millions of dollars’ worth of equipment in his capsule; he holds the prestige and the honor of his country .... But the astronaut is also something else: he is the symbol of the way of life of his nation. “In entrusting a 26-year-old girl with a cosmonaut mission, the Soviet Union has given its women unmistakable proof that it believes them to possess these same virtues. The flight of Valentina Tereshkova is, consequently, symbolic of the emancipation of the Communist woman. It symbolizes to Russian women that they actively share (not passively bask, like American women) in the glory of conquering space.” (CR, 6/27/63,11228-30) Jwne 27: usaf launched Minuteman icbm from amr in 4,000-mi. flight down Atlantic Missile Range in successful test, (dod Release 929-63)
The Iven C. Kincheloe Award was presented by Mrs. Dorothy Kincheloe to the seven original Mercury astronauts as the highlight of the Seventh Annual Awards Banquet of The Society of Experimental Test Pilots held at Lancaster, Calif. The award is presented annually for the recognition of outstanding professional accomplishment in the conduct of flight testing. (Space News Roundup, 10/16/63) e non	r»r\n TTinito /I tbo	-f n oiIiItt	l W o 11 at»c?	I?o1oo eac* _QA	onrl UjWO	OOUO tioitvu LilCl	IUCH1 cj .	y v f	AiL/AUWkAAJ	wt/ O A	Muu
J. A. MacTaggart, managing director of Niagara Falls, Ontario, wax museum, said wax image of Astronaut John Glenn was not on display because of “astronomical” $3,000 it would cost to purchase space suit from American manufacturer. Wax figure of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was on display, Soviet Government having supplied copy of his space suit after request through British Aeronautical Board. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63)
Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (usaf), X-15 pilot, was presented military astronaut wings by Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Curtis E. LeMay. (Wash. Post, 72663)
Contract award for two Apollo mission simulators, for training astronauts from launch through lunar orbit and return to earth, was announced by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., was selected by North American Aviation’s Space Systems Div. to develop and install the two spacecraft simulators, one at msc in Houston and one at Atlantic Missile Range, (msc Release 63-79)
At the State Department luncheon honoring Astronaut Gordon Cooper, Vice President Johnson remarked: “In 1942, President Roosevelt called together our wartime leaders for the final decision on continuing or abandoning the Manhattan project which produced the atomic bomb. One of the most eminent leaders present heard presentation from all sides. Then, he solemnly gave President Roosevelt his verdict: ‘The bomb will never go off—I speak, of course, Mr. President, as an expert on explosives.’ “In that first, uncertain spring of the space age 5 years ago, some conscientious experts took the same attitude toward Project Mercury. History has proved them grossly wrong. . . . “Hitler once predicted the Nazis would wring England’s neck like a chicken. After the Battle of Britain, Winston Churchill said to Commons, ‘Some chicken. Some neck.’ We have heard some say recently that the civilian space program is only ‘leafraking.’ Considering Major Cooper—considering the vast technological cooperation which made his mission a success—I would say today, ‘Some leaf. Some rake.’” (Text, CR, 5/23/63, A3299)
On anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Mercury Project Manager at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said: “Three U.S. Astronauts have accumulated 1,144.51 minutes in orbital space flights. The flights of Glenn, Carpenter and Schirra have confirmed that man can perform in a space environment and that he can enhance the mission success and flight safety by virtue of his flexibility and his capability to exercise judgment to solve operational problems. “The flights have also confirmed that the approach and philosophy followed in the design of the Mercury spacecraft was technically sound. Each of these flights has elevated our confidence level in the spacecraft systems and has demonstrated that, although not a simple task, the resources of the United States— that is, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, private industry and other elements—can be unified toward a common end with unparalleled cooperation to accomplish a national objective on a minimum time schedule. “All these benefits derived from the Mercury Project, are directly applicable to future manned space flight programs and ____: j____j *. j-x: ________1_;_i_ x_ i______xu _ t-: _ j a n~ pl UVIUO a &U11U. AUUIlU.U'blUll Ull WIUCU UA	1116 AJR5II11111 clilU ApVllO programs.” (msc Release 63-30)
In the wake of Washington reports that Lt. Col. John H. Glenn might be candidate for U.S. Senate from Ohio, the nasa astronaut said in Houston Post interview that his plans were to remain with nasa and that he had given no thought to a political career. {Houston Post, 7/7/63)
Brig. Gen. Charles H. Roadman (usaf) , nasa Director of Aerospace Medicine, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics' Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. Replying to press criticism of nasa plans to use pure oxygen in Project Gemini spacecraft, General Roadman said: “. . . in our investigations to date we have no physiological information that would permit us to say that 100% oxygen from a physiological standpoint is contraindicated in a two-week mission. This is not to say that there are not many physiologists who would like more information concerning 100% oxygen over a time period, which we thoroughly support . . . .” (Transcript) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in keynote address May 6, cited recommendation by Iowa Summer Study that one or more scientists be included in Project Apollo lunar flights: “To those who have the responsibility for success in reaching the moon, it has appeared that the nature of the Apollo effort requires the training of astronauts who have substantial experience as test pilots in high speed jet aircraft, and to the extent possible engineering training as well. “Meanwhile, it is apparent that the view of the scientists that trained scientific personnel should participate is valid, and that at the earliest appropriate stage in the program scientists will be included on Apollo missions. So far as we can now tell we are obligated to utilize astronauts with the maximum of test-flight experience and highly conditioned reflexes on the first flight of the most difficult of all undertakings. Should training and experience in intermediate flights indicate otherwise we will, of course, take this into consideration in determining the stage of development in manned space flight at which a scientist-astronaut will directly participate. “In its effort to insure maximum scientific benefit from the manned space flight program nasa is doing several things: “First, manned space flights are being used to take scientific measurements in order that they will provide results beyond crew training and technological experience. “Second, efforts have already begun to provide scientific training for the present group of astronauts including geological field trips to enhance their capacity for scientific observation. “Third, a manned space science working group has been established [within nasa] .... This group is already at work in the planning of a program for training scientists for space flight . . . .’’ (Text) Dr. David H. Stoddard, Assistant Director of Medical Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed human factors in manned space flight and said “we are confident that the biomedical needs of our currently approved manned space flight program can be met from within the scope of our existing technology.” (Text) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, reviewed U.S. manned space flight program. Describing Project Gemini, he said:	. . the Gemini is more than an experimental spacecraft. At the end of its scheduled developmental flight program, it will be available for missions ranging from scientific and engineering experiments to the ferrying of astronauts to and from a permanent space laboratory. The end goal of Gemini is, therefore, an operational spacecraft which can be launched by relatively small boosters. We expect Gemini to be a useful space vehicle for several years .... The Gemini spacecraft will reach operational status by 1966 . . . .” (Text)	. Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn), Director of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said: “The nation’s program to achieve pre-eminence in space and to insure that, the United States occupies first place among the nations of this world in science, in technology and in conquest of space is critically dependent on the power of the rocket. “You may have heard much about the ‘booster gap’ and the effect this situation has had on our position vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union started well ahead of us in the development of large rockets, so necessary for manned flight. The Soviets have been ahead of us, and are still ahead of us in their ability to launch reliably large masses to Earth orbit. “However, with the acceleration of our own progress and by the establishment of our program on a sound engineering basis we can, we believe, surpass the Soviets in time and clearly establish and demonstrate United States pre-eminence in manned space flight. . . .” (Text) Reviewing nasa space program, Director of nasa Office of Programs D. D. Wyatt said: “In its broadest context the nasa program can be classified into three complementary parts. First, we have those phases of the program which are aimed at the exploration of the very nature of space .... “The second major element of our program is aimed at the earliest practical utilization of space for the benefit of mankind .... “Complementing our programs to understand and define space is a third major program element aimed at developing and improving the highly complex technologies which will enhance our future capabilities in space . . . .” (Text) John E. Naugle, Director of nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, said: “. . . the scientific program which we have in nasa is a logical extension of the research work which has been underway in laboratories on the earth since the time of Galileo. Just as astronomers once carried their telescopes to the top of a mountain to see better, now we carry telescopes beyond the earth on rockets and satellites. By doing this we see entirely new phenomena and enable scientists to broaden their studies in certain scientific disicplines . . . .” He then discussed scientific results from each of the six scientific satellites launched by nasa since beginning of 1962 (oso i, explorer xiv, explorer xv, alouette i, ariel, and explorer xvii).	(Text) nasa Director of International Programs Arnold W. Frutkin said in May 7 address delivered by J. H. Barnes, nasa Chief of Cooperative Programs, Office of International Programs: “What other nations are doing in space and in particular, what they are doing together, is in fact small when compared with the resources going directly into national programs in the US and the ussr. Yet, what has been accomplished provides substantial evidence of the feasibility, the benefits, and the promise of joint action by the nations in this new field . . . .” (Text) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, described scientific spacecraft now under development, and said: “We must continually assess our progress .... The flight performance of our spacecraft has been increasing dramatically .... The useful life of unmanned spacecraft launched in 1962 has exceed six months and is still rising because most of those intended for long life are still operating successfully. “Our progress with launch vehicles has been equally gratifying. In 1962, 82% of all major nasa launchings were successful. This performance has been paced by the remarkable Thor-Delta which has successfully launched 16 out of 17 spacecraft. In addition, the huge Saturn has scored 4 out of 4 perfect flights. During this time period, both the Thor-Delta and the Scout payloads were increased over 60% at no increase in their $2.5 million and $1 million price tags. These dramatic increases in performance, life, and reliability of spacecraft and launch vehicles represent by far the most effective way to achieve economy in the space program . . . .” (Text) nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said: “There are four principal areas where a continuing and driving program of advanced research is required if this nation is to achieve pre-eminence in aeronautical and space activities in the decades to come. These are energy conversion and propulsion; materials and structures; control, guidance and communications; and space sciences and the environment of space.” (Text) Louis B. C. Fong, Director of nasa Office of Technology Utilization, said on May 8 that the “basic objectives of the [nasa] Technology Utilization Program are:
Unnamed nasa spokesman quoted as saying nasa had tried and failed to employ Col. Charles E. Yeager (usaf) and Maj. Robert M. White (usaf) as directors of astronaut training for Projects Gemini and Apollo at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Colonel Yeager is commandant of usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, and Major White is usaf pilot of X-15 aircraft, also at Edwards afb. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/63)
Proposal by nbc to television industry to televise Astronaut Gordon Cooper’s Mercury flight MA-9 in color would not be adopted, Executive Vice President of nbc News William R. MeAndrew acknowledged. Proposal had been rejected, science reporter William Hines said, in February by officials of abc and cbs networks, but nasa had been quietly trying to persuade them to accept the proposal. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
President Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral, his third tour of the test site within two years. Flying in from Palm Beach, where he was spending the weekend, the President spent three hours watching the launching of a Polaris missile from the submerged nuclear submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson, riding in a helicopter over the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) where nasa is constructing facilities for Saturn V launches, visiting the Saturn I rocket on its launch site. Speaking of the Saturn I flight scheduled for earlv December, the President said that if successful it would give tlie U.S. “the largest booster in the world and show significant progress in space. “I think that would be an important milestone for us.” The President was briefed on Projects Gemini and Apollo and the related booster programs by a group of nasa officials including nasa Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and msfc Director Dr. Wem-her von Braun. At one point in the illustrated lecture, the President lagged behind his party to examine models of the various boosters in the space program. He picked up a model of the 72-ft. Atlas D which had boosted the Project Mercury astronauts into orbit and compared it with a model of the 281-ft. Saturn V intended to propel Project Apollo astronauts to a manned lunar landing. “This is fantastic,” the President said. (NYT, 11/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 11/17/63,2)
According to three Ling-Temco-Vought aerospace scientists, astronauts operating outside their japsules in outer space would have considerable difficulty estimating distances to other objects, even of known size. Results of experiments suggest that observers cannot make accurate distance estimates without the aid of some kind of artificial ranging device. The accuracy of visual observation will affect the complexity of the guidance system and the total thrust requirement for close-in maneuvering. For this reason, man’s visual performance capability must be defined as accurately as are other design data for successful space missions. (Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc.; Space Information Digest, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1/28/63) During January: Dr. Douglas McKie, Univ. of London, writing in Jan. 1963 Endeavour, traced the history of the metric system, a subject of renewed interest in the U.K. since Parliament was considering; the adoption of the metric system of weights and measures. Dr. McKie pointed out that the recent adoption of the wavelength of a line in the spectrum of krypton-86 as the basis for an international unit of length was the realization of an old French dream at the time of the adoption of the metric system—the use of an invariable natural standard. At the time of the French Revolution, Dr. McKie asserted, France had become weary of the chaos of variable systems of weights and measures and the government and the National Academy urged the States-General to adopt a national system. The States-General authorized the Academy to formulate a system of weights and measures based on measurement of an arc of the meridian as the universal standard and decimals as the notation system. This was done by 1793, but Revolutionary politics intervened, having done away with the States-General and even replaced the Academy. Not until Dec. 10, 1799, did the new standards become legal, and by then it had been discovered that the earth was not a perfect sphere and therefore that the arc of the meridian was not the invariable standard the Academy had thought. (SIN, Mar. 1963,11-13)
nasa was tentatively planning to extend one-day MA-9 flight of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) from 18 to 22 orbits (27 to 34 hours), John Finney of New York Times reported. Scheduled for April 1963, MA-9 would be last flight in Project Mercury. (NYT Co., Atlanta Constitution, 1/3/63)
Ford Motor Co.’s Aeronutromc Div. was selected by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center to investigate requirement for Mars excursion module (mem)—unit designed to ferry astronauts between orbiting spacecraft and surface of Mars, (msc Release 63-98)
In meeting of legal subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Soviet delegate Roland M. Timerbaev declared that it would be “delusion” to report to the Committee that any progress had been made during 28-nation subcommittee’s three-week session. Business before subcommittee had been drafting of legal code covering space exploration activities and considering of proposals concerning liability for space vehicle accidents and return of astronauts and spacecraft after emergency landings in foreign territory. {NYT, 5/3/63,3)
Dr. Nancy G. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics, nasa Office of Space Sciences, at Marymount College, Tarrytown-on-the-Hudson, New York, stated that: “There [is] a great deal of discussion of whether the United States should have women astronauts, and I am frequently asked for my own opinion on this subject. Frankly, it makes little difference to me. I believe that there will be women astronauts some time just as there are women airplane pilots, but there are so many other ways that women can contribute importantly to the space program that the fact there are no women astronauts as yet should not worry us . . . .” nasa had over 146 women who were classified as professional Aerospace Technologists, 77 of whom were professional mathematicians whose responsibility was the programing and operation of nasa’s highly complex computers and similar equipment, Dr. Roman said. “Moreover, I should emphasize that as badly as we need scientists and engineers, we also need educated women as well as men in other fields and no one, man or woman, should go into science simply because of its glamour . . . The space program, the country and the world need young people who have been trained to think logically and clearly regardless of the area in which they have specialized.” (Text)
T„	f_•_______£___________t>___:j__i. T':__l_____ ' Alt ' '<f! ’ll u l/y	t. r /If /<*/ a { .11 lull' 1U1U1C1 j- rroiucill riinniiimwni “Let us turn to the space exploration program, which I publicly have called downright spongy. Now clearly the strong competitive spirit of the American people has been aroused by the so-called space race. But let us step back for a moment from emotion and be objective. This is what my scientific advisers and I tried to do when we started space work back in 1955 and thereafter enlarged it into a comprehensive program. We didn’t and don’t want to be a second-best nation, not in any important field, and certainly not in total accomplishment. But can we best maintain our overall leadership by launching wildly into crash programs on many fronts? This is where we seem to have got out of focus. “Let me make it perfectly clear that we should have an aggressive program of research and exploration, so broadly based that in the long run there will be no question of our space leadership; but we should pursue it in an orderly, step-by-step way to enlarge systematically our knowledge of the scientific, military, and industrial potentials in space. This sort of a program would be a strong, steady push from the known into the unknowns of space 741-023 O—64--------14 science, accumulating along the way the techniques and skills to put our astronauts on the moon, among other developments. The annual cost would not include money for stunts and unnecessary contests. “Most of the scientists who advised me on space matters—all men of great knowledge and integrity—believed in this step-bystep program as most effective for the long pull, pointing out that the things we need to learn in space are almost as endless as space itself. Proud as we may be of our astronauts and, our Venus probe and other accomplishments in space, this racing to the Moon, unavoidably wasting vast sums and deepening our debt, is the wrong way to go about it, as I see it. Because it has been stated that the country’s prestige is at stake in this race, the average citizen may be loath to question the huge sums now being requested. But he should . . . .” (Sat. Eve. Post, 5/18/63, 1519; CR, 5/15/63, 8111)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s faith 7 Mercury spacecraft was clearly visible to unaided eye to observers in Johannesburg, South Africa, (upi, NYT, 5/16/63, 19)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced ejection seat escape system for Gemini two-man spacecraft had successfully undergone first high-speed rocket-sled test, at Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, Calif. Both dummy astronauts were safely recovered after ejection at nearly 600 mph from boilerplate spacecraft, simulating emergency ejection during boost phase of Gemini mission. Tests simulating ejection before launch were also being conducted, consisting of firing ejection seats from 150-f£. tower and parachuting dummy astronauts to safe landing, (msc Release 63-111)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and nasa cosponsored second Manned Space Flight Meeting, in Dallas, Tex. (Advance Program) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter described flight experiences in Project Mercury at the aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting, Dallas, and concluded: “I think this philosophy sums up our attitude toward manned space flight. It is the increasing importance of man in the system that is going to characterize our space flights of the future. We will need skilled pilots to fly these missions, and we are in the process of developing those skills now. “The era of manned space flight is just beginning, however, and Project Mercury is only the first step. We are convinced that it has been a very profitable step and that succeeding programs in manned space flight will continue to expand our knowledge of the universe, hopefully for the benefit of all mankind.” (Text)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced assignment of areas of specialization for nasa astronauts. Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, flight MA-9 pilot, and Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., flight MA-9 back-up pilot, would be responsible for pilot phases of Project Mercuiy; Maj. Virgil I. Grissom’s area of specialization would be Project Gemini; Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., would concentrate on Project Apollo; LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter’s duties would cover lunar excursion training; Cdr. Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would be responsible for Gemini and Apollo operations and training. As Coordinator for Astronaut Activities for msc, Maj. Donald K. Slayton would maintain overall supervision of astronaut duties. Specialty areas of the 9 new flight-crew personnel: trainers and simulators, Neil A. Armstrong; boosters, Maj. Frank Borman; cockpit layout and systems integration, Lt. Charles Conrad, Jr.; recovery systems, LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr.; guidance and navigation, Capt. James A. McDivitt; electrical, sequential, and mission planning, Elliott M. See, Jr.; communications, instrumentation, and range integration, Capt. Thomas E. Stafford; flight control systems, Edward H. White II; environmental control systems, personal and survival equipment, LCdr. John W. Young, (msc Release 63-11; M&R, 2/4/63, 36)
In Wells College (Aurora, N.Y.) commencement address, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes said: “How about women in space ? The answer is yes, but not immediately. At the moment, however, all of the qualified pilots are men. “In a larger sense, of course, women are already in space. The astronaut does not fly alone. He relies on the thousands of people in his supporting team on the ground. These include women as well as men. On the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, there are about 150 women scientists and engineers. Many more are employed by the contractors throughout the country who perform the bulk of our work. In this rapidly growing program, there are many interesting career opportunities for those of you who complete the necessary preparation . . . .” (Text) Jwne 3: Students in Washington, D.C., area began helping Weather Bureau in Project Skywatch—drawing cloud formations, recording wind speed and direction, temperature and relative humidity and precipitation, in project to identify specific cloud formations photographed by Tiros meteorological satellites. About 50 students were participating in project. (Commerce Dept. Release WB-63-6)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, was the principal speaker at the Space Age Symposium held in Shawnee, Okla., in conjunction with the city’s homecoming celebration for Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2)
Faith 7” Mercury spacecraft was installed on Atlas booster at Cape Canaveral, in preparation for Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 flight, (upi, NYT, 4/23/63)
Advertising executive Hany A. Batten, representing nine nasa astronauts, said that withdrawal of Field Enterprises Education Corp. contract offer for astronauts’ personal stories did not mean nasa disapproved this type contract. Rather, he said nasa believed astronauts should conclude such a contract to protect their own and their families’ privacy. He predicted astronauts would reach story-contract agreement with some other firm. (AP, Houston Post, 7/10/63)
C. Leo DeOrsey, attorney for the original seven nasa astronauts, announced the astronauts had sold their interest in the Cape Colony Inn in Cocoa Beach, Fla. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/31/63)
Addressing National Conference on Citizenship in Washington, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said: “No one can foretell with certainty the tremendous import this broad technological revolution may have. But its implication is really much more broad and deep than a single reference to space, for space accomplishments are but one fruit of a greater advancement. There have been matching broad advances in many technical fields that have affected, and will continue to affect every facet of life from our homes, to automobiles, to medicine, to buildings, to roads, and to education. History has shown that such surges of advancement are times of greater opportunity to mold the future . . . .” (Text, CR, 9/16/63, A5799)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj. usaf) flew simulated Project Mercury launch in faith 7 at Cape Canaveral in preparation for MA-9 flight scheduled for May 14. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced eight nasa astronauts were working with manned space flight simulator at LingTemcoVought, Dallas, evaluating manual control and instrument display should the Apollo lunar excursion module’s primary guidance system fail during descent to the moon, (msc Release 63-81)
Project Mercury officially ended. Initiated in autumn of 1958, Mercury had achieved its goal of placing manned spacecraft, in orbital flight around earth, investigating man’s survival ability and performance capabilities in space, and recovering man and spacecraft. Mercury-Redstone suborbital flights paved the way toward ultimate goal, with Astronaut Alan B. Shepard becoming first U.S. man in space in freedom 7 (May 5, 1961), followed by Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom in liberty bell 7 (July 21,1961). First U.S. manned orbital space flight was achieved with Mercury-Atlas MA-6 flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn in friendship 7 (Feb. 20, 1962). This three-orbit space flight was followed by: MA-7, three-orbit flight of Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter in aurora 7 (May 24, 1962); MA-8, six-orbit flight of Astronaut Walter Schirra in sigma 7 (Oct. 3, 1962); and MA-9, 22-orbit space flight of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper in faith 7 (May 15-16, 1963). Project Mercuiy logged 34 orbits of manned space flight with 52 hrs. 23 min. of flight tune. Jwne 12: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of six-month study contract to Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for establishment of environmental control and life support requirements for manned earth-orbiting space station. Duration of 24-man station would be from one to five years, (msc Release 63-100)
Unnamed U.S. official was quoted as saying Astronaut Gordon Cooper’s one-day Project Mercury flight MA-9 was set for April 2, “for planning purposes.” Flight would be 18 orbits (about 27 hours) or, if all goes well, 22 orbits (about 34 hours), nasa had not yet officially announced precise launch date in April or length of flight. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/63, A2)
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
In Washington ceremony, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., tjsmc) presented U.S. flag he carried during orbital space flight in friendship 7 to Marine Corps Assistant Commandant Lt. Gen. Charles H. Hayes. Flag would be placed in Marine Corps Museum. (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/28/63, 8)
At aaas meeting in Cleveland, biophysicist Dr. Harold C. Urey expressed disappointment with cutback in scientific exploration of the moon preparatory to manned lunar landings. Criticizing advocates of exploring the moon by instruments instead of men, he repeated his view that only personal observations by trained men will provide answers to scientific questions about the nature of the moon. In this connection, he deplored criteria for selecting astronauts, arguing that the emphasis should be on trained geologists rather than jet pilots. Later at press conference, Dr. Urey stated that there is no scientific reason to believe the moon is devoid of water and that “most probably” there are pools of water below the rocky surface. Dr. Urey discussed eruptions on moon near the crater Aristarchus, observed by Lowell Observatory and others. He said sightings may have been carbon in a form not found on earth. Action of water on calcium carbide beneath moon’s surface may have released acetylene gas, which was then broken down by the sunlight into a molecular form of carbon in which the atoms are paired. Such substance could exist in moon’s near-vacuum atmosphere, but on earth the atoms would join and form graphite. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/31/63, 5; Wash. Post, 12/31/63; AF/’-cts, Chic. Trib., 12/31/63) _	_	_	_
Addressing U.N. General Assembly, President Kennedy listed results of U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations: “We have, in recent years, agreed on a limited nuclear test-ban treaty, on an emergency communications link between our capitals, on a statement of principles for disarmament, on an increase in cultural exchange, on cooperation in outer space, on the peaceful exploration of the Antarctic, and on tempering last year’s crisis over Cuba .... “Finally, in a field where the United States and the Soviet Union have a special capacity—the field of space—there is room for new cooperation, for further joint efforts in the regulation and exploration of space. I include among these possibilities a joint expedition to the moon. “Space offers no problem of sovereignty; by resolution of this Assembly, the members of the United Nations have foresworn any claims to territorial rights in outer space or on celestial bodies, and declared that international law and the U.N. charter will apply. Why, therefore, should man’s first flight to the moon be a matter of national competition ? “Why should the United States and the Soviet Union, in preparing for such expeditions, become involved in immense duplications of research, construction and expenditure? Surely we should explore whether the scientists and astronauts of our two countries—indeed, of all the world—cannot work together in the conquest of space, sending some day in this decade to the moon, not the representatives of a single nation, but the representatives of all humanity. “All these and other new steps toward peaceful cooperation may be possible. Most of them will require on our part full consultation with our allies, for their interests are as much involved as our own, and we will never make an agreement at their expense. “Most of them will require long and careful negotiations. And most of them will require a new approach to the cold war—a desire not to ‘bury’ one’s adversary but to compete in a host of peaceful arenas, in ideas, in production, and m service to all humanity. “The contest will continue, the contest between those who envision a monolithic world and those who believe in diversity, but it should be a contest in leadership instead of destruction, a contest in achievement instead of intimidation. Speaking for the United States of America, I welcome such a contest. For we believe that truth is stronger than error, and that freedom is more enduring than coercion. And in the contest for a better life, all the world can be the winner . . . .” In addition to urging U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations, President Kennedy urged U.N. to work on five major projects, among them “a global system of satellites [which] could provide communication and weather information for all comers of the earth.” (Text, Wash. Post, 9/21/63, A10)
Millions of Americans heard and watched MA-9 launching and subsequent flight activities on commercial radio and television. Estimated 8,000 people watched launching on Grand Central Station, New York, 12-by-16-ft. television screen. Attempt to telecast launching to European viewers via relay i communications satellite was unsuccessful because “an error on the part of the broadcast company programmers . . . resulted in the transmission of live TV monitors at Cape Canaveral which consisted of a hodgepodge of random pictures and sounds that was virtually meaningless.” Videotape of launch activities and of first TV pictures from Astronaut Cooper was successfully transmitted via relay i later in the day. Beginning at 6:55 p.m. edt, the three U.S. TV networks received via relay i a three-minute program on European reaction to Astronaut Cooper’s flight. (NYT, 5/16/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/16/63; nasa Release 63-106)
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., contractor to nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center to build the lunar landing vehicle in which two U.S. astronauts would descend to the moon’s surface, named Space Technology Laboratory, a division of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge Corporation, to develop the lunar descent and landing engine. The lunar excursion module (lem) of Project Apollo would detach from the Apollo spacecraft orbiting around the moon and slowly descend to the lunar surface, (msc Release 63-92)
Selection of two new X-15 pilots, Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf) and Milton O. Thompson (nasa) was announced by Paul F. Bikle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center, and Brig. Gen. Irving L. Branch (usaf) , Commander of AF Flight Test Center. Pilots would fill vacancies left by nasa research pilot Neil Armstrong, now a nasa astronaut, and Maj. Robert White (usaf), recently assigned other usaf duties, (nasa Release 63-127; frc Release 12-63)
Patent to Boeing Co. engineers Joseph H. Doss and Gary A. Graham for method of suspending astronaut in his spacecraft with netting and cables was reported in New York Times. Inventors claimed system would give astronaut more mobility than couches used in Mercury spacecraft. (Jones, NYT, 8/3/63, 21)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. announced it was withdrawing its $3.2 million contract offer to 16 U.S. astronauts for their personal stories. “It is with deep regret that we are withdrawing our bid. We knew there would be a vast number of subtle and complex problems to resolve before we could arrive at a viable contract. “Following our most recent conversations with [nasa] officials, we have reached the conclusion, most reluctantly, that further negotiations would be futile.” (upi, NYT, 7/9/63, 1)
nasa announced problems with two connectors to electrical amplifier in faith 7 Mercury spacecraft had caused loss of automatic control system during MA-9 space flight, forcing Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper to re-enter from orbit with manual control. Premature lighting of .05 g panel light during 19th orbit had indicated that automatic control system would be inoperative until spacecraft descended to point of feeling .05 g. Then, in final orbit, trouble in inverter caused loss of automatic control system altogether. Postflight examination of faith 7 circuitry traced .05 g signal and inverter failure to independent electrical connectors that failed to function due to moisture; in both cases, electrical insulation of the connectors broke down. Correction of problems for future spacecraft would include tighter control of moisture and increase of insulation of electrical components, (nasa Release 63—118)
Reported that Lear Siegler, Inc., delivered to nasa the slow-scan television camera systems and receiving equipment intended for use on the forthcoming flight of Astronaut Gordon Cooper. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Titan III program director, quoted as saying usaf planned to fly at least 10 X-20 (Dyna Soar) spacecraft, the first two to be unmanned and remaining eight carrying astronauts. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/14/63, 238)
usaf awarded to United Technology Center a $15,390,000 increment to existing contract for design, development, fabrication, delivery, and flight testing large segmented solid-propellant motors, usaf also obligated to Thiokol Chemical Corp. a $1,380,000 increment to existing contract for rad on solid-propellant motors, (dod Release 1609-63) During December: In its “Statement of Purpose,” the Subcommitee on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics outlined scope of Federal Government’s support of rad and reviewed responsibilities of the Congress in answering questions of basic policy and evaluating the Federal rad effort. Report pointed out that Government provides “more than two-thirds of the total research and development money being spent in the United States. Of this total, 75 percent is spent in industry, 8 percent in colleges and universities, and 15 percent within the Government itself, according to studies of the National Science Foundation.” (“Government and Science No. 1: A Statement of Purpose,” Rpt. of the House Subcomm. on Science, rad, 1963) During December: Marshall Space Flight Center engineer Paul J. deFries spent two weeks at U.S. scientific stations in Antarctica gathering data on their experiences. Some factors might relate to the problem of supplying astronauts during long stays on the moon. (Marshall Star, 1/1/64, 1)
Perfection in manufacture of engines for Project Gemini would be sought through a Verification Instruction Program (vip) to train and qualify manufacturing and test personnel at Aerojet’s Liquid Rocket Plant. The program would include 30 days of classroom instruction followed by on-the-job training for top management and senior hourly personnel. Program would be operated by nasa Astronaut Frank Borman and Aerojet plant manager Ray C. Stiff, Jr. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/8/63, 228)
Adm. Sergei Gorshkov, Commander-in-Chief of Soviet Navy, wrote in Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) that US.S.R. had successfully fired missiles from underwater submarines during training exercises last year. He said “radical re-equipment” had provided Soviet navy with submarines and surface vessels armed with missiles capable of striking anywhere in the world. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/6/63, A15)	_ February 5:	System to determine composition of moon’s crust by explosions on lunar surface was described by Francis E. Lehner, senior project engineer on lunar seismology, Cal Tech. Under development for nasa by Lehner and Dr. Robert L. Kovach, geophysicist at jpl, system was designed to be sent to moon in “unmanned instrument package weighing about 50 pounds .... “We propose to obtain subsurface information about the moon by touching off a series of small explosive charges and then with one or more geophones placed at some distance from the explosives detect the resulting waves that have penetrated into the crust and have been refracted again to the surface. “A geophone converts a mechanical wave into an electrical one that may be amplified and recorded. Different kinds of rock formation, and cracks and layers of material will affect the wave patterns, which can be amplified and radioed back to earth.” (ctps, Chicago Trib., 2/6/63) February 5-6:	First intra-agency technical conference on optical communications and tracking held at gsfc with representatives of nasa’s field centers and installations attending. Purpose of the conference was to provide for an exchange of technical information on laser optical and tracking programs at each of the centers. (Goddard News, 2/25/63,2) February 6:	nasa announced it would use TV to monitor Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper during his Project Mercury space flight MA-9. Slow-soan television monitoring equipment had been installed at Cape Canaveral and aboard tracking ship to be stationed in South Pacific; third monitor might be established in Canary Islands. Television pictures received at Cape Canaveral could later be fed into U.S. networks, it was reported, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/7/63, A4)	_	_
Informed nasa sources were quoted as saying Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s Mercury flight MA-9 would be delayed about a week from the May 7 planning date because of technical problems in the Atlas booster. Also revealed was name Astronaut Cooper selected for his Mercury spacecraft—“Faith 7,” (rrpi, Wash. Post, 4/19/63)
The Collier Trophy for 1962 was presented to the seven Project Mercury astronauts by President Kennedy in the White House Rose Garden: “I hope this award, which in effect closes out a particular phase of the program, will be a stimulus to them and to the other astronauts who will carry our flag to the moon and, perhaps, some day, beyond.” (AP, NTT, 10/11/63,18; naa Release 10/7/63)
Under questioning by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed the future space programs to follow the manned lunar landing program: “There are three principal candidates for what might be called the next program. These are the manned orbital laboratory; the further exploration of the moon; and finally, man’s interplanetary travel. “One difficulty is the definition, mercury is a one-man orbital laboratory; gemini is a two-man orbital laboratory; apollo is a three-man orbital laboratory; and all will stay up for the duration of the trip to the moon. “If you are going further, you come to a question, Do you want something for 3 men, 6 men, 12 men, or 20 men ? “One of our problems is to define the requirements and both the Department of Defense and ourselves are making studies. We have agreed there should be only one project for the time being because this will be a 2 or 3 billion project. We have agreed we will not proceed unilaterally. A decision, of course, has to be made as to what, if anything, in the 1965 budget will be in this field or another .... “As to the further exploration of the moon, the definition is a very variable one. You might leave an astronaut out and, figuratively speaking, take camping equipment along for a few days. Or you might convert a whole lunar bug to a freight carrier to extend the length of stay. You can go from that to a lunar base where you try to build a station, as m the Antarctic, that man can occupy for some time .... “All of these things run into the billions of dollars and certainly Congress will be involved in it. “There are people who favor one or another of these projects. I personally favor the manned orbital laboratory as being the next project. What we find on the Moon may change our minds on this, but from present knowledge I feel priority should go to a manned orbital laboratory. Some of this equipment has been in space for a period of a year or more. That is the length of a trip to Mars or Venus and back. “As you know, the matter of making major decisions of this kind in Government is a complicated one and I cannot say at this time when the hardware will be recommended by the administration. One reason for saying the manned orbital laboratory has priority is the possible military application.” (Hearings . . . Independent Offices Appropriations for FT 1964, Part 3,242-243)
In response to inquiries about rumors that Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter and Walter M. Schirra were ill with space-flight aftereffects, unnamed nasa Hq. spokesman quoted Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of msc Medical Operations Office, as saying: “Neither Carpenter nor Schirra has any difficulties at all, and they are in excellent health. “In fact, none of the astronauts who have made space flights has suffered any ill effects, and the entire group is in top physical condition.” (ch, Houston Chronicle, 8/3/63, 9)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper flew simulated launch countdown and aspects of MA-9 Project Mercury space flight at Cape Canaveral. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/8/63)
Writing in Hypnosis Quarterly, Frank M. Frazitta said astronaut trained in self-hypnosis could alleviate pain and discomfort during space flights. In event of air-conditioning unit’s failure, selfhypnosis could be used to lessen astronaut’s perspiration rate or make him feel cooler or warmer. (M&R, 4/8/63, 21)
Announced that transistorized sensory system, Myoelectric, to provide astronauts with automatic control during high g was patented recently by two Sperry Gyroscope engineers. (A&AE, December 1963, 5)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, speaking before aerospace medicine conference at sam, San Antonio, said that all three U.S. astronauts who had made orbital space flights had found state of weightlessness presented no problems; rather, it tended to become “addictive.” (upi, Wash. Post, 2/5/63, A 4)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center confirmed that Astronaut Lerov Gordon Coopers MA-9 space flight would be delayed because of “electrical wiring problems in the launch vehicle control system which are peculiar to Atlas 130-D,” the vehicle for • ( Arcr T? oIoooa C Q OA\
First college program to train usaf astronauts nad been established at Purdue Univ., u6af announced. Fourteen June graduates of Air Force Academy had been selected to begin the specialized program in Purdue’s School of Aeronautical and Engineering Sciences, their studies leading to newly created Master’s degree in astronautics. (Chicago Trib., 4/10/63)
Presentation on Project Gemini, prepared by Drs. Stanley C. "White and George B. Smith of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and presented at Lectures in Aerospace Medicme series, sam, said that present Gemini “flight program includes the performance of manned extra-vehicular operation. The accomplishment of this maneuver requires the opening of the hatch over the astronaut who will venture outside. During this period, the cabin pressure is lost, and both astronauts are dependent upon the suit for prime environmental protection. “. . . The program as it is now planned would start out with flights of two-days duration and move forward to flights of up to two weeks duration upon successful completion of the first phase. Ultimately, the more complex 14-day duration mission, the inter-vehicular rendezvous, and the extra-vehicular manned operation goals would be achieved. The intermediate steps offer an excellent opportunity to study the man, the vehicle, the man-machine interface, and to accomplish other bioscience experiments while the program moves toward its final objectives . . . .” (Text, msc Fact Sheet 134)
The concensus of a number of visual experts consulted by nasa is that Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper did in fact see houses, roads, and vehicles from his orbiting faith 7 capsule. Dr. John A. O’Keefe of gsfc dismissed the theory that the atmosphere had acted as a magnifier of the objects. Maximum atmospheric magnification would be 1.00002, or a rise of 8.5 ft. Normal human visual acuity is normally considered to be one minute of arc, but under good combinations of illumination and contrast objects of minute of arc or even smaller can be seen. From 100 miles altitude, this would work out at 30 ft. on the ground. Line or ribbon objects can be seen much more easily, down to one-sixth or less the diameter of circular objects. (M&R, 10/14/63, 14)
Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream, nasa Langley research {illots, reported to ias meeting on research results of simulated unar spacecraft landing, lunar orbit rendezvous, and atmospheric re-entry made in simulated three-man spacecraft. Realistic tests demonstrated ability of research pilots to complete precise maneuvers of flight, despite necessarily cramped quarters and seven-day duration. Lane aerospace scientists Jack E. Pennington and Roy F. Bris-senden reported on experiments to investigate astronauts’ ability to rendezvous in space by visual means. Pennington and Bris-senden concluded that pilot could sight target vehicle from perhaps as much as 200 mi. away if it is lighted by sun or bright beacon; he could then successfully brake his own spacecraft along an intersecting path. Dr. Leonard Roberts, LaRc physicist, reported to ias on implications of lunar landing if moon has, as many scientists believe, dust layer on surface. Dr. Roberts concluded that spacecraft descending to moon would erode a crater by action of its rocket exhaust. If dust exists on lunar surface, it would be blown outward and away from descending vehicle; air would not be present to recirculate dust in envelnnimr cloud so astronaut’s visibilitv '	...... ... ... .. IT-----Q -----7	—	----------- should not be reduced by lunar dust. Other Lane scientists presented research reports covering instruments for satellites, supersonic aircraft flutter problems, and wind tunnel experiments on helicopter rotors. (Langley Release)
On first anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft friendship 7 was presented to Smithsonian Institution by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. Astronaut Glenn presented to the Smithsonian the flight suit, boots? and gloves he had worn and the tiny American flag he had earned during his three-orbit space flight. Making the presentation, Dr. Dryden remarked: “It is appropriate that John Glenn’s friendship 7 spacecraft should join the Wright Brothers’ first airplane in this hall, dedicated to man’s pioneering efforts in flight. “These two machines . . . stand as constant reminders that mankind aspires to the stars .... “As in the early days of aeronautics we can only dimly foresee the future of space exploration, what we Shall find, and what benefits will come to us. We know only that we must move forward in knowledge and practical accomplishment as we strive to discover the nature of our universe .... “We are surrounded here by the cherished treasures of the Nation. Today, we add still another to bring to mind the promise of the future that men of imagination and courage will always find new frontiers to conquer . . . .” (WasJi. Post, 2/21/63, Bl; Text)
Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D.-W. Va.), addressing Alumni of Concord college, said: “Our marvelous technological developments, our flights into outer space, have demonstrated that there is virtually no limit to the development of the human mind. Today the moon is within range, tomorrow the stars—after that, who knows? Human knowledge is a pyramid whose topmost point stretches into infinity .... “Who develops the mind of the astronaut, and his co-workers? That is the job of the teacher, of education. That pyramid of knowledge .... rests upon a base of solid, fundamental learning which makes all of our splendid achievements possible . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/6/63, A3655-56)
President Kennedy telephoned Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper aboard carrier Kearsarge, saying, “I just want to congratulate you. That was a great flight .... We are very proud of you.” (upi, NYT, 5/17/63,1)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced the 271 applicants for astronauts had been screened to 30. Of these, 10-15 would be selected in late October. (AP, Wosli. Post, 8/29/63)
Ballute drag balloon was being built by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for use in Gemini manned spacecraft, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Ballute would be used as part of Gemini ejection-seat-escape system, planned means of emergency escape for altitudes below 70,000 ft. The inflatable rubberized fabric structure would stabilize and slow the astronauts’ fall until conventional parachutes could be deployed at lower altitudes. ( msc Release 63-67)
Dr. Edward P. Ney, Univ. of Minnesota physicist, said in New York Times interview that sightings by Astronauts Glenn, Carpenter, and Cooper during their orbital Mercury space flights represented the “first direct observation” of what probably is cosmic dust in the airglow layer of about 48- to 54-mi. altitude. Major Cooper reported that light of two stars in Big Dipper had been extinguished by airglow layer, and Dr. Ney said this was “strong evidence for the existence of dust” which could block out the light. (Toth, NYT, 8/12/63, 17)
McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of St Louis shipped the first of two Gemini mission simulators to Cape Kennedy, Fla., to provide nasa astronauts and ground crews with realistic training before actual launching of the two-man spacecraft. (AP, Kansas City Times, 12/14/63)
Astronaut John H. Glenn said in speech before annual luncheon meeting of Associated Press: “As a result of the space program, tremendous and vast new areas of information appear on the horizon and are increasing daily. Consequently, this space program will undoubtedly serve as a catalyst toward an expansion of information that will dwarf anything we have known heretofore .... “What we need is a national repository for information, organized not along traditional library-type lines, but designed to utilize all the techniques at our disposal for sorting, cataloguing, analyzing, storing and making readily accessible, new information as it becomes available .... “In short, I propose that we lose no time in establishing a National Information Center. Control of such an institution could be by government, private interests, or a combination of appropriate interests . . . .” (Text)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said in Palo Alto, Calif., press conference: “People who do the spectacular things in space are few—they owe their success to many, many people behind the scenes who are not given proper recognition—scientists, technicians, industrial workers—people in all walks of life .. ..” (Palo Alto Times, 1/5/63)
At meeting of American Institute of Biological Scientists in Amherst, Mass., Max D. Lechtman of Magna Corp. presented report by team of researchers predicting use of certain bacteria in life-support, systems of future manned spacecraft. One means of supplying oxygen to astronauts on long-duration flights would be electrolysis of water—breaking down water into its oxygen and hydrogen components by electric current. Microbes such as H. eutropha and H. ruhladi which absorb hydrogen would be valuable in removing the hydrogen. (Wash. Post, 8/30/63, All)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp., publishing subsidiary of Marshall Field, was reported as having offered nasa astronauts a multimillion-dollar contract for their personal stories. Spokesman for Field Enterprises said proposition was under discussion with C. Leo DeOrsey, Washington lawyer representing original seven Mercury astronauts, and Harry A. Batten, Philadelphia advertising man representing nine Gemini-Apollo astronauts. {NYT [Western Ed.], 2/9/63)	...	.
Gemini astronauts would learn how to “apprehend” another vehicle traveling in space on a special trainer in a darkened hangar-high structure now being erected at Manned Spacecraft Center’s Clear Lake home, (msc Space News Roundup, 1/8/64)
Moscow Radio said U.S. astronauts “become bourgeois exploiters [of the people] in their own right,” but the Russian people had “profound respect” for U.S. spacemen, who needed “no little bravery” to let themselves be launched in rockets “whose reliability is highly dubious.” (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 1/8/63)
Discussing the National Space Program before Iowa City Daily Press Association in Des Moines, nasa Associate Director of Plans and Program Evaluation Addison M. Rothrock said: “The prime objective of . . . [the manned space flight] program is to land men on the moon before the end of the decade. The scope covered by the program is much broader than this. It is in fact the research, development and operation of a series of research manned spacecraft that will determine for us man’s ability to operate in space. By focusing on the moon-landing we have set a goal that insures we develop all basic phases of the operation of manned spacecraft. I cannot emphasize this too strongly. “By the time our three astronauts leave for the moon-landing we as a nation will have accumulated 2000 flight hours in earth orbit of manned craft. To indicate to you the significance of this number—we have as of now less than five flight hours of manned aircraft at speeds in excess of Mach 2.5. ... In these 2000 hours we will have orbited the earth some 1300 times. Men will have gone to and from craft in orbit. We will have rendezvoused and inspected craft and transferred men and material between craft. We will have maneuvered the craft both in regards to the attitude of the craft as has been done with Mercury and the Orbiting Solar Observatory and in regards to changes in the flight path as has been done with Mariner II and Syncoms. These are the things that must be done and will be done in the development, operation, and functioning of manned craft in space. . . .” (Text)
Mrs. Sara Bartholomae disclosed plans for $1 million Mercury Space Capsule Chapel near Los Angeles in tribute to Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/8/63)
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on The Peaceful Uses of Outer Space convened in Geneva. {NYT, 5/3/63) Mercury spacecraft faith 7, with Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) as pilot, lifted off Pad 14, Cape Canaveral, at 8:04 a.m. est. Atlas launch vehicle placed spacecraft in initial orbit of 166-mi, apogee, 100-mi. perigee, 88.7-min. period, 32.5° inclination to equator, 17,544-mph speed. Be-sides participation in flight procedures, astronaut ate, slept, and conducted scientific experiments. Because automatic control system (acs) failed during 19th orbit, spacecraft was oriented manually during 22nd orbit, retrorockets were fired manually, and re-entry phase was conducted without acs. faith 7 landed two miles from U.S.S. Kearsarge near Midway Island in Pacific. Value of trained pilot’s presence in spacecraft was underscored by successful mission achievement despite acs failure. MA-9 provided biomedical data confirming man can survive and function during prolonged space flight with no ill effects. Experiments during flight included: ejecting from spacecraft in third orbit a 10-lb. flashing-beacon sphere (testing visibility of objects in space in preparation for future rendezvous maneuvers), which Cooper sighted during fifth and sixth orbits; photographs of zodiacal light nighttime airglow layer; horizon definition experiment, using colored filters in 70-mm. camera; radiation measurement experiment, using Geiger counters mounted on spacecraft exterior and detectors inside spacecraft and inside astronaut’s space suit; tethered balloon experiment (to measure atmospheric drag) which Cooper attempted in sixth orbit but balloon did not deploy; infrared photography for meteorological purposes; television photography, which achieved historic “first” in U.S. manned space flight with direct transmission of TV pictures to tracking stations; cabin environmental temperature study, another historic “first” with cabin coolant valve and fan turned off from orbit #5 until about two hours before re-entry, astronaut relying on space suit for cooling while cabin temperature stabilized at around 96° F; HF antenna tests, another “first”, involving transmissions with antenna horizontally polarized and vertically polarized; ground light experiment, with astronaut observing three-million-candlepower xenon light at Bloemfontein, Republic of South Africa; window attenuation experiment, with astronaut viewing calibrated standard light source and stars to evaluate transmission of light through spacecraft window; and white paint patch measurements, investigating changes in paint pigments during re-entry heating. Cooper’s historic flight covered estimated 593,885 mi. in 34 hrs. 20 min. Nearly 36 years before, Charles Lindbergh’s historic flight from New York to Paris covered 3,610 mi. in 33 hrs. 30 min. (nasa MA-9 Press Kit; NYT, 5/15/63; NYT, 5/16/63; NYT, 5/17/63; Press Conf. Transcript, NYT, 5/20/63; Aerospace Yearbook, I960)
Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., awarded $9.5-million contract to develop two Apollo mission simulators for training astronauts at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and Cape Canaveral. Contract was awarded by North American Aviation, Inc., prime Apollo spacecraft contractors. {Av. Wk:., 5/6/63,25)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter disclosed seeing twin tails on one side of sun’s corona during solar eclipse July 20. The twin-tailed corona did not appear in photographs Carpenter made of the eclipse while flying in DC-8 jetliner with other scientific observers. (O’Leary, Houston Post, 9/14/63)
Inter-Parliamentary Union’s seven-nation space subcommittee, meeting in Geneva, approved draft treaty on space law. Treaty would provide that outer space be subject to international law, including U.N. Charter, and that astronauts forced to land in foreign countries would be granted diplomatic immunity. Treaty would be presented to plenary meeting of ipu’s 60-member nations in Lausanne, Switzerland, April 15-21. (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 3/3/63)
Maj. Donald K. Slayton (usaf) one of the original seven Mercury astronauts and the only one of them who was grounded during the course of the project, submitted his letter of resignation to the usaf and would join nasa as a civilian pilot qualified for space flights. (Finney, NYT, 10/17/63)
An msc operations team finished a study at Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., that indicated an astronaut could effect rendezvous in space using only his piloting skill and simple spacecraft radar. Although Apollo flight would have automatic guidance and navigation equipment and continuous assistance from ground tracking stations, developers of backup systems needed to know the minimum with which the astronaut could operate, (msc Release 63-238)
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)
Mercury astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, accompanied by nasa astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill, would observe solar eclipse over central Canada, on July 20 from a specially equipped DC—8 jet, flying above most of atmospheric haze at 42,000 ft. During the flight Dr. Gill would point out to Astronaut Carpenter various scientific phenomena likely to be encountered in future manned space flights, and Carpenter would attempt to photograph airglow caused by zodiacal light. Scientists from nasa Ames Research Center also would be onboard to photograph rays of the sun’s corona, seeking particular detail in sun’s polar regions to trace solar magnetic fields. Flight would be sponsored by Douglas Aircraft Co., National Geographic Society, and 11 other organizations. (NTT, 6/28/63, 1; nasa Release 63-148)
nasa Ames Research Center announced seven nasa astronauts were conducting simulated manned spacecraft missions at Ames centrifuge facility. Tests involved subjecting astronauts to space flight stresses they might encounter during future manned space flights. (Ames Release 63-29)
nasa announced from Cape Canaveral that recruiting 9-12 new astronauts would begin next month. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/16/63)
The astronauts making the United States’ first two-man Gemini endurance space flight next year would be wired for sound as never before—to a pair of small magnetic tape recorders registering their physical and mental reactions second by second throughout the flight. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
Tass announced postage stamp commemorating vostok v space flight had been issued by Soviet Ministry or Communications. (Reuters, NTT, 6/18/63,10) Walter C. Williams, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Associate Director and Project Mercury Operations Director, summarized Project Mercury, emphasizing that primary lesson taught by the manned space flights was value of attention to detail. Discussing biomedical results, he said orthostatic hypotension first noted in Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (MA—8, six orbits) was more pronounced in Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (MA-9, 22 orbits). Lowered blood pressure was believed to be cause of Cooper’s temporary dizziness when he emerged from Mercury spacecraft: “The effects seem to be post-flight, and continued from 18 to 24 hours.” {Av. Wk., 7/1/63, 71) Astronauts Walter M. Shirra, Jr., and L. Gordon Cooper received the aiaa Astronautics Award. (Av. Wk., 7/1/63, 31) Rombus (Reusable Orbital Module—Booster and Utility Shuttle) concept described June 18 by Philip Bono, Chief Advance Project Engineer of Future Space Systems, Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. Single-stage manned space cargo carrier, capable of orbiting many hundreds of tons and reusable at least 20 times, could be developed by late 1970’s. Eight strapped-on liquid-propellant tanks would be jettisoned and parachuted to earth after providing initial boost; Rombus would be recovered from orbital mission with use of parachutes, main engine retro-thrust, and extended landing legs. Bono’s paper was based on study performed for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and was one of many large vehicle concepts under study by industry and government. ( dac Release 63-122) Speaking on June 19, Dr. Stanley Deutsch, Chief of Systems Research and Analysis in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, declared Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper could not have sighted houses, boat, and train during his MA-9 orbital space flight “because of the visual angle.” Dr. Deutsch speculated the visual impressions might have involved hallucinations or transfer of stored impressions. “We need a great deal of study in the area of perception [in the weightless condition].” Interviewed at meeting, Astronaut Cooper said: “I’m not changing my mind one bit, I know what I saw.” (Av. Wk. 7/1/63, 31)
16-in. cannon shot a 475-lb. instrumented capsule 15 mi. into the upper atmosphere from Barbados, first launching of an altitude probe by gun and first such project undertaken by a nongovernmental agency—McGill Univ. of Canada, with support of U.S. Army. Instruments in steel-encased capsule relayed data on conditions in upper atmosphere to ground tracking stations; capsule remained aloft about three min., fell into sea nine mi. southeast of Barbados. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/63) January 27; Lt. Col. John A. Powers, Public Affairs Officer for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 flight may extend to “as many as 22 orbits. If the flight lasts that long it will be a 34-hour flight.” Speaking before Texas Associated Press Managing Editors’ Association, Powers said nasa had not yet decided whether Cooper’s flight would be last of Project Mercuiy; “the decision on whether another [Mercury flight] will be necessary will be made after Cooper’s flight.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/28/63)
Questioned at nasa Budget Briefing about nasa’s substituting pickaback rendezvous target for Agena stage in Project Gemini flights, Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans said: “That is definitely by the boards We did study that kind of possibility. We feel it is very important to have a program where there will be two separate launches. We will put up the Agena. . .” as target object in Gemini flights training astronauts for Project Apollo lunar orbit rendezvous, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper arrived in home town of Shawnee, Okla., for weekend celebrations in his honor, his first visit there since Project Mercury MA-9 space flight (May 15-16). (AP, Wash. Post, 6/29/63)	...	.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $30,500 contract to Whirlpool Corp. for design and development of feeding system for four astronauts for long periods of time, first hardware fabrication for space station simulation facility. (M&R, 9/9/63, 9)
nasa announced at msc the selection of 14 astronauts for the Gemini and Apollo projects, bringing the total number of NASA astronauts to 30. New astronauts were: Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt. William A. Anders, Capt. Charles A. Bassett II, Capt. Michael Collins, Capt. Donn F. Eisele, Capt. Theodore C. Freeman, and Capt. David R. Scott, all usaf; Lt. Alan L. Bean, Lt. Eugene A. Ceman, Lt. Roger B. Chaffee, Lt. Cdr. Richard F. Gordon, Jr., all usn; Capt. Clifton C. Williams, Jr., usmc ; and R. Walter Cunningham and Russell L. Schweickart, civilians. nasa announced another contingent of astronauts would be named in the fall of 1965. (NYT, 10/19/63,9)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center had begun training nasa’s 16 astronauts in techniques of water and land parachute landings. In preparation for safe parachute landings in low-altitude abort during Project Gemini launching, astronauts were towed to heights of 400 ft. suspended under pre-inflated canopy, then cut loose for free descent to earth. Towing was by power boat for water descents and truck for land descents, (msc Release 63-151)
Radio Moscow wished Astronaut Cooper good luck on his space flight and said: “The Soviet people, who were pioneers in space, are hoping that this scientific experiment works out successfully. We sincerely hope that its results will serve the development of peaceful cooperation and above all cooperation between the Soviet Union and the United States in the study of the laws of the universe.” (upi, Wash. Post, 5/16/63)
Contract awarded to rca Services Company to create the sun’s intensity in two space environmental chambers. The largest chamber would measure 120 ft. high and 85 ft. in diameter; it would house the Apollo vehicle, consisting of command, service, and lunar excursion modules. The smaller chamber, measuring 85 ft. high and 65 ft. in diameter, would house the Apollo command module and provide the space environment for astronaut training. (Fact Sheet #96, msc)
22-orbit MA-9 flight of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper was reported delayed from planning date of May 7 until at least May 21 because of difficulties in Atlas booster’s guidance system. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
Thirty nasa astronaut candidates underwent physical examinations at School of Aerospace Medicine. Final selection would be made next month. (M&R, 9/2/63,12)
Astrovoice,” device to enable voice communications with astronauts during manned spacecraft re-entry, was displayed publicly by Avco Corp. Device adds voice channel to tracking radar, which is not blacked out during re-entry ionization. Modifications to existing ground radar receivers would require only “a few hours,” Avco spokesman said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/13/63)
nasa announced delay from a previously planned April launching date of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 orbital space flight, because of decision to rewire Mercury-Atlas flight control system. Rescheduled date of flight was not given, but nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Chief of Manned Flight Operations, Walter C. Williams, estimated delay would be at least three weeks—putting launch date no earlier than mid-May. (msc Release 63-26; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/13/63)	*
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper greeted by crowds of thousands in Houston as he returned home for first time since his 22-orbit MA-9 space flight, (upi, AFT’, 5/24/63)
Reported that usaf Vice c/s General William F. McKee had dispatched message to usaf commanders urging “personnel attention and active support” in recruiting volunteers for forthcoming nasa astronaut selections. (A-N-AF Jonm. & Reg., 6/15/63, 4)
Former President Eisenhower in Rochester, N.Y., hailed Astronaut
In an article in Missile and Rockets, nasa Administrator James E. Webb emphasized the importance of the engineer in the space program: “During this period of intensive research and development, it becomes doubly important for industry, the press, and nasa to tell the workshop and test site story as well as the launch site story. The role of the space engineer must be brought out as clearly as the achievements of space scientists and the astronauts . . . . ”	(M&R, 11/25/63)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Project Mercury launch crews conducted simulated MA-9 final countdown and launching. (AP, NYT, 5/11/63,4)
Text of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on legal principles of space exploration was released at the U.N. in New York. The document would be brought before the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on Nov. 22. Even if approved, the statement of principles would not be legally binding on U.N. members. The plan was for two treaties based on the principles to be submitted to member nations early in 1964. The treaties would cover (1) rescue and return of astronauts and space vehicles, and (2) liability for death, injury, or damage caused on earth by space vehicles. (Wash. Post, 11/22/63; Text, NYT, 11/22/63, 18)
Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., a vice president of Grumman Aircraft, replying to question during testimony before Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said first U.S. astronauts returning from the moon would bring back about 100-(earth)-pound sample of lunar terrain. {L.A. Times, 3/20/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced recruitment of astronauts had been broadened in current recruitment call for volunteers: change in criteria for selection, eliminating need for test pilot school certificate; and soliciting letters of recommendation from industries, professional groups, military services, and other organizations throughout the country, (msc Release 63-102)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Cook Technological Center Div. of Cook Electric Co. had completed first of new biomedical tape recorders for use in first two-man Project Gemini space flight. Each recorder would receive and record continuously, for 30 hours, six kinds of simultaneous biomedical signals from sensors within astronaut’s spacesuit. Post-flight play-back of the tapes would provide continuous analysis of astronauts’ physical and mental endurance in long periods of space flight, a major goal of Project Gemini, (msc Release 63-78)
New York City honored Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper with tickertape parade. At city luncheon honoring Major Cooper, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and the entire Project Mercury team, Mayor Robert Wagner presented Major Cooper and Mr. Webb with city’s Medal of Honor and scroll acclaiming MA-9 space flight. Mayor Wagner said: “. . . It is remarkable how such a feat not only unites our own country in prideful pleasure, but also gives satisfaction to the rest of the world—to friend and foe alike. This is not man against man, but man against the elements, man against the forces of nature, man armed with the power of knowledge . . . .” {NYT, 5/23/63; CR, 5/29/63, A3487)
Aetna Life Insurance Co. issued first individual life insurance policies to seven Project Mercury astronauts, astronauts’ legal adviser C. Leo DeOrsey announced in Washington. (Goodman, Wash. Post, 5/9/63)	_
RCA announced it had received $22 million subcontract from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for communications system to be used in Project Apollo lunar landing. The system would transmit continuous voice and telemetry data to earth, provide communications between the astronauts on the moon and Lunar Excursion Module (lem) and Apollo command module. (Phil. Eve. Bull.. 4/14/641
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former astronaut, was presented the George Washington Award for 1963 by the Freedom Foundation, in Valley Forge, Pa., ceremony. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/64)
Boeing Co. scientists announced invention of lightweight telescope with more than 100-mi. range for use by astronaut in satellite interceptor in spotting another orbiting spacecraft. (SBD, 1/15/64, 74)
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and aiaa Board Member, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial: “For some years past, it has been asked whether electric propulsion meets a ‘requirement’ in our space program. It may be well to remember that the airplane, the atomic submarine, the radio, and the first satellite were not developed in fulfillment of ‘requirements.’ An artificial atmosphere is certainly a requirement for an astronaut in space, and must Be developed for that reason. But the astronaut does not go into space because it is his requirement, but because our country has decided to excel in the exploration of outer space with the most appropriate means. Electric propulsion promises to be a very appropriate method of vastly expanding our exploration capability in space beyond that of chemical and nuclear systems. For that reason, its development should be pursued with high priority and great vigor.” (A&A, 8/64, 14—15)
Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of msc Apollo Spacecraft Office, said that U.S. would land men on the moon before Dec. 31, 1969. He stated that in his judgment “we have a much better than even chance” of landing the first two astronauts on the lunar surface ahead of the 1970 deadline set by the late President Kennedy, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/6/64)
Astronauts’ contracts with Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Time Inc. were discussed in Editor and Publisher editorial, which stated that the “principle of letting the astronauts sell their stories is all' wrong.” Before granting personal interview, editorial said, “astronaut must get permission in writing from Field and Time which will grant approval ‘in an instance where the acceptance of such outside offers will not materially affect the value of any of the rights granted.’ . . .” It concluded by saying that reporters could not interview these “national figures” unless two “competitors say it’s okay.” (E&P, 8/15/64)
Astronaut Neil Armstrong addressed Aerospace Workshop at Drake Univ.: “We don’t feel at this time it is particularly important whether an astronaut is masculine or feminine. Astronauts are picked on the basis of experience and training. At present there are no women with the proper qualifications available. Some day we will have qualified women and I’m sure they’ll be included in the program.” (Des Moines Register, 7/11/64)
By this date USAF had made 21 manned drop-tests of the ballute at El Centro, Calif., from C-130 flying at altitudes up to 35,000 ft. Basically a drag balloon, the ballute was under development by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. with NASA funds. To be installed in the ejection seat system of Gemini spacecraft, the self-inflating ballute would stabilize the astronaut during free fall down to 10,000 ft., where final recovery parachute would deploy. (Yaffee, Av. Wk., 4/6/64, 40-45; msc Roundup, 4/15/64, 8)
Paul P. Haney, Public Affairs Officer at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, asserted that the bulk of 550 communications regarding NASA scientist-astronauts had to be classified as letters of interest. Seventy-five per cent of this number, or 412, were lacking some detail and about 100 had been eliminated altogether. The number of applications was ahead of the number received for other classes of astronaut, he said. These figures clarified figures given by Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, who had said on Nov. 22 that only 20 applications had been received and that only nine of these applicants qualified. (Houston Post, 11/24/64)
John H. Glenn, Jr., discussed with NASA Administrator James E. Webb the possibility of the former astronaut’s returning to NASA in advisory capacity, according to NASA spokesman, but nothing had been decided by the two. (upi, Wash. Post, 7/2/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, A8)
Jet-propelled back-pack, part of a Modular Maneuvering Unit (mmu) for Gemini astronauts, was described by AFSC, whose Aero Propulsion Laboratory conceived the device. The unit would enable astronauts to fly outside their Gemini spacecraft for up to an hour and travel as far as 1,000 “ft. from the spacecraft, although the first flight would be made with astronaut on a 200-ft. tether to send the astronaut forward, backward, up, and down. In addition to the back-pack, mmu consisted of a chest-pack, furnished by NASA, which the astronaut would use when leaving and entering the spacecraft, before donning and after discarding the back-pack. First flight test of the unit on Gemini mission was planned for mid-1965. (afsc Release 47-22—113; MSC Roundup, 1/16/64,5)	_
The USn’s Sea Lab I, with four Navy divers aboard, began ascent to the surface after 10 days on the ocean floor at a depth of 192 ft. The experiment was terminated 11 days ahead of schedule because of an approaching storm. Astronaut Scott Carpenter was to have participated in the experiment, but was forced to withdraw because of the broken arm he suffered recently, (dod Release 558-64)
On third anniversary of his historic space flight, first American in space Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn) received the Langley Medal, highest award of the Smithsonian Institution, in ceremonies at the Smithsonian, Washington, D.C. (CR, 5/5/64,9767-68)
NASA and dod announced Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Lt. Cdr., usn) would participate in USN Project Sea Lab I off coast of Bermuda in July. The submerged lab would collect and evaluate scientific data on physiological and psychological reactions to the undersea environment. (nasa Release 64-112; dod Release 383-64)
At Aerospace Medical Association conference, Dr. Dietrich E. Beischer and James C. Knepton, Jr., of Naval School of Aviation Medicine said high magnetic fields, such as those under study for spacecraft shielding, may have noticeable effect on behavior of heart. Squirrel monkeys subjected to high magnetic fields (20,000 to 70,000 gauss) showed up to decrease in heart rate and marked change in heartbeat’s rhythm. Dr. Beischer also reported sea urchin eggs exposed to 140,000 gauss were retarded in their development, but fruit fly showed no effects after two-hour exposure to high gauss. High magnetic fields were being investigated for use in shielding astronauts against cosmic radiation and other space hazards, and Dr. Cornelius Tobias and N. M. Amer reported that magnetic fields around 3.5 kilogauss appeared to have protective effect against high doses of ionizing radiation. (M&R, 5/18/64,16)
Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems, sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, Fla., with some 200 engineers and scientists attending. In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 'or Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion and control of energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. “The state of man’s technology in every age has depended on his ability to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge of the equivalence of different forms of energy. . . . “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy conversion and control are breathtaking. New methods of energy conversion from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program. . . . Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in the NASA program are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite reactor at 6000° R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a device about the size of an American motor car. . . .” (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of nasc staff said in address at the Conference: “. . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite different. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for the year before. ... “My 'best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very complex missions. Let us look at j ust the main outlines. “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit: . . . The Soviet Union is clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In the Earth-orbital regime, it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites with a minimum of fanfare, and these have included a range of experiments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles. “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of unmanned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accomplishments. . . . But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet capabilities. . . . “Lunar and Planetary Probes:. . . In absolute number of launchings the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner II carried about 40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are rightfully proud of this accomplishment. “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962, ten such launchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a difficult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner II. Not one of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . . “While neither country should he overly proud of its lunar probe record, the pictures taken by Lunik III back in 1959 are still a high-water mark. “Manned Space Flight: . . . Through the 1963 season each country had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astronaut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. . . . “Human Safety: . . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika, four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs, before the first man was sent. . . . “Future Manned Missions: ... To the best of our knowledge, the Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of convenient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then, if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that the United States is building a lunar capability either. . . . “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . . With all this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even probable that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant manned flights. . . . “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reactions, but with sound, consistent planning. . . .” (Text)
Article written by Sen. Barry Goldwater, Republican nominee for President, in which he laid down his views on the form the U.S. space program should take, appeared in Science and Mechanics: “The concept that speeding men to the moon is the same as jockeying trotters over a muddy track must be abandoned, regardless of Kremlin propaganda. The idea that we can cooperate with the Russians to do the job quicker and cheaper is too ludicrous for comment. We are spending entirely too much money on the manned moon program, when a carefully plotted program using unmanned lunar landing equipment could steadily build up a solid body of scientific knowledge about the lunar environment that would increase the safety factor for astronauts much later. Automatic landing equipment could be designed at minimum cost. The program should expand in easy steps, each one leading to the next. The billions of dollars thus saved could be profitably invested in other aspects of space research.”	, Speaking of the military role in space, he said: “All manned space research should be directed by the military, with national security and control of the access to space as primary goals. The threat from space now and in the foreseeable future is from spatial regions within a thousand miles of Earth and not from lunar distances. Routine daily surveillance of these regions must be established, and the additional capabilities of positive identification, interception, and destruction of hostile enemy space vehicles will be necessary. This would be the greatest deterrent to an enemy’s military space aspirations. It would also give us the means of developing experienced space pilots, scientific and technological methods, and new scientific knowledge which could be used later in sending men to the moon and the planets. The hardware, on a routinely reliable basis, would be available ofi-the-shelf. “It might be added that almost every successful NASA launch to date, manned and unmanned, has been made with military support—with missile rocket-boosters, launch facilities, technical know-how, communications (including air transport of boosters) or safety procedures—or with all five. . . . “Finally, I believe that an immediate initial step of any effective military space program must be a manned station in near orbit about the Earth, with necessary support equipment. . . .” Senator Goldwater also stated that in his opinion there was the need for two crash programs in space research. The first would develop the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, and the second would develop the potentiality of lasers for use as military weapons. (Science and Mechanics, 6/64; Wash. Post, 7/21/64) During June: France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aero-spatiales (ONERA) revealed it had successfully flight-tested hybrid rocket engine in a rocket launched April 25 from Ceres sounding rocket facility on the lie du Levant in the Mediterranean Sea. Engine employed combination of liquid nitric acid oxidizer and unidentified solid fuel. (Av. WL, 6/29/64, 24)
Development of astronaut techniques for egress from Gemini spacecraft began this week at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, msc announced. Boilerplate model of Gemini spacecraft floats in water-filled tank; two subjects in the closed spacecraft practice egress and the manner, procedure, and time required are recorded for study, (msc Release 64^-19)
Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (Capt., usaf) was killed when his T—38 jet trainer crashed near Houston. The former experimental test-flight instructor was among third group of NASA astronauts, selected last October, and was first U.S. astronaut to lose his life. (AP, NYT, 11/2/64)
More than 2,000 high school juniors and seniors attended Student Space Conference at Northeastern Univ., Boston, where they heard remarks by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Bruce T. Lundin of NASA, John D. Nicolaides of NASA, Nancy G. Roman of NASA, and Isaac Asimov, writer and biochemist. (Boston Sun. Globe, 5/3/64)
msc announced issuing requests for proposals for six-month study of how astronaut on the moon could conduct selenodetic measurements (lunar surface surveys), making maximum use of scientific equipment already planned for Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module and Command Module. Proposals for the study were due March 5. (msc Release 64-457)
During annual meeting of international Committee on Space Research (cospar), which ended today, U.S. and Soviet scientists said manned space flights had raised the question of whether a man could tolerate more than five days in space, with present equipment. Scientists said astronauts showed effects of space flights, and last year’s five-day manned space flight by Soviet cosmonaut was about the longest that could be attempted safely now. (Levin, AP, 5/20/64)
FAITH 7 Mercury spacecraft, in which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper made 22 orbits of die earth in final space flight of Project Mercury, went on display at NASA Hq., Washington. Nov. 2 the spacecraft would resume its tour of the 50 state capitals. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
On the eve of his 85th birthday, M/G Renjamin D. Foulois (usa, Ret.) was honored for his achievements in aviation at a dinner at Andrews'afb. General Foulois, who was the United States’ first military pilot, was inducted into the Primus Club—an elite group of aerospace pioneers— and hailed as “a living link between the age of the Wright Brothers and today’s astronauts.” (Raymond, NYT, 12/9/64,53)
gao complained nasa had spent money unnecessarily by producing four basically similar films on the flight of astronaut John Glenn, three on the Alan Shepard flight, three on the Apollo lunar exploration project, two on the Ariel satellite, and two emphasizing international cooperation in the space program. The cost of the films ranged from $216,000 for one of the Glenn-flight productions to $1,500 for one of the three on Shepard’s flight. (Orlando Sentinel, 11/4/64; NYT, 11/4/64,40)
Translations of reports in Russian journals indicated that space flights lasting longer than 24 hours produced changes in the human body, including bladder and kidney troubles, that could not be corrected. Future Soviet flights would be aimed at detecting the beginning of these disorders and attempting to prevent them. The translations indicated that the Russians planned to send up more doctors and physiologists and that the primary reason for the 16-mo. delay between flights by the U.S.S.R. was the seriousness of the disorders affecting astronauts after flights lasting for five days. Future crews would be selected “as medical teams as opposed to individuals,” said one Soviet journal. The men would also be picked on the basis of their medical compatibility— to see that one man’s personal germs, bacteria, or virus did not infect other members of the team. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 12/13/64)
Dr. Charles A. Berry of NASA’s msc said that some communicable diseases could develop on space missions of up to 14 days if astronauts were exposed during preflight preparation period. Therefore nasa plans included turning the spacecraft around and returning to earth in severe cases and equipping vehicles with emergency medical supplies. Also, doctors might be trained as astronauts for 30- to 60-day missions. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 7/14/64)	_
Former NASA astronaut Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), completed 15-day assignment at El Toro, Calif., mcas, where he was on TDY for flight refresher training. {J/Armed Forces, 11/28/64,5)
usaf announced it had built the T-27 space flight simulator—a $5,500,000, 15-ton machine which would be used for astronaut training at the Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif. The simulator was built under a contract with the Link Group of General Precision, Inc. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/23/64, 24)
An msc investigative board announced that a snow goose, weighing about eight lbs., with a wingspan of more than 24 in., caused the fatal crash of Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (usaf) on Oct. 31. The bird struck the left side of the airplane canopy causing both engines to flame-out on impact. Captain Freeman, however, still had control of the aircraft and attempted to make a landing at Ellington. He flew a looping pattern over the Gulf Freeway and lowered his landing gear as he approached the field. When he apparently realized that a landing was not possible, he veered to the left into an open field, probably to avoid buildings at Ellington. Seconds later, at slightly under 100-ft. altitude, he ejected, too late for his parachute to deploy fully, (msc Roundup, 11/25/64)
The House Republican Conference’s task force on space and aeronautics charged that NASA was disregarding the safety of astronauts in its haste to place men on the moon. The report specifically criticized the agency for not developing means of rescuing astronauts stranded in orbit and called for a slowdown in the program until the feasibility of “rescue ships” could be explored. The criticisms were directed at the Project Gemini flights. The report suggested that NASA’s reluctance to develop a Gemini space rescue system resulted from a fear that it would slow the Apollo project. (Finney, NYT, 6/5/64)
NASA msc announced Gemini test vehicle for training astronauts in recovery procedures had arrived at MSC, and water tests with the astronauts and recovery forces would be conducted in nearby Galveston Bay. (msc Release 64-2)
Czechoslovakian news agency Ceteka reported Czechoslovakia would issue series of eight postage stamps in April bearing faces of 10 Soviet cosmonauts and American astronauts. (Reuters, Houston Post, 3/30/64)	#	#
Maj, Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of usaf Office of Aerospace Research, addressed National Space Club in Washington: “I am sometimes asked how military space research differs from space research conducted by civilian institutions or other government agencies. The answer, of course, is that there is no difference, except in the ultimate purpose for which it is conducted. As a matter of fact, there is very close liaison in this field between my Command, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Office of Naval Research, and the scientific community. We make every effort to keep them informed about the work we are doing or sponsoring, and we are constantly exchanging information with them about our findings on the characteristics of space. Our job, however, is specifically to support the Air Force mission in space. . . . “I know that you are all familiar with the potential radiation hazards to man in space, particularly with the deadly proton showers that accompany certain solar flares. We have made great strides in predicting the onset of these showers at our Sacramento Peak Observatory in New Mexico. “We can predict safe periods with increasing accuracy—better than most weather predictions here on earth—but there is still a large gray area in which we do not know whether conditions will be safe or unsafe. It is possible that we could narrow this gray area significantly with that which penetrates the atmosphere and can be picked up at the observatory. “If we had this knowledge, it would extend the time we could operate in space with absolute assurance of safety. It would also give us advanced early warning that would enable us if necessary to get our astronauts out of danger. “Even in the present state of the art, our Sacramento Peak predictions have been crucial to the safety of the astronauts participating in the Mercury program. We have been able to give NASA absolute assurance of safe conditions, insofar as proton showers are concerned, when the astronauts have gone into orbit; and warnings of potential danger, at other times. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Thomas B. Weber, formerly at Aerospace Medical Center, Brooks afb, Tex., and now manager of advanced research for space engineering at Beckman Instruments, Inc., Fullerton, Calif., said that all space-cabin simulation experiments so far have had to be called off within a few days because of accumulation of toxic elements in the closed atmospheres. “This may be the reason Russia’s recent three-man space flight, which was expected to last several days, ended after only 24 hours.” Dr. Weber continued, “Unless an answer is found, this is a definite threat to our own plans for a manned orbiting laboratory and it could delay the Apollo program to land men on the moon.” Working under usaf contracts, Dr. Weber had devised instruments to collect and identify more than 400 contaminants given off by the human body and by space cabin equipment. So far he had found that 20 were potentially lethal, including highly explosive hydrogen given off by water used in cooling systems; ozone, given off by electrical equipment; and ammonia, acetone, and alcohol found in breath, perspiration, and body wastes. “None of these occurs in dangerous amounts in a normal environment,” Dr. Weber said, “but in a small cabin they build up to lethal concentrations in short periods of time. . . . Our longest space flight so far lasted less than two days, but even on that one we ran into trouble filtering out the carbon dioxide exhaled by the astronaut.” (AP, Denver Post, 11/8/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/64)
Fifteen years ago Eastern Test Range was activated at Long Range Proving Ground. Hq. were established at Patrick afb, then still the Banana River nas, some 18 mi. south of Cape Kennedy (then Cape Canaveral) rocket launch site. (A&A, 1915-60; AP, Tulsa Daily World, 10/1/64) October 2: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center conducted tests of astronauts floating in model Gemini spacecraft in the open seas, simulating astronauts awaiting recovery after splash-down from space flight. MSC project engineers considered the tests successful, despite the fact that the two astronauts became ill while the enclosed spacecraft pitched and rolled in the rough Gulf of Mexico waters. The astronauts considered the heat in the spacecraft to be cause of sickness. Tests were ended after 16 hrs. rather than lasting the planned 36 hrs. because of approaching Hurricane Hilda. Astronaut participants: Lt. Alan L. Bean (usn) and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn). (Maloney, Houston Post, 10/3/64)
15 NASA astronauts began three days and two nights of jungle survival training in the Panama Canal Zone, under supervision of the usaf Tropic Survival School, (msc Roundup, 6/24/64, 8)
World Book Encyclopedia announced 14 new NASA astronauts had been added to the 16 astronauts with four-year contracts for newspaper distribution rights to their life stories. World Book—a unit of Field Enterprises Educational Corp.—also said the astronauts had signed separate contracts with Life magazine. (AP, NYT, 3/28/64, 20)
Scientists at Aerospace Medical Div., Brooks Afb, said in paper presented by Maj. William B. Clark at space medicine conference that, with proper reconnaissance training, astronauts in space could easily spot missile bases, encampments, troop movements, and “unsuspected targets of opportunity” from outposts 100-mi. high. The scientists’ report was based on studies of visual reports of six U.S. astronauts who made space flights and relied heavily on accounts by Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) . (AP, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/5/64; AP, Phil. Eve. Bull. 2/6/64)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in press conference preceding address at Texas a&m Univ. that a geologist would be in crew of second Apollo lunar landing mission. Geologists probably would be sought when NASA recruited astronaut trainees for subsequent Apollo lunar flights. In his address, Dr. von Braun advised that U.S. must protect itself from any hostile force that attempts to “use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us.” (Houston Post, 2/15/64; Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
NASA awarded $1,125,040 contract to Ling-Temco-Vought for construction of Dynamic Crew Procedures Simulator which would allow astronauts to simulate orbital, lunar, and interplanetary flights in model spacecraft. Simulator’s completion was scheduled for May 1965, when it would be delivered to msc. (msc pao; Denver Post, 7/5/64)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper revealed at luncheon meeting with newsmen in Washington that scientists would be invited to volunteer for training for lunar missions. Plans had been finalized at meeting between nasa officials and’members ; of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board. ’ Up to 50"’ scientists would be selected to train with the Gemini/Apollo astronauts at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center during the summer months. Then, perhaps two years before a lunar landing, nasa would select some persons from the reserve to begin full-time training as crew members for later lunar flights. (AP, 4/30/64)
Radiation hazards to Project Apollo astronauts bound for the moon were described at American Medical Association conference by Dr. Hermann J. Schaefer, scientist at U.S. Naval School of Aviation Medicine. Dr. Schaefer predicted that in 1969 proton streams from the sun could range from deadly “downpour” to very light “shower.” He calculated chance of lethal-dosage proton stream was three in 10,000; chance of moderate but incapacitating “rain” would be one in 1,000; and chance of light “shower” would be one in 100. Dr. Schaefer emphasized his forecast was based on predictable solar behavior and that the weather of the sun, like that of the earth, could be unpredictable. (Justice, Houston Post, 6/23/64)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (Maj., USAF) was presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert, at the National Geographic Society, Washington. Award cited Major Cooper for “the most outstanding contribution to the Nation’s progress in aerospace during 1963,” orbiting the earth 22 times in Mercury spacecraft in May 1963. (Wash. Post, 9/22/64X
NASA announced the large air-filled bag safety system performed successfully in DC-7 crash experiment conducted April 24. Results indicated that if a man had sat in for the dummy, he would have survived the crash. Martin Co. designed the airbag system under NASA contract, for possible use by both airline passengers and astronauts. (NASA Release 64-121)
In experiment to test reactions of astronauts under environmental conditions they would encounter outside their spacecraft, three out of four subjects suffered the bends. Capt. Eugene A. Degner, expert in body metabolism conducting tests planned on 50 volunteers at Brooks afb, said: “All three men with the grade one [least severe] bends had them dramatically dissipate as the altitude chamber pressure dropped below that of 30,000 feet. “I was surprised at the results, and a little worried because the three men complained of the bends and mild discomforts early in the experiment period. “I was afraid they would keep getting worse, but the trouble was intermittent and not severe enough to abort the [10-hour] test.” (upi, Houston Chron., 3/21/64)
David B. Clark Co. began building eight flight suits for Project Gemini astronauts, msc suit engineer Henry Friloux said the pressurized suits would protect astronauts up to 150-mi. altitudes. (M&R, 5/25/64, 31)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced scientists were investigating use of chewing gum for astronauts on long-duration space flights, “to stimulate dental tissues and freshen the astronaut’s mouth. . . (msc Release 64-69)
Team of NASA space scientists and engineers, including Astronaut Walter Cunningham outfitted in a pressurized spacesuit, began week-long mobility tests at McKenzie Pass lava area in central Oregon’s Cascade Mountains, where they investigated man’s ability to perform on surfaces thought to resemble that of the moon. (AP, Balt. Sun, 8/26/64)
NASA received patent for life preserver carried by Mercury astronauts on all orbital space flights. Invented by MSC engineers Mathew I. Rad-nofsky and Glenn A. Shewmake, life-preserver was called “Ram’s Horn” because of its shape: main part fits across wearer’s chest and hook-like ends fit over the shoulders. (Jones, NYT, 10/17/64, 35)
Soviet space scientists Dr. Vladimir Lebedev and Dr. Oleg Kuznetsov, writing in Soviet Air Force magazine, discussed U.S. Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s sightings of houses and other objects from space as he orbited over Tibet in May 1963. The scientists noted that some U.S. experts had attributed Major Cooper’s sightings to hallucinations caused by spaceflight conditions. However, the Soviets said, their own experiments with men in soundproof, dark chambers simulating spacecraft led them to conclude that Major Cooper’s observations were “an illusion of recognition caused by insufficient information.” (AP, NYT, 10/19/64, 3)
Soviet draft treaty for aid to astronauts in distress and for return of spacecraft was submitted to Legal Subcommittee of U.S. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva. Draft treaty differed from U.S. draft by providing that country of origin reserve “exclusive right” to search unassisted for the downed spacecraft on the high seas. Soviet draft also specified two conditions for returning spacecraft: (1) the spacecraft must have been launched “for the purposes of peaceful exploration and use of outer space” and (2) the purpose and launching of the spacecraft must have been “officially announced.” (NYT, 3/11/64,5)
Paul Haney, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Public Affairs Officer, told the Radio and Television News Directors Association that television viewers would be able to watch the first astronauts land on the moon from the comfort of their living rooms. Television cameras carried by the astronauts would beam a signal back to earth which could be relayed to the major TV networks. The astronaut on the lunar surface would also take pictures as he walked along. All of these would be relayed back to earth, Haney said. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/12/64; Maloney, Houston Post, 11/12/64)
X-15 No. 3, piloted by Capt. Joe Engle (usaf), flew 3,511 mph (mach 4.94) and gained altitude of 170,000 ft. in first test of infrared horizon scanner designed to give sharper outline of earth to astronauts re-entering earth’s atmosphere. Flight also enabled Engle to make pilot checkout of adaptive control system which had ability to sense atmospheric conditions surrounding the craft. Flight was postponed twice before successful effort, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 7/9/64)
usaf annual report of unidentified flying objects said there were 382 sightings in 1963 compared with 469 in 1962 and 1004 in record year of 1957. During past 16 years, report said, usaf had investigated more than 8,000 sightings, all but 7.7 percent of which had been explained by natural phenomena, (upi, Houston Chron., 5/1/64) During April: Aluminum pressure suit designed for astronaut use on the moon was undergoing evaluation at msc. Officially called a “constant volume, rigid articulated, anthropomorphic protectic suit,” it featured increased mobility and constancy of pressure. Rigid suit concept was first introduced by Litton Industries in 1956 for use in pressure chambers. Advanced version for space use, with adaptations and improvements, was proposed to NASA by Litton last year, (msc Roundup, 4/15/64,8)
NASA began recruiting 10-20 scientist-astronauts for future manned space flights. Qualified applicants—with doctoral degree or equivalent experience in natural sciences, medicine, or engineering—would be screened and evaluated according to standards established by NASA and ad hoc Committee on Scientific Qualifications of Scientist-Astronauts of the nas Space Science Board. Before final selection as astronauts, applicants would receive training in a limited space-simulation program designed to familiarize them with space environment and test their ability to withstand physical stresses of space flight. Departing from previous requirement that astronaut candidates be experienced jet pilots, NASA said selected astronauts not already qualified pilots would be given individual flight training to qualify them as pilots of high-performance aircraft and helicopters. (NASA Release 64-248)
At Manned Spacecraft Center press conference, MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth announced Astronauts Gus Grissom and John Young would be prime pilots for the first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3), with Astronauts Walter Schirra and Tom Stafford as backup pilots. Also at the press conference it was disclosed that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was suffering from labyrinthitis, msc’s Dr. Charles Berry emphasized that Shepard’s inner ear inflammation was not caused by space flight but by infection that spread into his inner left ear. (msc Press Conf., msc Historian)
Maj. Edwin Aldrin, Jr., from the newest group of NASA astronauts, already was qualified as a scientist-astronaut, holding a doctorate in astronautics. Two other astronauts were nearing completion of doctoral studies: R. Walter Cunningham (physics) and Russell L. Schweikart (aeronautics/ astronautics).	(Houston Post, 10/20/64)
Mercury capsule (MA—9) in which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper flew 22 earth orbits was viewed by more than 20,000 people when on display in Nebraska State Capitol at Lincoln. (Omaha Eve. World-Her., 7/13/ 64)
Three NASA astronauts began flights in T-33 trainer jets simulating approaches to the lunar surface. Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt. David R. Scott, and Elliott M. See, Jr., sent their planes into dives from altitudes of about 15,000 ft. toward the large, rugged lava flow in southern Idaho; cameras in the planes recorded the,.approaches, and the astronauts made their own observations of the surface. Planes were leveled out at about 3,000-ft. altitude. (Houston Post, 9/3/64)
More than 900 persons had applied to NASA for the 10 to 20 positions for scientist astronaut that it would fill next year. To qualify, a scientist had to be under 34 years old, a U.S. citizen, no taller than six feet, with a B.A. degree and a doctorate or the equivalent in experience. Recruitment would end Dec. 31. Recommendations would be made by the National Academy of Sciences to NASA in the spring of 1965. (AP, Miami Her., 12/18/64)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), usaf Space Systems Div. Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, said at AIAA space station symposium in Pasadena that USAF planned to assign to a single contractor the task of integrating the Gemini spacecraft and the manned orbiting laboratory (mol). He said astronaut transfer from the Gemini to the mol was a major problem and described several alternative methods of transfer being studied. (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 39)
14 men selected last October for astronaut training reported to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center to begin training for the Gemini and Apollo space flight crew pool. ( msc Release 64-24)
C. Leo de Orsey, attorney for the seven NASA Mercury astronauts, revealed former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc) had turned down a $1,000,000 contract with private industry in 1963. (St. Louis PostDispatch, 10/7/64)
Astronaut Russell L. Schweikart began week-long test of continuous living in a Gemini spacesuit. Before donning the spacesuit at Edwards afb, he had biosensors attached to his body. Among his activities for the test: experiencing weightlessness in F-104B aircraft, going through reproduction of a Gemini space flight in Manned Spacecraft Center mission simulator, and spinning in Ames Research Center centrifuge. (Maloney, Houston Post, 10/20/64)
After examining Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), U.S. Air Force doctors at San Antonio said the former astronaut was on the way to “virtually complete recovery” from his inner-ear injury resulting from accidental fall last February. (AP, NYT, 10/2/64,62)
Dr. Alan T. Waterman, physicist and former director of National Science Foundation, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. He is also a member of the NASA Historical Advisory Committee. (nasa Release 64-240) *	NASA msc’s Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, announced Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Lt. Cdr., usn) would serve as his executive assistant. Dr. Gilruth called this a “convalescent assignment,” because Astronaut Carpenter still had minor injuries from a motorbike accident several months ago. Also announced was selection of Carpenter for promotion from Lt. Cdr. to Commander. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/18/64)
Aerospace Medical Association honored Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II and CoL William K. Douglas at its meeting in Miami. Dr. Lovelace, President of Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research and recently appointed NASA Director of Space Medicine, received the 1964 Theodore C. Lyster award, and Dr. Douglas, Assistant Deputy for Bioastronautics at AFMTC and formerly personal physician to the original seven Mercury astronauts, received the Louis H. Bauer Founders award. (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/14/64)
In study financed by NASA, a Mexico City matador had his heart heat, respiratory rate, and body temperature monitored during the height of a bull fight. Readings from sensors fixed to his skin were telemetered to instruments inside bull ring. Doctors at msc used information in study to determine how much physical stress human body could withstand and what effect stress had on performance. It had been determined previously that many athletes undergo more physical stress than do astronauts in flight. (AP, NYT, 7/8/64,12; msc Roundup, 7/22/64,7)
USAF announced selection of the first six astronauts for its manned orbiting laboratory (MOL) program. An additional six would be named in early 1965. Following a six-month basic training course, the crewmen, all graduates of USAf’s Aerospace Research Pilot School, would be assigned specialty areas. (Av. Wk., 11/23/64,25)
The last in a series of 11 tests of the F—2 Apollo service module engine was successfully conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineers at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The engine was fired for 20 sec. and then shut down for a five-min. “purge” before a 100-sec. test firing. The F—2 rocket engine would be expected to bring astronauts back to earth from the moon. (Lee, Houston Post, 12/10/64)
Capt. Theodore C. Freeman (usaf) was buried with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetey, Va., with the entire astronaut team attending the services, (msc Roundup, 11/11/64, 1)
Researchers at Lankeneau Hospital in Philadelphia had concluded that orthostatic hypotension such as occurred in Astronauts Schirra and Cooper after orbital space flights could be caused as much by dehydration as by weightlessness, Missiles and Rockets reported. (M&R, 4/6/64, 25)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said at Washington press luncheon that the two astronauts in Project Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module would stand up during the descent to the moon. He described support gear—like elasticized parachute harness—which would cushion the landing for the crewmen. Elimination of chairs and rearrangement of Lem’s gear permitted weight reduction of 1,000 lbs., he said. (Halsell, Houston Post, 2/4/64)
NASA announced requesting from industry proposals for feasibility and design study of possible payloads for manned lunar exploration with an Apollo Logistic Support System (alss) . One of the payloads was a mobile laboratory capable of supporting and transporting two Apollo astronauts for about 14 days; the other payload concept included both a stationary base and a smaller vehicle. The ALSS concept, making maximum use of Apollo-developed systems, provided for Saturn V launch vehicle to launch into earth-moon trajectory a manned Apollo command module, service module, and lunar excursion module modified for landing equipment rather than men on the. moon and called the lem Truck. Following alss landing, astronauts would land nearby in unmodified Apollo lem. MSFC would manage the nine-month study. (NASA Release 64-62)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, interviewed in Washington World, replied to interviewer’s question: “Yes, Gemini is really necessary to the Apollo program. As a matter of fact, Gemini would be necessary as the next major step in manned space flight even if there were no Apollo mission. Gemini provides the United States large increments of manned space flight capability. Gemini is vital to the Apollo program since our astronauts must learn— and perfect—the techniques of rendezvous and docking in space before attempting the trip to the moon and hack. . . .” (nasa)
It was announced that in the first two-man Gemini flight, set for Feb. 1965, Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom might become the first man in space to alter the orbit of his own spacecraft. .The change would be after about 90 minutes of flight in the first orbit over Guaymas, Mex. Major Grissom, the command pilot, would be sitting on the left side of the spacecraft and Lt. Cdr. John Young, pilot, would be sitting on the right side. (AP, Sunday Oregonian, 11/1/64)
John H. Boynton of MSC discussed pilot’s role in Mercury space flight systems failures, in paper to aiaa first annual meeting. He summarized: “For the two unmanned missions, MA-4 and MA-5, control system difficulties made impossible the successful completion of a three-pass orbital flight, which was the design mission for the Mercury spacecraft. But in both cases, the presence of a pilot and the capability to control the spacecraft attitudes manually would have made die three-pass mission possible. This fact was demonstrated in the MA—6 mission in which a similar malfunction occurred but in which the astronaut completed the flight by using his manual control modes. . . . “For the MA-6 mission, . . . the flight would undoubtedly have been terminated before the planned time because of an excessive rate of fuel consumption in the automatic control mode. In the successful MA—7 flight, manual initiation of the retrorocket-ignition sequence prevented the horizon scanner malfunction from significantly delaying this critical event. Although an error in yaw angle caused the spacecraft to land somewhat beyond the planned landing area, this error would have undoubtedly been much greater had the pilot not been present. The six-pass MA—8 mission was successful, although a problem of an abnormal increase in suit temperature could have terminated the flight early had no means been available for reducing this temperature. The pilot, however, was able to correct this situation by manual adjustment of his coolant flow valve. Short circuits in the automatic control circuitry during the MA-9 flight made it essential for the pilot to control the spacecraft manually during retrofire and reentry.” (Text)
In testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year. It was the year of transition to hardware—now we can fill the pipeline and move forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade. . . . “The resources for the Gemini and Apollo programs are moving forward. The major developmental resources are essentially completed; the manufacturing resources are under construction and approaching our goal; the test and operational resources have been initiated; a logistics program is being formulated and our personnel build-up is progressing. “The personnel staffing at the NASA Centers ... is increasing from 11,858 at the end of FY 1963 to 13,711 at the end of FY 1964 and a forecast total of 14,711 at the end of FY 1965. In addition to the government team of personnel there are approximately 181,000 contractor personnel who are working on Manned Space Flight programs. With the continued buildup of construction, manufacturing, test and operations, it is anticipated that this figure will approximate 300,000	personnel at the peak of the Manned Space Flight Program. ...” Discussing planned activity in manned space flight program, he said: “A major decision was made in 1963 to adopt the ‘all-up’ testing concept as a basic approach to our flight verification test program. ‘All-up’ testing means, all flights will be scheduled with complete space vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft. ... “There are several advantages to the ‘all-up’ approach. It will permit us to land an American astronaut on the moon, and return him safely to earth, in accordance with our schedule even though we are operating this year on a reduced budget. It will permit us to capitalize on successful flights. It will also allow us to gather a very large amount of data early in the flight program and thereby provide much needed information to our design organization. It is planned in the Saturn IB and Saturn V programs to launch a complete unmanned space vehicle on the first flight in an earth orbital trajectory.” (Testimony) February 6: NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined NASA’s program of advanced research and technology and proposed activities for FY 1965. Objectives in advanced research and technology were summarized: “1. Basic research aimed toward an understanding of the natural laws underlying aeronautical and space technology. “2. Engineering research aimed at the application of these laws and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles. “3. Experimental subsystem development, using advanced concepts and components, to produce test ‘know-how’ for the design of future operational systems. “Our aim in basic research is to contribute to the fund of relevant scientific knowledge and, in so doing, to maintain the best possible contact with the scientific and engineering community. Engineering research, that is the creation of engineering design principles, is also conducted by these same institutions with industry playing a somewhat greater role than in the case of basic research .... “A program of [advanced] research . . . which looks beyond today’s technology is believed to be a pre-requisite for continued advancement in the performance and efficiency of aeronautical and space vehicles.” (Testimony)
Prof. Marcel Florkin of Liege Univ., a member of the Committee on Space Research (cospar), said that many American and Soviet scientists shared his belief that men cannot survive weightlessness in space for more than five or six days. He said that Soviet scientists had produced photographs showing abnormalities in cell division attributable to the sustained weightlessness some of their astronauts had experienced. Prof Florkin said that under present conditions, only space robots could visit the moon or Mars and that the only alternative would be space vehicles that could produce artificial gravity to simulate normal human environment. (O’Toole, NYT, 12/24/64)
NASA Astronaut Donn F. Eisele dislocated his left shoulder during weightless flight training at Wright-Patterson AFB in KC-135 jet aircraft, and was placed on limited duty for about three weeks. (Houston Post, 9/17/64) ■September 15: Two NASA-USAF memoranda of understanding providing for exchange of technical management and scientific personnel became effective. Signed by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and usaf Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert, the agreements were based on recommendation by joint usaf/nasa Military Requirements Review Group. Previously no NASA personnel had been assigned to USAF; under the new terms, NASA would assign personnel to usaf on a “when-needed” basis. NASA personnel would be GS-13’s and above, and usaf officers assigned to NASA would be majors or higher unless “the position offers exceptional opportunity to the Air Force,” according to agreement. Under basic agreement dating from 1959, about 100 USAF officers were now on duty with NASA, including 13 astronauts, not affected by the agreement, and 40 recent rotc graduates. About 40 more senior officers were scheduled for assignment to NASA in the near future. (nasa Release 64r-234; dod Release 671-64)
Msc began 10-day series of short weightlessness tests with Gemini spacecraft installed inside a KC-135 jet aircraft. Astronaut John Young took part in the tests along with four usaf and McDonnell Aircraft Corp. test pilots. (Houston Chron., 5/19/64)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell* Jr., and Maj. Thomas P. Stafford practiced in the Gulf of Mexico developing a training technique for escaping from Gemini spacecraft, both with and without flotation collar, (msc Release)
Vincent L. Johnson, NASA Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, was interviewed in Data on Centaur launch vehicle. “At this point in the Centaur development program, the major portion of the ground tests have been completed, and three development flights have been accomplished. Three more devlopment flights remain before the vehicle will be considered operational in a single-bum configuration in early 1965. The two-burn capability will be certified by two additional development flights providing a proven operational two-bum capability in 1966. I would like to note, however, that lunar flights can and will be accomplished by single-burn Centaurs in 1965 and 1966, and perhaps also in future years during those lunar opportunities that allow single-burn trajectories. . . .” {Data, 10/64, 27—31) During October: Lt. Cdr. M. Scott Carpenter was awarded special gold medal by International Association of Man in Space, commemorating Astronaut Carpenter’s Project Mercury orbital space flight. (Dryden, Ltr. to Carpenter, 11/5/64)
Labor Dept, said industry employed 885,000 engineers and scientists in 1963, about 4% more than in 1962. 715,000 of the 885,000 were engineers and 170,000 were scientists. (AP, NYT, 9/l/64>, 22) During August: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received five Northrop T-38 aircraft on loan from USAF for use as space-flight readiness trainers to maintain proficiency of astronauts. (Av. Wk., 8/31/64, 25)
Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. concluded in its manned Mars exploration study for NASA Marshall . Tlight Center that future interplanetary space travelers should be no taller than 5'7" and no heavier than 145 lbs. Six of these “20 percentile” men—smaller than approximately 80 per cent of American men—on a manned Mars flight would require 1% lbs. less food per day than larger men, thus saving nearly 500 lbs. of food cargo weight on a one-year trip. Study said 70,000 lbs. could be saved in gross weight of Mars spacecraft if the six astronauts were 20 percentile men. (dm&ssd Apogee, 6/64)
msc reported that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard had had a small benign tumor removed from his thyroid gland by surgery. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64,
Researchers reported the centrifugal experiment conducted for the Air Force by Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. indicated that a centrifuge device in a space station could help to recondition astronauts living for prolonged periods in a weightless condition. Tests in which five college students spent 42 days in a horizontal position showed that tendency to faint on standing diminished after periodic centrifuge rides. (NYT, 12/20/64, 42)
At meeting in Geneva, U.S. delegation to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Legal Subcommittee submitted to the Subcommittee drafts of two treaties. One draft treaty dealt with aid to astronauts in distress, calling for nations to take “all possible steps to assist or rescue promptly the personnel of spacecraft” having difficulty or making emergency landings. Astronauts making emergency landings would be returned to their own country “promptly and safely,” and any spaceship or its parts falling to earth would be returned to country of ownership at the country’s request. The second treaty, dealing with liability for damage caused by spacecraft, would establish a “simple and expeditious procedure to provide financial protection against damage.” (nyt, 3/10/64, 8)
James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, talked and dined with Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., at the home of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of MSC, in Houston. Afterwards, Col. Glenn told an interviewer: “We talked about a number of different areas in which I could work. I want a part-time job, a consulting job.” (NYT, 7/12/64)
In press interview during Third International Symposium on Bioastronautics and Exploration of Space, in San Antonio, Major Duane E. Graveline, a usaf doctor who examined each of the Project Mercury astronauts after their flights, said there was no doubt that even brief forays into space created a certain physical debilitation. “What prolonged space flights, with the constant state of weightlessness and no gravity as we know on earth might do to the human body, we don’t know yet. We know that the Russian cosmonauts have suffered from the effects of prolonged weightlessness, and that U.S. astronauts Walter Schirra and L. Gordon Cooper had temporary debility for the same reason. . . . What we must do now is determine how to condition man for long-duration manned orbital missions and journeys into the universe. Frankly, we don’t have the answers yet.” (Macomber, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 11/19/64)
At Aerospace Medical Association meeting, Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Dernier, Commander of afsc Research and Technology Div., said usaf was studying use of “space lifeboats” for astronauts who might have to abandon their spacecraft. The self-contained unit would be designed to sustain astronauts until they were rescued, (upi, NYT, 5/12/64,43)
U.S. Committee for International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) and usn announced satellite to monitor solar x-ray emission, instrumented by Naval Research Laboratory scientists, was launched recently to initiate continuous “watch on the sun” during iqsy (1964-65). First signals from the satellite showed the sun now is close to its minimum activity, reported nrl scientists Robert W. Kreplin, Talbot A. Chubb, and Herbert Friedman. Any solar activity that occurs this year should be isolated and relatively uncomplicated, permitting the satellite to record individual storm centers, in contrast to igy which was marked by succession of overlapping storms. Observatories in 14 countries joined U.S. in preparing to utilize continuous data transmissions from the satellite. At press conference, the NRL scientists said that astronauts on lunar flight would be under no more radiation danger during maximum period of solar cycle than during minimum period. Friedman explained: “All available evidence indicates that solar minimum is as bad as solar maximum for superflare eruption.” To date, superflares occur at random and cannot be predicted, (nas-nrc Release; USN Background Statement; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/5/64)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in informal press gathering in Washington that when nasa had decided on 30 trainees for its astronaut pool, it had anticipated losing 4 of the 30 men, for various reasons, before completion of Project Apollo. Commander Shepard said, “we figured on two casualties as a result of space flight,” explaining that the figure was “just pulled out of the air” but was considered a reasonable guess. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden emphasized “We have no idea what the casualty rate will be. We’re hoping it will be zero.” (Troan, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 2/21/64)
In speech to cospar on the NASA Biosatellite Program, Dr. Dale Jenkins, Bioscience Programs Div., NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, remarked: “The United States Biosatellite Program is a second generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and equipment development. This program has been designed to study the biological effects of: (a) zero gravity or weightlessness, (b) the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation, and (c) removal of living organisms from the Earth’s rotation. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to critically test major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will delineate hazards to astronauts, and determine and define effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights, for example, may involve changes observed in ten days of bed rest such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. The effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown.” (Text)
Awards at 1964 Air Force Association national convention included H. H. Arnold Trophy to General Curtis E. LeMay (USAF CofS), who was named “Aerospace Man of the Year” for his “enlightened and aggressive leadership in behalf of the status and welfare of fhe military man”; David C. Schilling Trophy to Maj or Sidney J. Kubesch, SAC B-58 pilot, for his record Tokyo-to-London flight in October 1963; and Theodore von Karman Trophy to Clarence L. Johnson, Vice President (Advanced Development Projects) of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., for designing theYF-12A (A—11) aircraft. Among the citations of honor: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, nasc, was cited for his “broad understanding and vigorous pursuit of aerospace goals.” Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), deputy director of Apollo program in NASA Hq., was cited for his contributions to Minuteman icbm program in previous assignment with afsc/bsd. Chief M/Sgt. Frank M. Davis (usaf) and Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) were named outstanding airman and outstanding officer of 1964 by afa. Davis was cited for leadership in desert survival training including program for Gemini astronauts, among other citations. Engle was cited for “his active and aggressive” role as an X-15 test pilot. (AF Mag., 10/64, 33; Wash. Post, 9/12/64)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD i spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said voskhod i was first of a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard voskhod I, revealed he had made astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aeronavigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously on hoard the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed voskhod i’s attitude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described voskhod i’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the spacecraft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after parachutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of general discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/ 22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/22/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/64) • Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I. Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the moon “may be somewhat commonplace. . . . The moon will also be serving as an important scientific station for radio astronomers . . . [and] many other kinds of scientists. . . . We may be maintaining sizable installations on the moon. . . . “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . . In space stations orbiting above the earth we shall likely be fabricating space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one continent to another. . . . “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory expeditions to the outermost reaches. We will be considering the extension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am somewhat doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man. “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established outposts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I doubt that this will take place on the moon, unless the moon turns out to contain resources of great economic value to us here on earth. The resources required for such extensive exploration of Mars will require cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not, likely to be accomplished. . . .” (Text)
Former astronaut Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC) announced his decision to withdraw from the Democratic primary campaign for Senate candidacy in Ohio. Colonel Glenn was still convalescing from severe injury to his vestibular system in the inner ear sustained when he accidentally slipped and struck his head on a bathtub Feb. 26. In Houston, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth said: “The news of John Glenn’s continued illness is upsetting. Our first concern is for his recovery. . . . We will be happy to discuss with John and the-commandant of the Marine Corps his future if John so desires. . . . We wish him a speedy recovery.” (AP, NYT, 3/31/64, 1,18,19; Burkett, Houston Chron., 3/30/64)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center awarded 29 contracts involving studies of advanced manned missions. The 29 studies, which were designed to look beyond the time when American astronauts would have landed on the moon, covered the subjects of launch vehicle development, earth orbital operations, lunar exploration, and planetary exploration. (NASA Release 64-175)
Astronaut Russell Schweickart removed spacesuit at NASA Ames Research Center, where he had undergone three rides on centrifuge. Schweickart, who had celebrated his 29th birthday in the spacesuit, had worn it constantly since Oct. 19. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/27/64)
It was reported that technicians had experienced some difficulty returning to their spacecraft couches during test designed to see how well astronauts would be able to perform certain functions in weightless space flight. The tests were performed inside a mockup of a Gemini capsule mounted in a KC-135 flown to produce short periods of weightlessness. The difficulty was caused by pressure suits swollen by pressurization and couches designed to fit the astronaut only when his suit was not pressurized. Dr. M. Debrovner of msc said that the difficulty would soon be overcome. (Houston Post, 6/9/64)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed banquet of Aviation/Space Writers’ Association in Miami. Discussing possible hazards to Apollo astronauts, he said that based on data from explorer xvi satellite it was “not anticipated at this time that meteoroids will constitute a major problem in the planning or scheduling of the first manned lunar exploration.” Radiation did not present a hazard either: “. . . In the case of solar flares, we compared the allowable safe dose with what would have been produced within the Apollo command module by the worst flares on record, that of July 1959. If an Apollo spacecraft had been in flight on a lunar mission at this time, the astronauts would have received only 15 percent of the safe dose, calculated on the basis of a report by a group established by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences. . . . “Very recently there have been suggestions that space flight—even relatively short duration flight—is harmful to man. There is no evidence from Project Mercury to support these fears. Based on our experience in Mercury, which included a flight of 34 hours by Gordon Cooper, there is no reason to believe that flights of two weeks or less will be harmful. . . .” Dr. Mueller then outlined nine medical experiments to be conducted during the two-man orbital space flights of Project Gemini. (Text; NASA Release 64^128)
At MSC press conference, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Deputy Project Manager of Project Gemini, stated that an experiment assigned to the second manned flight (GT-4) in Project Gemini would involve the first exposure of an astronaut to the hazards of outer space without full space vehicle protection. He said that the experiment would involve “stepping into space,” but modified this later to say that it might involve nothing more than the crewman’s opening up the spacecraft hatch and standing up in his seat In addition to this experiment, the second flight (scheduled for early 1965) also would include other scientific assignments, including medical tests, radiation measurements, and measurement of the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, NYT, 7/30/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center named Capt. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Capt. Edward H. White II (usaf) as pilot and copilot for the second manned space flight of Project Gemini (GT—4), a four-day earth-orbital mission in early 1965. Astronauts named as backup crew for the flight were Maj. Frank Borman (usaf) and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn) . All four were “second generation’’ astronauts selected for the NASA program in Sept. 1962. (msc Roundup, 8/5/64,1)
President Johnson personally congratulated scientists and technicians responsible for the successful flight of ranger vii. He congratulated Dr. William Pickering, Director of JPL, and Dr. Homer Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and then issued a statement on the experiment. He called the flight “a basic step forward in our orderly program to assemble the scientific knowledge necessary for man’s trip to the moon. . . . The pictures obtained of the lunar surface should prove extremely useful. ... They will be a guide in constructing the lunar excursion module and in planning the trip. Now we shall be able to better map out our descent route. We’ll be able to build our lunar landing equipment with greater certainty and knowledge of the conditions which our astronauts will encounter on the moon. I recognize that this great success has come only after a number of failures and partial failures in our efforts to send probes to the moon. This success should spur us on to added effort in the future. . . . On behalf of a grateful nation, let me again congratulate you on this magnificent achievement. All of you today have helped further the peaceful exploration of space.” (NYT, 8/1/64)
Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, NASA Director of Space Medicine, said in Dallas: “Physiologically, women would make excellent astronauts.” However, he added, “They lack the experience in flying high-speed planes and handling the complicated equipment used in the program. “All of our astronauts are seasoned test pilots or men with much experience in combat flying. It would be very difficult for any woman to gain such experience.” (Dallas Morning News, 5/23/64)
The U.S. Fighter Aces Association awarded Astronauts Walter Schirra, Alan Shepard, Virgil Grissom, and Donald Slayton honorary memberships. (Houston Chron., 5/14/64)
It was reported that usaf was planning to permanently preserve the launch complex from which the first American astronauts were launched into space and to develop the area around it into an Air Force Space Museum. (Strothman, Miami Herald, 7/24/64)
Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of NASA Langley Research Center, said in speech before National Space Club in Washington that the problem of maintaining radio communications with astronauts during atmospheric re-entry may have been solved. He said LaRC research in Project Ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) showed that ejection of small amount of liquid into the air “provides an effective means of dealing with radio blackout,” the liquid apparently preventing buildup of an ionized sheath that cannot be penetrated by radio waves. While it may not be the “completely workable answer, it looks like a very promising method of dealing with the problem.” (nsc Release)
Colonel John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), was declared fully recovered from inner-ear injury by usaf doctors in San Antonio, Tex. The former NASA astronaut was expected to resign from usmc and become an active director of Royal Crown Cola Co. (upi, NYT, 10/31/64, 11)
NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight was holding three days of meetings with msc officials on problems related to Project Apollo. Members of Committee, established by nasa Administrator James E. Webb in December 1963, and which functioned in advisory capacity to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, delved into problems posed by launch vehicle systems, spacecraft systems, launch operations, science program, and space medicine. MIT physicist Dr. Charles Townes said at msc meeting of the Committee that he believed astronauts, not scientists, should be first men to explore moon. Scientists, he said, would concentrate on their own specialties in exploring the moon’s surface, but astronauts trained in scientific principles would bring back important information on the moon as a whole, (msc Roundup, 7/8/64, 1; Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
It was reported that NASA was actively considering methods to be used for exploration by astronauts on the moon. Two devices were under consideration: a mobile laboratory (Molab) in which men could work and also go out in spacesuits to gather rock and soil samples, and a “lunar hopper,” a helicopter device for short flights to sites that could not be reached on foot or by Molab. Parallel studies of the Molab concept were being undertaken by Boeing Co., Seattle, and Bendix Corp. of Ann Arbor, under contracts of $800,000. Bell Aerosystems Co., Buffalo, had been awarded a $199,333 contract to study the lunar hopper concept. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64)
Hand-held navigational device called a “stadimeter,” conceived by usaf scientists at Air Force Avionics Laboratory, was displayed by afsc. To be tested in Project Gemini manned space flights, the device used only manual and visual alignment and required no electronics. Astronauts would use stadimeter to determine optically the range of the spacecraft from the earth. (afsc Release 44-14-56)
msc announced approval of improved Gemini spacesuit for use by Apollo astronauts in the earlier flights in earth orbit. Adoption of Gemini spacesuit would allow more time for development of Apollo suit, which would allow astronauts greatest mobility for walking on surface of moon. (Houston Post, 7/7/64)
Astronaut Scott Carpenter was involved in a motor bike accident in Bermuda and suffered a fracture of his lower left arm. Carpenter was in Bermuda to participate in a Navy test in which he would have submerged in Sea Lab I diving chamber with four Navy divers to a depth of 192 feet, but his injury precluded his participation in the test. He was reported to be resting comfortably. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/17/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64)
In Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut to orbit the earth, announced that he would he a candidate for the Ohio Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator in the May 5 primary. He added that he was retiring from the U.S. Marine Corps after 22 years of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is certainly a challenge and a high calling.” Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It could very well he wishful thinking on my part to train for another six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old. “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best opportunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other research and development activities. These are areas with which I am well acquainted. . . .” (AP, Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/64, Al; Finney, NYT, 1/17/64,17)
usaf was reported continuing to seek industry support for avionics subsystems studies for DOD’s manned orbiting laboratory (mol) program. The Space Systems Div. of afsc asked avionics companies to submit bids for a study of an image velocity sensor subsystem, which would enable orbiting astronauts to acquire and track space targets visually and to take fixes on terrestrial bodies for navigation. SSD also asked Honeywell to submit a sole-source proposal for a study of the laboratory’s attitude control system. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 24)
Soviet cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pavel Popovich (VOSTOK ill and rv) had orthostatic hypotension following their space flights, Soviet physiologist Prof. Vasily V. Parin revealed. The condition was noted in the cosmonauts “even two days after the flight.” In address at cospar—prepared and delivered in English—and in the discussion which followed, the Soviet Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology, Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, said that the cosmonauts “showed no disturbances in their state of health” after their prolonged space flights, and the “transient functional reactions” were said to have “disappeared in seven or 10 days. . . He added that “post-flight disturbances were largely related to the central nervous system, the cardiovascular systems and metabolism.” Prof. Nello Pace, head of Physiology Dept, at Univ. of California (Berkeley), closely questioned Prof. Parin about his statements. Prof. Pace considered that hypotension was “among the most significant facts” disclosed at the conference. He noted that the condition had been observed in U.S. Astronauts Schirra and Cooper, and that NASA had said that implications of blood pressure responses “will have to be given very serious consideration as larger missions are undertaken.” (Text; Hillaby, NYT, 5/16/64,8; Burkett, Houston Chron., 5/17/64)
usaf Space Systems Div. reinitiated its program to develop Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (amu) for extravehicular space activity. Earlier this year SSD had requested bids for “remote space maneuvering system” but canceled this in favor of the amu, to be used in MOL-oriented program, amu would consist of five subsystems—hydrogen peroxide propulsion, environment control, attitude stabilization, manual control, and telemetry and voice communications. (SBD, 2/17/64, 255)
Col. John M. Stapp (usaf) said at iaf congress in Warsaw that pigs and bears had been used in tests to determine best position for astronauts to be in when Apollo spacecraft returning from the moon hits the earth. Human volunteers were used in 146 test runs, but anaesthetized bears and pigs were used in tests which were considered too dangerous for human subjects. Results: safest position would be landing backwards at 45° angle to the line of impact, (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/11/64)
Speaking at the dedication of a monument at Cape Kennedy honoring Project Mercury and the nation’s seven original astronauts, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Acting Chairman and Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council said: “Mercury served to lift the selfrespect of our nation when it badly needed such a boost. I know that we still have widespread public support of our national space programs in spite of the criticism of some short-sighted individuals.” (NYT, 11/11/64, 48; AP, Balt. Sim, 11/9/64; Rossiter, upi, Miami Herald, 11/11/64)
Apollo spacecraft (BP-23) was subjected to simulated catastrophic failure of its launch vehicle in a successful test of the ahort escape system at White Sands, N. Mex. Apollo command and service boilerplate modules were boosted on a Little Joe II launch vehicle to the region of maximum dynamic pressure at 29,000-ft. altitude and launch vehicle failure was simulated. The escape vehicle, mated to the spacecraft by a connecting tower, yanked the Apollo free of Little Joe and carried it almost two miles higher. The Little Joe rocket fell to earth; the Apollo modules were returned gently to the ground by three 88-ft. parachutes. This was the third successful test of functioning of the 33-ft. launch escape tower designed to jettison the command module and three Apollo astronauts to safety in an ahort before or during the launch phase of a Saturn V mission. It was the first test of the boost-protective cover subsystem, a contoured shell fitting over the command module and designed to protect the docking mechanism of Lunar Excursion Module (lem) from excessive heating during high temperatures of first-stage flight. It also protected command module windows from exhaust of the launch escape motor, (nasa Release 64-299)
Weber Aircraft Co. of Burbank, Calif., demonstrated the astronaut escape system that it had developed for NASA. System was designed to boost astronauts out of their Gemini spacecraft and open escape parachutes in 10 sec. if a spacecraft malfunction should develop. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 10/30/64) 0 Minuteman II icbm flight test from Cape Kennedy marked second success in as many launchings, usaf said the advanced missile achieved all test objectives. (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced that Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr. (Maj., usaf), would receive the Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1964 for his 34-hour orbital space flight (MA—9) in a Mercury spacecraft May 15-16, 1963. Others to receive Harmon Trophy would be Aviatrix Betty Miller for her solo transpacific flight and Lt. Col. Fitz-hugh Fulton (usaf) for 11,000-lb. payload of B-58 to 85,318-ft. altitude. The Harmon awards for 1963 and 1964 would be presented to recipients in White House ceremony September 14. (NYT, 8/2/64, 78)
Royal Crown Cola Co. president W. H. Clenn announced Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former NASA astronaut, had heen elected a director of the company. (Hammer, NYT, 10/20/64,49)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told group touring Saturn-Apollo industrial facilities at NASA Michoud Operations that astronauts on flight to the moon would not be harmed by radiation from Van Allen belts or solar flares. Project Apollo astronauts would be “safer than test pilots in industry have ever been,” he declared. (Maloney, Houston Post, 5/12/64)
22,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine for Project Apollo service module, to return Apollo astronauts from the moon, was test-fired twice at Las Cruces, N. Mex. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/16/64)
NASA announced the next U.S. manned space flight, Project Gemini GT-3, had been delayed into 1965 because of time lost as result of lightning damage to GT-2 launch vehicle and removal of the rocket from launch pad during hurricanes Cleo and Dora. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said GT—2 unmanned suborbital mission would be made in last quarter of 1964. GT-3, with Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young as crew members, was scheduled for first quarter of 1965. (nasa Release 64-233)
A study at Northrop Space Laboratories was reported as indicating that a fluid-filled “bladder” might offer the best form of protection to astronauts during impact acceleration. Using guinea pigs, the investigators found that the fluid-filled garment seemed to offer the same advantages in minimizing internal organ displacement as did water immersion, but without the risk of generating high hydraulic pressure pulses. (M&R, 12/21/64,21)
Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, msc, announced specific assignments for astronauts. Included in assignments was that of Alan Shepard, Jr., who was named chief of Astronaut Office, taking place of Slayton, who had been acting in the position in. addition to other duties, (msc Roundup, 7/8/64,1)
Research in extrasensory perception as a means of communication with astronauts on space flights was advocated by Harold Sherman, President and Executive Director of ESP Research Associates Foundation, Little Rock, Ark. Speaking in Los Angeles, Sherman said: “It is entirely feasible for the Air Force to experiment in the training of astronauts to transmit and receive thoughts and, in this connection, a battery of ‘sensitives,’ who can communicate with them on a two-way basis while they are traveling through space.” (L. A. Herald-Examiner, 8/6/64)
The newest 14 NASA astronauts began week-long desert survival course in Nevada, under direction of usaf 3637th Survival and Special Training Squadron, Stead afb. (msc Roundup, 8/19/64, 2)
NASA Astronaut Coordinator Donald K. Slayton said in World Book Encyclopedia Science Service feature article that physical training of U.S. astronauts differed greatly from that of his Soviet counterparts. He pointed out: “There is a basic difference in philosophy between Soviet and United States flight crew selection and training. The Soviets select and train bodies as biological specimens for space experiments. The United States selects and trains engineer-pilots as integral operators of spacecraft. Our emphasis is on intelligence and skill as opposed to physical prowess.” (wbe Sci. Serv., Ind. Star, 10/8/64) 7-66—598 0—65-----23
It was reported that former astronaut John Glenn had recovered sufficiently from his inner ear ailment to work in his yard and walk around the neighborhood. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/13/64)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said at dedication of Aerojet General’s Dade County (Fla.) plant: “Leadership in propulsion is . . . synonymous with leadership in space—for both military and non-military purposes. We cannot afford to relax in this area. There is no room for complacency, only room for urgency. . . . “In supporting the thesis that there is real danger from complacency, I list the following points: “1. The USSR is having some economic difficulties, particularly in agriculture. Yet, their space program is expanding. “2. The USSR is far ahead of the United States in manned flight experience. Even their female cosmonaut has flown more orbits than all of our astronauts combined. “3. The USSR has flown their heavier Vostok spacecraft in manned and unmanned flights some 45 times as many earth orbits as we have flown our much smaller Mercury. “4. Practically all of the competences developed for space could be used for aggression as well as for peaceful purposes. “Please do not misunderstand what I am saying. We have made great strides, particularly in the past three years. We are actually ahead of the Soviets in some applications of space, such as communications and meteorology. We are, however, not yet ahead overall. But, our rate of progress is very impressive. “Probably what I am warning about more than anything else is the danger that we might slow down our rate of progress—that we might heed the voices of defeatism and impracticality. This is the one thing we cannot afford. We cannot afford to lose the momentum which stems from a growing program. To slow down is to be content with second place. This we should not do. In fact, we dare not do it.” (Text)
George M. Low, NASA MSC deputy director, said all pilots in Projects Gemini and Apollo would be astronauts trained by NASA for its own manned space projects. Brig. Gen. Bleymaier (usaf), in interviews at Houston, had previously said he thought pilots selected by usaf, whose mol project he heads, would participate in Apollo and Gemini in order to acquire experience for the MOL project. Without NASA training for its astronauts, usaf would have to orbit its men without previous space flight experience or launch its own Gemini training flights. (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/10/64; HoustonChron., 6/10/64)
Titan II rocket booster for first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was turned over to the Government in ceremonies at Martin Co.’s Baltimore plant. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini project manager of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said parachute landing system and spacecraft’s ejection seats were all that remained to 'be flight-qualified, and GT-3 was still planned for first quarter of 1965. Mathews disclosed msc had been experimenting for more than a year with braking rockets to enable manned Gemini spacecraft to land on land instead of water. Para-sail also would be used in such a landing. Among other officials present were GT-3 crewmen, Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/64; Witkin, NYT, 10/29/64)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned Space Flight, afsc, said that usaf would sharply increase its participation in NASA’s manned space flight program; usaf astronauts might be assigned for training as crew members on some Gemini and Apollo flights, and 100 officers would help staff Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc) at msc. [George Low, msc Deputy Diricetor, denied this claim three days later (see June 9).] General Bleymaier disclosed that: (1) flight crews of Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) would come from nine Dyna-Soar pilots now at Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb; (2) usaf would begin discussing specific flights aboard Gemini and Apollo when Sec. of Defense Robert S. McNamara gave approval for production of mol; (3) 17 Titan III—C launches were planned, two allocated to MOL; (4) payloads of 6,000 lbs. would contain scientific research projects, with NASA experiments to be accommodated. (Houston Post, 6/10/64; M&R, 6/15/64, 12)	_
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced $133,358 contract was awarded to AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. of Garrett Corp. for design and production of extravehicular pressurization ventilation system to be used by astronauts in Project Gemini, (upi, San Diego Union, 2/9/64)
Washington Post editorialized: “The failure of the sixth straight Ranger spacecraft hoists aloft the question of whether the United States will accomplish its goal of putting an American on the moon by the decade’s end. . . . “A delay would not simply be a case of a stretchout in which work would continue but at a slower pace. A delay would take much of the binding and motivating tension from Apollo. It would increase costs by underusing men and facilities brought together for a tighter schedule, and it would allow projects and personnel to drift out of the main stream into the eddies of lower priority. A delay also would entail loss of prestige for NASA, for the Administration and for the Nation as well. “No schedule, however, is sacred. If it is determined that the landing of a man on the moon by Jan. 1, 1970, is simply not feasible, or cannot be done with reasonable assurance of safety for the astronauts, then the space agency and the country will have to adjust to this reality, no matter how costly and comfortless it may be. A manned flight to the moon will be no less exciting or valuable for being somewhat delayed.” {Wash. Post, 2/6/64,18)
At AIAA meeting and press conference, Dr. Bernard M. Wagner, Chairman of New York Medical College’s pathology dept., reported Soviets had decided not to send any more women cosmonauts into space. Soviet doctors were not satisfied with performance of Valentina Tereshkova, first woman cosmonaut. She had been too excited during the space flight, as seen by wide variations in her pulse rate, and she did not recover from effects of space flight as quickly as the male cosmonauts. Dr. Wagner visited in Moscow earlier in June at invitation of Prof. Vassily V. Parin, Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology. Dr. Wagner reported Prof. Parin, prominent in Soviet space program, believed artificial gravity would be necessary for astronauts on long space flights, and Soviet space planners were considering possibility of equipping Vostok spacecraft with centrifuge providing periodic spin of Ys earth’s gravity for the crew. Dr. Wagner added that Soviets were preparing for another manned space flight before the end of the year. (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/30/64)
Two-man crew and backup crew for first manned Gemini space flight would be selected in May or June, according to Astronaut Donald K. Slayton at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Flight was expected in late 1964. (Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
At the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Afb, Ohio, four college men completed a test in which they lived on astronaut food for 28 days in a spacecraft type of capsule and 14 more days in hospital isolation. They ate what was called “freeze dehydrated foods” that came in one-in. cubes of beef, chicken, etc. Liquid was distilled water, tea, and fruit juices. No ill effects were apparent. (NYT, 11/27/64, 31)
Dr. Ted Foss, geologist at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, described model of the moon to be constructed at Msc for conducting time and motion studies with astronauts in their space suits. To be covered with slag rocks and ash, the area would be about 340 ft. in diameter and feature several craters about 50 ft. in diameter and about 15 ft. deep, as well as ridges as high as 12 ft. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers would perform basic work on the $50,000 construction job. (Houston Chron., 5/24/ 64; AP, 5/23/64)
American scientists began a two-year experiment at the South Polar ice cap in which they would study cosmic rays of solar and galactic origin. Located at the South Pole so that the same background of stars would be present at all times, experiment was to investigate any regularities in solar outbursts of cosmic rays, as well as reason for cosmic Tays from sun and galaxy. Cosmic rays could be lethal to astronauts. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/10/64)
At American Astronautical Society meeting in New York, msc’s Dr. Charles A. Berry said Apollo astronauts would be kept in isolation longer than earlier space crews, to prevent infection and disease. Families of crewmen would be given intensive medical care to ensure the good health of the astronauts. If one member of the three-man crew becomes ill, the entire crew would be replaced, he said. (Houston Chron., 5/6/64)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever predicted at a Retired Officers’ Luncheon in Washington, D.C., that “the next major breakthrough in international commerce will be low cost, long haul air transportation, which could be derived in large part from prior military experience.” Gen. Schriever said he recognized “that there are problems involved in translating military systems into commercial systems . . . but these problems can be successfully attacked and solved if there is adequate long range planning now.” (Text) White’s extravehicular activity, planned for the second orbit, but delayed until the third to allow astronauts more preparation time, began at 3:45 p.m. edt. The cabin was depressurized; White, equipped with tether carrying oxygen and communication and with chest pack for emergency oxygen supply, emerged from the spacecraft just past Hawaii. Carrying a modified 35 mm. single-lens reflex camera loaded with color film and propelled by a hand-held, oxygen-jet gun, he went three times to the full length of his 25-ft. tether and then returned, using the gun to halt his motion and prevent his hitting the spaceship. When the gas supply in the gun was depleted, he returned to the spacecraft by gently tugging on the tether line. At one point, McDivitt exclaimed:	“You smeared my windshield, you dirty dog.” Flight plans had called for a ten-minute walk in space but White remained outside the spacecraft for 22 min. He experienced no disorientation during his “walk.” When he finally heeded commands to return to the capsule, he had difficulty closing the hatch and decided not to reopen it to jettison excess equipment. “It’s the saddest moment of my life,” White said as he reentered the spacecraft. On June 5 during the 17th orbit, the astronauts spoke to their wives at msc. During the 20th orbit, McDivitt spotted a satellite with “big arms sticking out.” He was unable to identify it positively. On June 6 during the 48th orbit, trouble developed with the spacecraft’s computer and attempts to repair it with the aid of ground instructions failed. The malfunctioning computer made it necessary for GEMINI IV to reenter on a ballistic trajectory. Throughout the flight the daily routine of the astronauts included eating, exercise, and performance of medical and scientific experiments. They alternated rest periods. During 12 of the 62 orbits, when gemini iv passed through a heavy radiation area called the South Atlantic anomaly, Astronauts McDivitt and White switched on radiation and magnetic field measuring devices to take readings inside and outside the spacecraft and near their bodies. They also attempted to improve the knowledge of the earth’s terrain through high-quality color photographs; to measure with instruments the electrostatic June 3; Space walk o{ gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White. charge that accumulates in space and on objects in space; to better define the magnitude and direction of the earth’s geomagnetic field; to test the accuracy of part of a prototype navigational system for future space capsules; to measure heartbeats to try to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on functioning of the heart; to determine the effects of limited exercise in space through use of a tension cord; to take high-resolution photographs of cloud formations over the earth to aid weathermen in improved forecasting from weather satellites; to determine more exactly the elevation of the earth’s atmosphere and its layers through use of filtered film; and to determine if long periods of weightlessness might make the bones brittle. On June 7, to begin reentry, McDivitt fired a 100-lb. thrusting rocket for two minutes, 41 sec.—one second too long—to guide the capsule into an orbit with 156.2-mi (252-km.J apogee and 100-mi. (161-km. perigee. Twelve minutes later, McDivitt fired the retro-rockets; 2% min. later he placed the spacecraft into slow rotation to reduce reentry dispersion. Communications with the spacecraft then ceased for about 4 min. as ion-sheath blackout phase of reentry began. GEMINI iv entered the final stage of reentry at 1:07 p.m. edt when the stabilizing chute emerged and damped the oscillations of the descending craft. The main parachute opened shortly afterward and slowed the spacecraft for its final landing at 1:13 p.m. EDT, about 450 mi. east of Cape Kennedy. The landing was 40 mi. off target because of the one-second error in the firing of the thrusting rockets and one-second delay in the firing of the retrorockets. Fifteen minutes after splashdown, Navy frogmen, lowered into the water by helicopter, placed a flotation collar around the capsule. Before egressing from the spacecraft to be hoisted to helicopter, astronauts took biomedical data on themselves. About 40 min. later, Majors McDivitt and White were landed by helicopter on the flight deck of the'carrier Wasp. They were taken immediately to the ship’s sick bay for postflight examinations. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief Flight Surgeon for the astronauts, said after the examinations:	“We have knocked down an awful lot of straw men. We had been told that we would have an unconscious astronaut after four days of weightlessness. Well, they’re not. We were told that the astronaut would experience vertigo, disorientation when he stepped out of that spaceship. We hit that one over the head.” The most serious problem was fatigue. “Both men were bushed,” said Dr. Berry. Maj. McDivitt had a few flecks of caked blood in his nostrils, caused by the dryness of the mucous membranes from inhaling pure oxygen for so long. X-rays taken of the astronauts’ little fingers and heel bones both before and after the flight to determine if long exposure to weightlessness would cause a substantial loss of calcium were being studied. Commenting on the historical significance of the Gemini flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said the flight had included “at least two world firsts”: a record length for two-man flights and the first time a pilot had maneuvered outside a ship with a propulsion gun, which gave him control over his movements. American astronauts had flown a total of 259 hrs. 34 min. in space; Soviet astronauts had accumulated 507 hrs. and 16 min. (NASA Release 65-158; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 6/4/65, 1,15; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65, A1,A6,A10; Wash. Post, 6/4/65, A1,A7,A8; WSJ, 6/4/65, 4; Clark, NYT, 6/5/65, 1,12; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/65, A3; Wash. Post, 6/5/65, A1.A7; NYT, 6/6/65, 1,70; NYT, 6/7/65, 22C; Wash. Post, 6/7/65, A1,A4,A6; Balt. Sun, 6/7/65; Justice, Wash. Post, 6/ 8/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/8/65; Time, 6/8/65, 20,25,25A; NYT, 6/8/65, 22C; NYT, 6/9/65, 1,22; Lee, Houston Post, 6/9/65; Wash. Post, 6/11/65, Al; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, Al; Wash. Post, 6/15/ 65, Al.)
As part of the ceremonies dedicating the Capt. Theodore C. Freeman Memorial Library of Astronautics at the Houston Baptist College, Faith L. Freeman, lO-yr.-old daughter of the late astronaut, was awarded a scholarship to the college. (Houston Post, 1/22/65; msc Roundup, 2/3/65, 8)
Battelle Memorial Institute reported reasons the sweet potato would be the best vegetable for a space garden: (1) it would yield a large number of calories per pound and would have a high count of vitamin A; (2) its leaves are edible, either cooked or raw; (3) under simulated space conditions, it would grow in 90 to 120 days; (4) it would give off oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide, aiding air conditions inside a spacecraft. The plan, Battelle said, would be to grow the sweet potato in a spacecraft in a soilless culture to provide fresh vegetables for astronauts, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/16/65)
In an interview with Izvestia, one of the two directors of the Soviet space program, the “chief designer,” whose identity had never been revealed, said the voskhod ii program had called for Lt. Col. Leonov to spend “10 minutes outside the cabin” but that he could have stayed much longer. He said the weight and space saved by having two men aboard voskhod ii instead of three men, as on voskhod i, had been used to install a decompression chamber and related equipment. The designer said Leonov’s spacesuit was equipped with “duplicate systems” to ensure a high degree of reliability and that a bellows had been installed to allow bending of the torso, arms, and legs. Izvestia said in another article that Leonov’s spacesuit consisted of five layers: a heat reflecting layer outside; material for strength; airtight material; heat insulating material; and an inside layer containing a ventilation system. The “chief theoretician,” joint director of the Soviet space program, told Izvestia that Col. Leonov’s venture into space had shown that future astronauts might find it easier to work in space than on earth. He said that “we shall yet live to see the day when orbiting platforms appear in space—resembling scientific research institutes in the earth’s upper atmosphere.” The theoretician was also quoted as saying that Leonov’s principal assignment had been to determine man’s reaction to “weightlessness in free space.” He told Tass: “We obtained in practice what we had visualized theoretically before.” (Tanner, NYT, 3/20/65, 1, 3)
Vice President Humphrey and the gemini iv astronauts, Maj. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Maj. Edward H. White II (usaf), won cheers and applause from visitors to the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France. Attendance at U.S. pavilion, which had been poor, picked up appreciably. Also present were nasa Administrator James E.	Webb, and Charles Mathews, manager of the Gemini program. A scheduled formal meeting between the American astronauts and Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, fell through when the Soviets announced that Col. Gagarin would be “too busy.” However, at an official luncheon, Gagarin stopped at White’s table and the two astronauts shook hands and spoke briefly, (ap, NYT, 6/20/65, 38; UPl, Wash. Daily News, 6/19/65; ap, Hudgins, Wash. Post, 6/20/65, A28)
NASA officials released clear, detailed, color and black and white photographs of the gemini vii-vi rendezvous taken by the gemini vi astronauts, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/18/65, El)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that USAF would send 12 f-5a jet fighter aircraft to Vietnam this fall to evaluate the performance of this new multipurpose aircraft under combat conditions. Built by Northrop Corp., the f-5a was a lightweight supersonic aircraft that could carry 6,200 lbs. of bombs, rockets, air-to-air missiles, or other ordnance. With two' 20-mm. cannons mounted in its nose, it could take off fully loaded from unpaved runways. (dod Release 614-65) “Why they would not appear at all, said Scheer. He said no one had cleared such a meeting with him . . . The Russians were angry and left the scene in a huff, and at a news conference later, Sedov made no secfet of the fact that they considered the incident a snub and an affront. “An air of mistrust now prevailed. There was, as Pete Conrad observed later, ‘some real bad feeling around this place.’ “Scheer, trying to right things, sent a letter to Dr. William Pickering, president of the International Astronautical Federation, urging that the astronauts be brought together. . . . “Friday afternoon Cooper and Conrad spoke before a Congress session. . . . “As soon as that meeting was over, the two Americans jumped from the conference stage and headed for the white-uniformed Belyayev . . . Conrad [said] through the Russian’s interpreter ‘Tell him we would like to show them all our pictures. . . . Tell him we’ve got 250 slides and they can see them all. When would they like to see them?’ ” Hicks said Belyayev exchanged his lapel pin with Cooper and Conrad gave his to Belyayev to be delivered to Leonov. Hicks continued: “That night, considerably more progress was made at the Congress’s large banquet. Cooper and Belyayev, strategically seated within talking distance, even went so far as to exchange watches. . . . Finally the astronauts warmed up the cosmonauts from the earlier chill. They ail posed for a four-way handshake photograph. No more fooling around through official channels, drawled Cooper. Why don’t you fellows come up to our place for breakfast tomorrow morning? “The Russians agreed. . . . The talk, through an interpreter, was almost entirely personal and non-technical. . . . Conrad and Leonov exchanged writing pens. All traded autographs and Leonov . . . drew a picture of himself walking in space. . . . “As they departed, the spacemen locked in Kussian-styie bear-hugs. . . . Said one of the Soviet pilots, ‘We are colleagues and we have a full understanding. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad are good boys.’” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/17/65, A10; Hicks, Life, 10/1/65, 113-116)
At a news conference at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini GT—4 spaceflight, Astronaut McDivitt said: “I saw three things that looked to me like they were satellites on the earth. I saw two over the Pacific, I guess. One . . . near Hawaii. ... I saw a white object and it looked like it was cylindrical and it looked to me like there was a white arm sticking out of it. . . . We saw another one at night. It looked like just a pin point of light in the sky. . . . And I saw another one over the western Pacific again just shortly before I got into the sunlight on the windshield. . . . The only one I could even define the shape of at all was the first one and it looked a lot like an upper stage of a booster.” Astronaut White commented: “. . . we were looking to find out: Could man control himself in space? And the answer is yes, man can control himself in space.” McDivitt continued: “The first thing we learned was that the Gemini 4 is a liveable spacecraft for at least four days.” (Transcript; NYT, 6/12/65, 3)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
Gemini V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., together with Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, and Paul P. Haney, MSC Public Affairs Officer, held a news conference at MSC. Both astronauts recommended that in future flights both pilots sleep at the same time; more rehydratable foods be included in the diet; daily inflight exercises to compensate for muscular inactivity of the legs be included; the crew travel without spacesuits for greater comfort and flexibility; and that the training period be less compressed. Cooper and Conrad agreed that stowage had been the main problem throughout the flight. “Any small little item that was misplaced or wasn’t placed in the proper location seemed to multiply,” Cooper said. They had seen “a great many micrometeorites, and one meteorite when it was reentering the atmosphere down below us. And on any night side, during a very short interval of time, you could see micrometeorites reentering.” Dr. Gilruth said he considered both astronauts “very potential candidates” for the first trip to the moon. (Transcript)
President Johnson sent letters to Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn), Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf), and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf), congratulating them on successful completion of the gemini vi and gemini vii space missions and advising them that promotions for new astronauts would be submitted to Congress for confirmation in January. (Pres. Doc., 12/27/65, 606)
A moving model of a proposed lunar exploration vehicle under development by the Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. was demonstrated on two acres of simulated moonscape. The two-section wheeled craft, known as a mobile base simulator, lumbered at five mph around moonlike craters made of cinders and coal dust at the Grumman test field, Calverton, L. I. The Grumman engineer in charge of the project, Edward G. Markow, explained that the aluminum working model, valued at $250,000, was being developed in the hope that NASA officials would buy the project for use possibly by 1975. The exploration craft would have a lunar range of 250 mi. and accommodate two astronauts with 50 lbs. of equipment for perhaps two weeks. It was designed for use with the Saturn V booster. {NYT, 11/30/65, 22)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White, II (Maj., usaf) of the June 3-7 gemim iv flight received usaf astronaut wings from Gen. John P. McConnell, usaf Chief of Staff, in an Air Force ceremony at the Pentagon, x-15 test pilot Joseph H. Engle (Capt., usaf) also received USAF astronaut wings, thus becoming the 12th American to receive the award and the fifth to wear the insignia for suborbital flight. Meanwhile the Senate Armed Services Committee approved President Johnson’s promotion of Astronauts Walter M. Schirra from commander to captain and John W. Young from It. commander to commander. (dod Release 458-65, 7/14/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at a press conference held in conjunction with the NASA University Program Review Conference in Kansas City, Mo., that the space research program would cost $35 billion over a ten-year period. At the end of that time, NASA expected to have accomplished (1) 12 to 15 flights of the Saturn V, (2) 5,000 hrs. of astronaut flight time, and (3) the capability of lifting 240,000 lbs. from the earth and orbiting 90,000 lbs. (Kansas City Times, 3/3/65)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), visited Pope Paul vi at Vatican City and accepted a medal commemorating the Pontiffs October 4 visit to the United Nations. (Reuters, NYT, 10/14/65, 32; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/14/65, A-2)
Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, told a press conference that “there is a question whether astronauts can stand long confinement, let alone weightlessness.” Dr. Gilruth was in Los Angeles to accept the 1964 Spirit of St. Louis Medal from the asme at the Aviation and Space Conference. (Miles, L. A. Times, 3/17/65; naa S&ID Skywriter, 3/19/65, 1)
Christopher C. Kraft, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center director of flight operations, said the three-orbit Gemini gt-3 flight with astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and John W. Young (usn) would be much safer than Project Mercury orbital space flights. The astronauts would not depend solely on the braking rockets to bring them back to earth. They would make maneuvers during the first and third orbits to bring the spacecraft back through the atmosphere even if retrofiring braking rockets failed. Toward the end of the third orbit, near Hawaii, Grissom would fire the rockets for about two minutes, sending the Gemini spacecraft into a 54-mi. orbit which would be a reentry path. Over Los Angeles, the main braking rockets would be fired to drive the spacecraft down to a landing about 70 mi. east of Grand Turk Island in the Atlantic Ocean. Kraft said if the braking rockets did not fire, the gt-3 craft would land about 1,000 mi. due west of Ascension Island. (Galveston News-Tribune, 2/16/65)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that it would take “a great deal of effort over a number of years” for the United States to achieve first place in space and warned it would be “a mistake to believe” that the successful GEMINI iv spaceflight had “overcome a lead of several years” held by the Soviet Union. He said “the most important result” of the GEMINI iv flight might be the condition of the astronauts upon their return, based on the preliminary medical examinations of Astronauts McDivitt and White. The final medical report on the flight and their postflight condition would take about two months. (Text; Clark, NYT, 6/16/65, 13)
Kansas City Star editorial: “In the long book of history, the 20th century is likely to have a place alongside the 15th and 16th centuries that saw historic explorations of the surface of the earth. Today, man is on the edge of the conquest of another world—the world of space. He now possesses the capability of leaving this planet and setting foot on the moon or another body of the solar system. “In fact, it now begins to appear that American astronauts will settle gently onto the surface of the moon in 1969. It will be an exploit that knows no counterpart in more than 4 billion years of earth’s history. . . .”	(Kansas City Star, 9/12/65)
In a memorandum report to President Johnson on Gemini vi NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “This is to report to you that the Titan ii booster which we expected to use on October 25 to launch Gemini 6, carrying astronauts Schirra and Stafford, is now being removed from the launching pad. We have examined carefully the question of whether this booster could be used for the launching of Gemini 7 into a 14-day orbit, and our studies show that the Titan booster which we have especially prepared for Gemini 7 is more suitable. This is the reason for the change from the booster now on the pad to the one especially designed for the Gemini 7 launch. “Also, we have examined a number of ways to speed up the accumulation of the information which the Gemini 6 rendezvous flight was designed to give us. We find that it may be possible to take advantage of the work we have already done in mating the Gemini 6 to its booster and to the launching facility and thus save considerable time in its re-erection. If we can launch Gemini 7 without serious damage to the launching pad, there is some possibility that we could immediately re-erect the Gemini 6 spacecraft and booster and launch it in time to rendezvous with Gemini 7 before the 14-day flight comes to an end.” (Text; Pres. Doc., 11/1/65, 734)
Reports by U.S. astronauts of seeing details on the earth’s surface while orbiting the earth at altitudes of over 100 mi. did not surprise physicists at the U.S. Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Laboratory in Indianapolis, reported the Indianapolis Star. Wind tunnel experiments there had proven that the closer a viewer is to turbulent air, the more it distorts an image: the image wavers in brightness, changes position, and shifts in and out of focus. All these effects diminish contrast—an essential factor in identifying objects in aerial reconnaissance. The effects are reduced and seeing improves as the viewer moves away from the turbulence. (Lewis, Sci. Serv., Indianapolis Star, 7/11/65)
NASA announced plans to install Unified S-Band System equipment at Corpus Christi communications station for use with Apollo spaceflights. With the system, the station would be able to combine in a single two-way transmission all types of communications with the three Apollo astronauts. Seven kinds of communications would be conducted simultaneously, including tracking the spacecraft; commanding its operations and confirming execution of commands; two-way voice conversation; continuous checks on the astronauts’ health; continuous check on the spacecraft and its functions; continuous information from onboard experiments; and television pictures of the astronauts and their exploration of the moon. All communications would be conducted with one 30-ft.-dia. parabolic ground antenna to be constructed at Corpus Christi. (nasa Release 65-250)
Special NASA awards ceremony was held at MSC, with NASA Administrator James E. Webb making the presentations. Rep. Olin Teague, Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also was present for the occasion. NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest honor, was presented to Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, MSC, and to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Command Pilot for GEMINI VI mission. Slayton’s award was for “his outstanding performance in directing NASA flight operations and for his leadership of the continuous and rapid adaptation of NASA’s astronaut training activities to the experience gained from Mercury and Gemini flights. . . .” Schirra’s dsm cited “his courage and judgment in the face of great personal danger, his calm, precise and immediate perception of the situation that confronted him and his accurate and critical decisions that made possible the successful execution of the Gemini VI mission.” This ceremony marked the first time the top NASA medal was presented away from Washington. (With these two presentations, all seven original Mercury astronauts had received the Distinguished Service Medal.) nasa Exceptional Service Medal was presented to the crews of gemini VII (Astronauts Borman and Lovell) and VI (Astronauts Schirra and Stafford); William C. Schneider, Deputy Director of the Gemini Program for Mission Operations, omsf; and John T. Mengel, Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems Directorate, gsfc. Group Achievement Awards were presented to the following groups from the Cape: ksc Launch Operations; ksc Spacecraft Operations; Martin Co. Gemini program group; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Gemini program group; Gemini Launch Vehicle Div., afsc 6555th Aerospace Test Wing: and afetr Test Operations Div. (msc Gemini VII/ Gemini VI Fact Sheet; Exec. Secy., msc Awards Committee; nasa Proj. Off.)
Gemini v backup crew members, civilians Neil Armstrong and Elliot M. See, Jr., began a training exercise in Gulf of Mexico waters designed to teach the astronauts the proper methods to leave the spacecraft after touchdown. Primary crew members Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) and Cdr. Charles Conrad (usn) would take the same training July 21. (ap, Houston Chron., 7/16/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (LCdr., usn) finished the last day of their general debriefing at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (upi, NYT, 9/2/65, 15; Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A14)
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., (LCdr., usn) discussed the GEMINI v spaceflight with the Oba (King) of Benin in his palace in Nigeria. In his luncheon speech, the Oba said: “In this age, astronauts are physically making visits to some sphere in the universe our ancient people thought was possible to visit only in spirit form. . . . Such journeys may prove or disprove such theories that the space is limitless, according to scientists, or that over and above the outer space there is a canopy, according to the saying of our ancient people.” (Louchheim, Wash. Post, 9/29/65, Al)
First Negro to receive usaf astronaut training, Capt. Edward J. Dwight, Jr. (usaf), denied Ebony magazine’s charges that he had been eliminated from selection by the NASA program because of his race. Dwight said the charge “apparently had some information out of context.” A statement released by NASA in response to queries about Dwight said:	“A formal objective rating system based on flight experience, academic background and supervisory ratings was developed and used by a preliminary selection committee in rating the candidates to make sure that the best qualified were selected as finalists to be considered for the 14 available astronaut positions. Of the 136 candidates, 102, including Capt. Dwight, were eliminated by the primary selection committee, leaving a group of 34 finalists of whom the 14 best were chosen. “Selection is made on a best qualified basis without regard to race, religion or sex. “Capt. Dwight did possess the basic qualifications; he did not score sufficiently high to be selected under the rating system.” (upi, NYT, 6/3/65; WSJ, 6/3/65, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/65)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), youngest holder of Air Force astronaut wings, was honored by his hometown of Chapman, Kansas, with a parade. Engle fle>v the x-15 to peak altitude of 282,000 ft. on June 29, qualifying for the astronaut wings, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/7/65, A-2)
Presidential Press Secretary William D. Moyers announced from the Texas White House that the U.S. would launch Gemini 6 and Gemini 7 about 10 days apart and have them rendezvous in space. The double launching would probably take place in January with the two spacecraft scheduled to maneuver within a few feet of each other but without touching. Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) would be in Gemini 6, whose Oct. 25 mission was canceled after an Agena vehicle with which they were to dock exploded in space. In Gemini 7, set for a 14-day orbital journey, would be Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James Lovell (Lcdr., usn). (Pomfret, NYT, 10/29/65, 1; Chapman, Wash. Post, 10/29/65, Al)
NASA absolved Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) of any blame in the 58-mi.-off-target landing of the GEMINI ill spacecraft following the three-orbit flight Mar. 23, according to msc spokesman. The mishap was attributed to the fact that the spacecraft did not develop as much lift as expected. The possibility that Major Grissom might have banked GEMINI in improperly as a result of misunderstanding instructions from ground stations had been investigated, (upi, NYT, 4/21/65, 11, msc gemini iii Fact Sheet)
Subcommittee Chairman Albert Thomas (D-Tex.) and the House Independent Offices Appropriations Subcommittee were highly critical of Astronaut Virgil Grissom’s deviation from flight plan instructions during the GEMINI ill flight and eating a sandwich instead of fasting. According to published reports, one Subcommittee member referred to a “$30 million corned beef sandwich,” and another asked NASA Administrator James E. Webb how he could control a multi-million dollar budget if he could not control two astronauts. (Av. Wk., 4/12/ 65, 25; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/15/65)
An editorial in the Baltimore Sun said: “Yesterday’s Gemini flight is described as ‘historic’ and so it was. So too is each successful new space exploration, launched by whatever country, manned or unmanned. . . . What is happening is that a body of knowledge is being accumulated through increasingly accurate photographs and increasingly sophisticated exercises and experiences on the part of the adventurers of our age, the astronauts. . . .” (Balt. Sun, 3/24/65)
Commencing on the visit to Washington, D.C., by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., the Washington Post wrote: “Colonel Cooper has been through all this before following his 22-orbit flight in May, 1963. The reception this time will be less spectacular. But this does not mean that the astronauts have become passe or that the American people are indifferent to their achievements. Rather it is a reflection of the public’s trust in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s space program. For if the people no longer gawk and shout, they still applaud vigorously, with their hearts as well as their hands, each monumental step in the great venture into space.” (Wash. Post, 9/14/65)
Months-long breathing of pure oxygen at the pressure used in Gemini spacecraft might damage the lungs and interfere with blood cell manufacture in the body, reported Col. Harold V. Ellingson (usaf) at a meeting of the American College of Preventive Medicine in Chicago. For that reason, he said, pure oxygen would not be used in Air Force manned orbiting laboratories in which astronauts would remain in space 30-90 days. Instead a mixture of oxygen and helium was being considered. Colonel Ellingson, Commander of the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks afb, emphasized he was not referring to brief orbital trips such as the Gemini flights, but to missions of one to three months duration. (Lewis, Wash. Post, 10/28/65, G3)
DOD selected the first eight of a planned 20 astronauts for USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program: Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) ; Maj. Albert H. Crews (usaf) ; Lt. John L. Finley (usn) ; Capt. Richard E. Lawyer (usaf) ; Capt. Lachlan Macleay (usaf) ; Capt. F. Gregory Neubeck (usaf) ; Capt. James M. Taylor (usaf) ; and Lt. Richard H. Truly (usn). Formal training would begin at Edwards afb, early next year, (usaf Release)
nasa astronauts gathered at nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center for a debriefing by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr. The meeting was held primarily for the Gemini Vi and vn crews, but other astronauts attended as observers, (ap, NYT, 9/6/65, 6; Wash. Post, 9/5/65, A8)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
Thirteen NASA astronauts left NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for an area near King Salmon afb, Alaska, for a week-long study of a large volcanic ash flow believed to be similar to the surface of the moon. The ash was deposited in 1912 from a volcanic eruption and is the largest flow of its type in the world, (ap, NYT, 6/22/65, 2)
A $3,200,000 contract had been let to the E. A. Hathaway Co. for construction of the new 93,000-sq.-ft. Advanced Flight Simulation Laboratory at NASA Ames Research Center, ARC announced. It would contain the most advanced aircraft simulator known (for supersonic transport studies) ; the most powerful centrifuge yet built (up to 50 times the force of gravity); a mid-course navigation facility where stars and planets could be projected just as they would be seen by astronauts in spaceflight; and a “virtually frictionless” satellite attitude control facility. Total values of these facilities would be $10,068,000. (ARC Release 65-16)
Hughes Space Systems Div. at El Segundo, Calif., signed a contract with NASA to propose designs of a beacon that could be placed on the moon as a guide for safe landing for moonbound Apollo astronauts. The beacon would be landed on the moon with a Surveyor spacecraft, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bui., 2/10/65)
The rendezvous of Geminis 6 and 7 had been scheduled tentatively for the eighth day of Gemini 7’s 14-day endurance flight, revealed Command Pilot Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf) at a news conference held by Gemini vu’s prime and backup astronaut crews at MSC. Gemini 7 would act as a passive target vehicle, but would expend fuel to circularize its 108-mi.-perigee orbit to 161-mi.-perigee orbit and to maneuver into range of Gemini 6’s radar, if necessary. Borman said there would be no Eva on Gemini vii because the crew would be wearing new lightweight spacesuits unsuitable for work in the vacuum of space; he was unaware of any plans for Eva on Gemini VI. During ten days of the mission, the Gemini vii crew would fly in USAF-issue longjohn underwear. Pilot James Lovell (Cdr., usn) said that training for Gemini vii had emphasized stowage reviews because of the serious stowage problems encountered by Astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on their eight-day GEMINI v flight August 19. (Transcript; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/2/65, A3)
Robert L. Sohn, scientist at Space Technology Laboratories, proposed to use the gravity field of Venus as a brake for manned spacecraft returning from Mars. “We don’t expect to have boosters powerful enough to launch spacecraft of the 1970s that can carry extra propulsion to brake reentry speeds. . . . The landing corridor will be so narrow that a small fractional error in navigation would send the spacecraft into an eternal orbit around the sun.” He said traveling near Venus on the return journey from Mars would slow a spacecraft as it passed through the Venutian gravity field. Then, with some midcourse maneuvering and navigation, the astronaut could return to earth and reenter earth’s atmosphere with greater margin of error. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 1/17/65)
Announcement was made at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) had been selected for the first Gemini docking and rendezvous mission, scheduled for launch “the first quarter of 1966.” Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John Young (Cdr., usn) would be the backup crew. (Transcript)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) qualified for the military rating of astronaut by piloting the x-15 No. 3 research aircraft to an altitude of 280,600 ft. at a maximum speed of 3,432 mph (mach 4.94). By exceeding 264,000	ft. (50 mi.) Engle, 32, met the USAF astronaut requirements. Purpose of the flight was to use a scanning device to obtain measurements of the earth’s horizon. The measurements would be used to establish the design criteria for navigational systems for future spacecraft. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; nasa Release 65-201; X—15 Flight Log)
The John Young Award, a medal specially struck by the citizens of Orlando, Fla., was presented to the astronaut as a highlight of the John Young Day celebration. The medal would be used in future years to honor Orlando residents for outstanding achievements, but would not necessarily be awarded annually. (Orl. Sent., 4/18/65)
Gemini gt-3 Astronauts Maj. Virgil I. Grissom and LCdr. John W. Young were given traditional heroes’ welcome from New Yorkers at a parade given in their honor. Honored with the astronauts was Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Associate Administrator of NASA. They were met by Mayor Wagner and the city’s official greeter, Commissioner Richard C. Patterson of the Department of Public Events. Mayor Wagner presented gold keys to the city to the astronauts and Dr. Seamans at a ceremony at City Hall. He also presented the city’s Gold Medal of Honor to Major Grissom and Dr. Seamans and the Silver Medal of Honor to Commander Young. At the United Nations, Secretary General U Thant presented medals and two autograph sets of U. N. outer space commemorative stamps to the astronauts. (Sibley, NYT, 3/29/65, 36; Talese. NYT, 3/20/65, 1: Orl. Sent., 3/30/65)	'
At Purdue Univ., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed in a speech nasa’s emphasis on man’s part in future planned space experiments:	“The role of man in space is basic to any discussion of our planned space experiments. . . . We have always recognized his inherent characteristics as a sensor, manipulator, evaluator and investigator. “As a sensor, man adds little to automatic equipment in space— sometimes nothing at all. . . . instruments can measure . . . phenomena that man cannot perceive at all. “But instruments are limited by the knowledge we now have on earth; they cannot cope with the unexpected or the unknown. Man, on the other hand, can operate in any unprogrammed situation and reap full benefits of the true objective of manned operations. He can explore the unknown. “The second function of man in space is manipulation. Gus Grissom demonstrated superbly last month that a man can operate the spacecraft controls for delicate maneuvering. . . . “In the conduct of space research also, man as a manipulator can probe into his environment. He can make use of motor responses and verbal skills to carry out procedures and to assemble, operate and repair equipment. . . . “With the capacity to evaluate, man achieves a substantial degree of self-reliance in controlling what he perceives and how he reacts. When a man remembers, analyzes, compares, and induces—using a solid foundation of knowledge—he has improved the degree to which meaningful data can be translated into useful knowledge. . . . “The most advanced role of man in space is that of an investigator who responds creatively to unexpected situations. He is able to postulate theories and hypotheses, and to devise and use systematic measurements. In this role, the astronaut is a full-fledged scientist.” (Text)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
In a White House ceremony, President Johnson conferred Exceptional Service Medals on GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Charles Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts. The President announced that military promotions for the astronauts would be submitted to the Senate immediately. (Richard, Wash. Post, 9/15/65, A3) Following the ceremony, Vice President Hubert Humphrey accompanied the astronauts, their families, and Dr. Berry to the National Academy of Sciences. Humphrey told the Academy: “The achievements of our astronauts are not just the achievements of two men. They are the achievements of family, country and of a society. . . . “This is the best example of cooperation between Government and industry, between public and private, that I know in this nation, and might I add, that it is an example that should be emulated by many others in many other endeavors in this country. “But our space program ... is more than national. It would be well enough if it were only national, but it is more than that. It is truly international. And I want ... to stress our space program’s potential as an arm of our foreign policy, of our international relations, and particularly of our peace policy, because this Government has but one objective in the world: a just, honorable and enduring peace. . . .” Astronaut Cooper summarized some of the things that man could do in space: “. . . we again showed that man can do a great deal of geological observations while in space. ... I think it is very significant that although you pass across some [geological formations] rather rapidly you still are able to . . . observe them and you are very capable of photographing them in great detail. “. . . man is very capable of doing oceanographic observations. We have noted that you can detect a great deal of detail as to the depths of water, as to the currents of running water, and even to wind patterns that run on the waters, the wave patterns caused by the wind. “. . . man could do a great deal of weather observations, both in real time and photographically. And we . . . were able to pinpoint one tropical storm in between some of the planned observations, and apparently that was very accurate pinpointing of its position. “We determined in our discussions later with the Weather Bureau people, that for future use ... we could get much greater accuracy even on pinpointing these by the use of our platform combination and taking angles to a great deal more accuracy, rather than just estimations of the angular distance and locations. “We found that you could do a great deal of visual observations of the phenomena around the earth ... we picked up ship wakes, several hundred miles away of . . . the contrast of the white wake against the blue background in very clear weather areas. . . .” Conrad revealed that photographs taken during the Gemini v mission at the request of the Mexican government, had located volcanoes in Mexico that “the Mexicans didn’t know they had. . . .” He also said: “I think a system that has been left out and nobody has talked about is our environmental control system, which performed in a most outstanding manner for eight days. We had probably the nicest, freshest air that anybody could want to breathe, and we had an unusual first in the space business: most environmental control systems had been loaded down and pilot after pilot came back and said they were too warm, and we fought and fought it, and at McDonnell, to have a little change made because of some of the problems of heat exchange between the inlet and outlet pipes. It turned out that we were too cold. “With two tubes running, we were probably the first ones to shut the cabin heat exchanger down and run everything as hot as we could get it in there. We were just right. And the thing that most surprised us on opening the hatch on landing, we couldn’t tell the difference between inside and out, and that is a monumental job for that small system.” Dr. Berry concluded the program by presenting a review of the medical data received from the gemini v mission. The astronauts’ party then proceeded to the Capitol where Vice President Humphrey presented them to the Senate and then to the House. Cooper told the House: “We set out with our prime objective on Gemini 5 to fly 8 days. We were to fly this 8 days primarily to show that man, with all the various equipment on board, and the machines, could safely and very functionally do this 8-day mission with no adverse effects. We were entirely successful in this. . . .” Conrad explained: “Gemini 5 was a significant advance in the whole program in that we flew the first all-out spacecraft. We would not have been able to go without the fuel cells for 8 days. This was the first time they were flown. We had the first radars from which we got some very excellent data to enable the GT-6 to continue with their present rendezvous plans. It was the first time that the cryogenic storage of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been run that long in space. . . .” Dr. Berry told the Senate: “We are conducting a program such as this [Gemini program] ... to make man a vital part of such a research effort and to show the facility that man has to gain scientific information using vehicles such as we are able to build in this country. . . . “I think I can report, so far as information has been obtained in this country to date and at the moment, that we are the only ones who have that sort of information for the duration of which we are speaking. We can confidently say that man has been able to perform very well up to 4 days in a weightless state earlier, and on this mission 8 days in a weightless state. He has then been able to re-adapt back to a 1-G environment. We have living proof of that.” (Texts; CR, 9/14/65, 22924-22927; nas-nrc News Report, 9/65, 1-2)
Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of nasa Manned Space Flight Field Center Development, told Theodore von Karman Memorial Seminar in Los Angeles that solutions to air and water pollution “could very well develop out of the research now being undertaken to develop self-sustaining life support systems for astronauts on missions of long duration.” (West, L.A. Times, 5/13/65)
Paraglider, in its first successful manned free flight, demonstrated it could guide a spacecraft to preselected landing site. Test pilot Donald F.	McCusker landed a Gemini-type test craft at Edwards afb, following a four-and-one-half-minute flight suspended beneath the wing. He put the previously-inflated paraglider and simulated spacecraft through a series of turn and pitch maneuvers enroute to his landing, after being towed aloft by helicopter and dropped at approximate 8,000-ft. altitude. In actual spacecraft recovery, the paraglider would be stored in a ten-cubic-foot canister onboard the spacecraft. After reentry when the vehicle would be slowed by the earth’s atmosphere and parachute drogue, the paraglider would be deployed to its full size—31 ft. long with a 31-ft. span—using an onboard nitrogen supply. The astronaut would control his glide through an onboard flight-control system. North American Aviation, Inc., was conducting the paraglider program for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, studying the feasibility of a controlled earth landing system, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 9/3/65, 1)
Gemini vii would be launched Dec. 4 and Gemini vi Dec. 13 in a combination long-duration, rendezvous mission, NASA announced. Astronaut Frank Borman (l/c, usaf) would be command pilot and Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), pilot, on a 14-day mission to determine the effects of long-duration spaceflight on man; 20 scientific, medical, and technological experiments would be performed. Astronauts Edward H. White ii (l/c, usaf), and Michael Collins (Maj., usaf) would be Gemini vii’s backup crew. Gemini vi mission would be nearly identical to the original rendezvous flight postponed October 25 when the Agena Target Vehicle failed to achieve orbit, and would demonstrate rendezvous of two vehicles in space. Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Pilot Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) would maneuver the Gemini 6 spacecraft within close proximity of Gemini 7 during the fourth revolution and station-keep for a period of time, but would not dock. Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (l/c, usaf) and John W. Young (Cdr., usn) would be Gemini Vi’s backup crew, (nasa Release 65-347; UPl, NYT, 11/10/ 65)
United Airlines announced that fog-dispersal plans involving aerial seeding of clouds were being discussed in nine cities in addition to those where the technique had already been successful. United had conducted successful seeding operations last winter using light planes to drop ice pellets into the top layers of super-cooled fog. The airline estimated that the fog-abatement program had permitted 135 of its flights, carrying 3,200 passengers, to operate at airports that otherwise would have been closed, (ap, NYT, 8/21/65, 48) August 21-29; CE.MiNi v launch (left), and Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and L- Gordon Cooper, Jr., onboard U.S.S. Lake Champlain after eight-day mission and recovery (above). First stage of the booster burned for 156.8 sec. Second stage then separated, burned for 179.6 sec. Traveling at 17,605 mph. 7,947-lb. Gemini v was inserted into orbit: apogee. 215.4 mi. (347.4 km.); perigee, 100 mi. (161.3 km.); period, 89.58 min.; inclination to the equator, 32.6°. Fifty-six minutes after liftoff, astronauts fired thruster rockets to raise the perigee to 106 mi. (179.9 km.) in preparation for rendezvous with Rep, a practice maneuver to prepare for Gemini 6’s rendezvous in orbit with an Agena stage. At beginning of 2nd orbit, astronauts ejected Rep from the adapter section behind the spacecraft. Rep moved away at five miles per hour. About two hours after insertion of gemini v into orbit, oxygen pressure for the new fuel cell dropped from 800 to 60 lbs. psi because of a failure in the heater element circuitry. This pressure-drop severely reduced the fuel cell’s output of electrical power. The Rep experiment was abandoned and there was some apprehension as to whether the flight could continue. At 27 hrs, into the flight. Cooper and Conrad successfully locked their spacecraft radar on a spare Rep transponder mounted on a tower at NASA Merritt Island Launch Area during a six-minute pass. Oxygen pressure began building up in the fuel-cell system and hopes of completing the mission were raised. On Aug. 23, as gemini v made its 32nd revolution around the earth, the spacecraft began a series of maneuvers to rendezvous with a simulated Agena upper stage in lieu of the Rep experiment. By the 34th orbit Gemini v was only 16 mi. behind the simulated Agena, very close to the planned 15-mi. separation NASA hoped to have on GEMINI VI prior to final closing and docking maneuver. Last maneuver was not attempted because of the need to conserve fuel on GEMINI V. On Aug. 24, Astronauts Cooper and Conrad twice spotted objects on the ground; they observed a Minuteman icbm launch from Vanden-berg afb, and tracked and photographed it; they sighted a huge checkerboard design laid out on the ground near Laredo, Tex., and reported direction in the which arrows in the center of the blocks were pointed. During the flight, the astronauts both remained in good spirits. Sixteen of the planned seventeen experiments were conducted. Despite the heavy work schedule, Cooper and Conrad each slept about five hours a day. The astronauts ate about 2,000 calories of food a day, less than the 2,900 calories prescribed for the mission, and each drank six pounds of water daily. Aug. 27 saw problems with the steady accumulation of water in the fuel cell, which threatened to exceed water-storage capacity; faulty attitude and maneuvering thrusters; and the boiling off of hydrogen gas which caused the spacecraft to roll. On Aug. 28, the fuel cell and the left thruster were functioning well. Conrad reported seeing “a carrier and a destroyer steaming right into Jacksonville”; it was actually a tug pulling a large barge. On Aug. 29 Cooper and Conrad talked via radio with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), in Sealab II on the floor of the Pacific off La Jolla, Calif. Approach of Hurricane Betsy from the coast -of South America forced NASA officials to order GEMINI V to land one revolution early. Two more of gemini v’s thrusters froze, but there was still sufficient steering power to correct minor variations. To begin reentry, the astronauts fired four braking rockets as the spacecraft passed 700 mi. north of Hawaii. Reentry was normal. gemini v splashed down into the Atlantic at 8:56 a.m. edt, 600 mi. east of Jacksonville—90 mi. off target. A human error in computing the elapsed time of flight caused the target error. Assisted from the capsule by Navy frogmen 45 min. after splashdown, the astronauts were taken by helicopter to U.S.S. Lake Champlain for medical debriefing. (nasa Release 65-262; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 8/22/65, 1, 72, 73, El; 8/23/65, 1, 16; 8/24/65, 1, 16; 8/25/65, 1, 24; 8/26/65, 1, 15; 8/27/65, 1, 12; 8/29/65, 1, 68, 69 ; 8/30/65, 1, 16, 17; Wash. Post, 8/22/65, 1, 34; 8/23/65, 1, 3; 8/24/65, 1, 6; 8/25/65, 1, 10, 24; 8/26/65, 11; 8/27/65, 1, 6, 7; 8/28/65, 1, 7; 8/29/65, 1, 8, 10; 8/30/65, 1, 9, 11; WSJ, 8/23/65, 1; 8/24/65, 1; 8/27/65, 1; 8/30/65, 1; Av. Wk„ 8/30/65, 24^28)
Rep. Oren Harris (D-Ark.), in France for the International Air Show, endorsed the idea of an international exhibition at Dulles International Airport in 1966. Harris, who headed the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce which would handle any American counterpart of the Paris show, made his statement after comment by American aircraft builders participating at Le Bourget that the U.S. had let the Soviet Union “steal the show.” During the first days of the exposition, the Russians had displayed the prototype of a 720-passenger commercial aircraft to be ready in two years. Also, Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, was on hand. The U.S. had recovered some lost ground during the final weekend by flying in Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Astronauts Edward White II (Maj., usaf) and James McDivitt (Maj., usaf). American jets had also put on spectacular acrobatic demonstrations. Rep. Harris said the project had been discussed at the White House but that further studies by the FAA and the Budget Bureau would be necessary, (upi, Bruns, Wash. Post, 6/22/65)
Lt. Frank K. Ellis (usn), who had lost his lower legs in an aircraft crash, was advised that the Navy was considering his application to become an astronaut. “The only difference between me and any normal man,” he said, “is running and jumping ability. There is no change in my flying ability . . . I’ve wanted to be an astronaut ever since I first heard the word. That field is moving more and more into actual controlled flying. I’m a fly boy. Count me in.” (ap, NYT, 10/30/65, 28C)
Gemini vi Astronauts Schirra and Stafford were “very healthy,” reported Dr. Howard Minners at the conclusion of their post-flight physical examination aboard the carrier Wasp, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (LCdr., usn) would undergo intensive debriefing and medical tests for 11 days following their spaceflight, NASA announced. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: “Producing scientific and technical information is the purpose of the flight. This information is vital in determining the effects of long-duration flight on the human system and in proving out flight systems for future flights.” (NASA Release 65-273)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s Public Affairs Officer, Paul Haney, announced that daily newspapers might have VoAit. interviews with the crew of the GT^l flight on the same basis as television networks and wire news services. Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would spend two full days in personal interviews at MSC early in May. There would be a mass press conference for all news media in Washington, D.C., on April 30. Without such an arrangement, the only newspapers that would have had personal interviews would be those that subscribed to the service that paid astronauts for their stories. (Houston Post, 4/23/65)
The Soviet Union’s apparent effort to penetrate the world commercial aircraft market was reported by Evert Clark in the New York Times. He said the U.S.S.R. had formed a new organization called Aviaexport to direct commercial sales. It was expected to pick satellite countries as its first target, then so-called “dependent” nations, and eventually the Western countries. Showing of the Antonov 22 700-passenger aircraft and a model of a supersonic airliner scheduled to begin test flights in 1968 had enabled the Soviet Union to dominate the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) until the arrival of Vice President Humphrey and Astronauts White and McDivitt. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/65, 30)' During week of July 4: Ambassador Tran Thien Khiem, South Viet Nam, visited NASA Langley Research Center. (Langley Researcher, 7/16/65, 8)
A mouse-size “algatron,” life-support system designed to make outer space habitable for astronauts on prolonged missions, was demonstrated by Univ. of California scientists Dr. William J. Oswald and Dr. Clarence G. Golueke. In the system bacteria break down animal wastes, algae live off the result, and emit oxygen while absorbing carbon dioxide. According to the scientists’ report, the algatron, in which a mouse lived for six weeks and could have stayed indefinitely, would weigh about 1,000 lbs. in a man-sized version. (Wash. Post, 5/14/65)
freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft, flown by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., USN), on May 5, 1961, was put on exhibit at the Science Museum in London. (Reuters, Boston Globe, 9/17/65)
Addressing the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “I would like to acknowledge the debt that NASA owes to the armed forces for early and continuing work that has contributed to some of our most successful space projects. As you know, NASA works closely with the Air Force in the development of launch vehicles and in the general technology of space flight. . . . “As an example—among many—of cooperative nasa-dod activities: on January 1, NASA transferred control of its operating SYNCOM II and syncom in communications satellites to the Department of Defense. . . . “When the great dod missile site construction program—which ran at one time to $2.8 billion a year—subsided, the Corps of Engineers brought its tremendous engineering capability to the construction of NASA facilities. As the Corps moved toward completion of its work for NASA, its abilities will have been enhanced by the experience of building these great new national resources. The Corps, with new skills, will be able to move to new national requirements with assurance that it has performed extraordinarily well in engineering fields never before attempted. “Today there are detailed to NASA 254 active duty military personnel. Five of our astronauts are graduates of this great Academy. Nothing could be more fitting. For the debt modern American science and technology owes to West Point is too large to be repaid. It can visibly be traced back to Sylvanus Thayer who not only is the father of this Academy but who had a tremendous influence for half a century in the field of technical and scientific education throughout the United States.” (Text)
GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., arrived in Athens with their wives and children at the start of a six-nation goodwill tour and were greeted with cheers from the crowd. The astronauts would attend the International Astronautical Federation Congress which opened Sept. 13. (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/16/65)
Cape Kennedy and Moscow’s Red Square were linked in a British television program, “East Meets West,” marking U.S. and Soviet space achievements. First part of the program showed the triumphant return to Moscow of Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Aleksey Leonov. Then the scene switched to Cape Kennedy to show preparadons for the gt-3 flight of Astronauts Virgil Grissom and John Young. Both parts were screened "live”—the Moscow scenes via Eurovision and the Cape Kennedy one via comm unications satellite. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3, 2-1/65! starch 24: tiAVRKK IX photograph of moon, 38.fi seconds before impact and 58 miles above lunar surface. March 24; After transmitting 5.814 close-up lunar pictures to earth, ranger ix. traveling at 5.677 mph, imparted the moon at 0:08 a.m. EST at 12.0° south latitude and 2.-10 west longitude in the crater Alphonsus. The 10-ft,, 800-lb. spacecraft, last in the Ranger series, was only four miles off Larget. NASA had made real-time TV coverage available and the three major networks broadcast “live7’ pictures during the last ten minutes of ranger tx’s flight. First pictures, taken as the photographic probe was 1.300 mi. from the moon, had about the same degree of detail as telescopic views from earth. Those taken a few seconds before impact defined objects as small as 10 in, across, including close-ups of canal-like rilles on the floor of the crater and dimple-like depressions at points along the rilles. Photographs shown on television were taken by the “B” camera, one of two wide-angle cameras used. Four narrow-angle cameras took other shots. Pictures were received on 85-ft. antennas at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station in the Mojave Desert and recorded on both 35mm film and magnetic tape for detailed analysis. Simultaneously signals were relayed by microwave to the JPL laboratory in Pasadena where an electronic scan converter “translated” electronic impulses from the 1,152-lines-per-picture of the ranger IX signal system to the standard 500 lines of commercial television. The Ranger program had begun inauspiciously in 1961 with a series of failures and near-misses. Rangers 1 and 2 had been designed to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle but were not injected into the desired orbit, ranger iii, iv, and v were to rough-land a seismometer package on the moon to record moon quakes, and to transmit closeup photos of the moon to earth by radio. None of the missions was successful, ranger VI, first of the reworked and redesigned spacecraft, impacted within 17 mi. of its point of aim—but its television system failed. On July 31, 1964, ranger vii successfully relayed to earth 4,316 high-quality close-up photos of the lunar surface, ranger viii, launched on Feb. 20, 1965, transmitted 7,137 pictures. Total number of photographs from ranger vii, viii, and ix was 17,267. (nasa Release 65-96; Sullivan, NYT, 3/22/65, 1; ap, Dighton, Wash. Post, 3/25/65, Al, A12, A16; Hill, NYT, 3/25/65, 1, 23; nasa Proj. Off.)
At a news conference in Washington, D.C., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said that although “extravehicular activity” was not planned for Gemini astronauts until GT-5, “we are working hard at trying to qualify the space suit and the hatch itself to see whether we can accelerate that date.” If their spacesuits and the spacecraft’s hatch passed tests in time, Astronaut Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would lean halfway out of the capsule for perhaps 15 min. on flight GT-4, scheduled for early June. He and Astronaut James A. McDivitt would attempt to orbit the earth 63 times in 98 hours, taking off from Cape Kennedy and landing in the Atlantic near Grand Turk Island. Maj. White and Maj. McDivitt appeared at the news conference with their backup crew—Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), and Maj. Frank Borman (usaf). (Transcript)
Reported that NASA Administrator James E. Webb had ruled against a protest by a group of nasa astronauts of the NASA decision to limit the first manned Gemini flight to three orbits. The astronauts had requested that the CT-3 flight should be “open-end,” leaving it to the astronauts as to whether they should go for three or even 30 orbits. (Macomber, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 1/13/65)
“Should the MOL blueprint as envisioned by the Air Force’s Systems Command be approved by Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara, the Navy conceivably could be the first to use this earth-orbiting station as a new technique for charting ship movements on all the oceans of the world,” wrote Frank Macomber in the San Diego Union. Macomber envisioned “two Navy astronauts . . . spinning around the earth as early as 1968 in a 10-foot diameter, 25-foot long orbital laboratory—about the size of a small house trailer filled with electronic detection gear . . (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 7/25/65, 13)
New York World’s Fair opened for its second season. It featured NASADOD U.S. Space Park, containing two and one half acres of full-scale rockets and spacecraft. Among the exhibits were a full-scale Gemini model, an X-15 model, full-scale reproductions of Tiros, Nimbus, Relay, Telstar, and Syncom satellites, and aurora 7 Mercury spacecraft. An honorary astronaut card signed by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn), the first American in space, and Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf), the first astronaut to make two trips into space, was available at the U.S. Space Park to young visitors taking a ride in the full-scale animated Mercury spacecraft on display there. (Press Release)
The Washington Post editorialized: “Decision of the Gemini-5 space flight commanders to try for the scheduled eight-day voyage, despite the power shortages that threatened the exploit during the first two days is one that the whole country will greet with delight. The astronauts have accomplished no mean feat already, but the execution of the intended plan will prove the sophistication of the American space engineers. . . . “The power difficulties on Gemini-5 have, in a curious way, reminded us that these incredible penetrations of space are not yet so commonplace as to he devoid of risk and misadvanture. A succession of triumphant experiments by Americans and Russians have made it look easy. The powerpack troubles, like the dips and bobs and pauses of gifted high-wire performers, have succeeded in reminding the ‘audience’ that the whole act is indeed very difficult and dangerous. We may have forgotten it for a moment, but now we are convinced.” (Wash. Post, 8/24/65, A12)
ComSatCorp, in a letter to the FCC, outlined its position regarding ITT World Communications, Inc.’s request to use EARLY BIRD I satellite for live television coverage of the recovery of the Gemini 5 astronauts. George P. Sampson, ComSatCorp’s Vice President of Operations, said that although itt and ComSatCorp had agreed that technical and operational aspects of the shipboard station would be subject to ComSatCorp’s control, ComSatCorp took “firm exception” to itt’s insistence that the fcc designate ITT as the responsible operating entity. Sampson noted the Fee’s May 12 decision giving ComSatCorp sole responsibility for operation of the initial terminal stations for the proposed global satellite system and said: “Despite our fundamental concern with the proposal, ComSat Corp is willing to give consideration to a joint application for the operation of the station.” (ap, Wash. Post, 7/23/65)
Laboratory research prompted by weight losses of American and Russian spacement on orbital flights had indicated a relationship between a person’s water-drinking habits, working ability, and real or imagined stresses and strains, reported William J. Perkinson in the Washington Evening Star. American astronauts had lost between three and five percent of their body weight in orbital flights; Russian cosmonauts had lost less—between one and three percent—partly because they perspired less in the shirt-sleeve environments of Soviet spacecraft than Americans did in spacesuits. One NASA report on hypohydration— condition when a person drinks too little water—noted a 5% weight loss due to water imbalance was tolerable, but a 10% loss could cause gross mental and physical deterioration. (Perkinson, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, B10)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., left with their wives on a six-nation goodwill tour arranged by President Johnson to demonstrate the U.S.’ peaceful intentions in space. They would visit Greece, Turkey, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Kenya, Nigeria, and the Canary Islands. At a State Department luncheon prior to departure, Cooper told the audience, which included ambassadors from the six countries he and Conrad would visit, that from the GEMINI V cockpit “you don’t see any of the combat, you don’t see any of the fighting and bickering, the world looks like a very peaceful place.” (vpi, NYT, 9/16/65, 27)
Launch of Gemini VI from Eastern Test Range on a two-day mission no later than Oct. 25 was announced by NASA. It would be man’s first attempt to rendezvous and dock with an orbiting spacecraft. Pilots for Gemini VI were Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf). Backup pilots were Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John W. Young (Cdr., USN). This would be Schirra’s second space flight. His first was Oct. 3, 1962, a six-orbit flight in Mercury spacecraft SIGMA vi (nasa Release 65-307)
. . . The Biosatellite Program is a second-generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and development. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to test critically major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will help delineate hazards to astronauts and assist in determining and defining effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights may involve, for example, physiological changes such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. Also, the effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown. “Twenty experiments have been selected for flight to study the effects of weightlessness and decreased gravity during 3- to 30-day orbital periods. The experiments include a wide variety of plants and animals from single-cell organisms to higher plants and animals. The effects of weightlessness will be studied on the primate, especially the central nervous, the cardiovascular, and the skeletal systems during orbits of 30 days’ duration. “Experiments have been selected to study the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation to determine if there are any antagonistic or synergistic genetic or somatic effects on various organisms. “Experiments are included to study the effects of the unique environment of the Earth-orbiting satellite and removal from the Earth’s rotation in relation to biological rhythms of plants and animals. . . (Text) Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, outlining progress made toward the objective of solar system exploration, said:	“ ... It would appear . . . that enough experience and know-how has been accumulated to make the move to a five-ton Voyager spacecraft on the Saturn IB Centaur launch vehicle a reasonable next step in the unmanned exploration of the solar system. There is no question but that the size and weight of Voyager, plus the increased demands that will be placed upon it, will make the development of the Voyager a complex and difficult undertaking. But certainly, the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory and Mariner have shown us that we can deal successfully with complexity. As a matter of fact, the increased weight and size may afford considerable relief from the need to tailor every last function to a gnat’s eyebrow in order to achieve the intended mission, as has been the case hitherto. . . .” Dr. Newell said that reliability was probably the most difficult problem for deep-space long-duration missions and that “. . . the development of adequate spacecraft systems will not be the problem. The most serious threat to long life operation will lie in the potential random failure of one or more [spacecraft] components.” He added that this would probably be an ever-decreasing problem as we gained experience with launch vehicles and that “. . . launch vehicle reliability is far less a difficult program than that of long spacecraft lifetime for very deep-space missions.” In conclusion, Dr. Newell said:	"... Nevertheless, the time has arrived when many thoughtful people urge a vigorous program of solar system exploration. The President has in his Fiscal Year 1966 budget request included funds to support initial conceptual and design studies of a Voyager spacecraft. Funds are also included for the development of a launch vehicle consisting of the Saturn IB plus the Centaur. Final decision as to whether to move ahead with the development of the Voyager spacecraft would come a little over a year from now.” (Text) Missiles and Rockets reported that scientists at the Symposium had differing opinions on Mars goals. Gilbert V. Levin of Hazleton Laboratories opposed the 1971 scheduled landing of the Voyager:	“. . . although we insist that Mars should not be contaminated by terrestrial life before we search for Martian life, we fail to recognize that this is tantamount to saying that the U.S. must get there first, because the U.S. appears to be the only nation willing and able to sterilize its spacecraft. “I’m all for Voyager, but an initial step in the Voyager program should be some early landers at the earliest opportunities. We should go ahead and devote efforts to develop a program to land on Mars in 1969.” Temple Neumann, Automated Biological Laboratory program engineer with Philco’s Aeronutronic Div., agreed with Levin:	“If the planetary biological exploration task is to be performed in a sound scientific manner, the U.S. must do it—first.” Lawrence B. Hall, NASA Special Assistant for Planetary Quarantine, re-emphasized “the disastrous effects that an unsterilized spacecraft could have on Mars. ... If a single micro-organism should land on Mars and have a replication time of 30 days, it could grow to the bacterial population of Earth in eight years. This could not only compete with Martian life but could result in drastic changes in the geochemical and atmospheric characteristics of the planet.” JPL’s Gerald A. Soffen said that “since the decision between Mariner landers and Voyager missions has not been made yet, scientific experimenters have to think in terms both of small payloads and large ones. Numerous small missions would provide a good opportunity to perform experiments in different locations and during different planetary seasons.” Bruce C. Murray, of Cal Tech, said:	“. . . finding the right location, getting there, and interpreting the biological experiment results in a way that would indicate definitively whether life was or was not present would call for at least 100 times more photography than was currently assumed.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (usn), said he probably would be assigned as command pilot to the sixth Gemini flight, which would be the first U.S. attempt to meet and join two vehicles in space. (ap, Balt. Sun, 2/2/65)
Gemini V launch counted down to T-10 min. before it was canceled and reset for Aug. 21. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr., (Lcdr., usn) were disappointed, but took the delay in stride. Cooper commented: “. . . you promised a launch today and not a wet mock.” Five hours before the scheduled launch, computer studies suggested that the liquid hydrogen in the spacecraft’s fuel cells was boiling off too quickly. Engineers’ attempts to force additional liquid hydrogen into the fuel cells succeeded only in hastening the escape of hydrogen gas. Finally, a colder liquid hydrogen was used with success. Ten minutes before lift-off, apparent troubles with a telemetry programer caused another hold in the countdown. During a thunderstorm, a lightning-induced power surge affected the electrical instruments. At 5:00 p.m., edt, as NASA officials were opening a press conference, they were informed that a fire had broken out in a communications cable linking the Gemini v launch complex with mission control center. The officials said that there was a “very good possibility” that Gemini 5 could be launched on Aug. 21, but that no definite date could be set until a partial countdown was held the next day to determine the damage caused by the power surge and the cable fire. (Clark, NYT, 8/20/65, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 8/20/65; A1; WSJ, 8/20/65, 1)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that the time had come for the Administration to decide on what goals it wanted to set for the period after landing astronauts on the moon. The U.S. must use the tremendous space capability it had carefully built up since sputnik I, he said, “or see its value erode. If we do not use what we have created, continued expansion of the Soviet program will likely lead to future Soviet missions that will have the impact of Sputnik I.” (Text)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center analysis showed that radiation shielding offered by the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) was negligible: a particle flux producing a 1-rem dose in the Apollo command module would produce a 17-rem dose in the Lem. The Apollo space radiation warning system would provide advance indication of need for astronauts to return from the Lem to the command-service modules. (.M&R, 3/22/65, 23) During March: usaf San Bernardino Air Materiel Area reported that Atlas and Titan icbm’s scheduled for phase-out by summer would be used in antimissile and space booster research and development assignments. Requests had been received to use the silos as civil defense shelters and for storage of petroleum, gas, and grain. (M&R, 3/22/65, 12)
Eight NASA astronauts began geology field training in Hawaii, where they visited lava fields of Mauna Loa and Kilauea, active volcanoes, as well as upper elevations of dormant Mauna Kea. Geologists believed that these shield volcanoes contained features similar to those of the lunar surface. Study emphasis was on mechanics of lava flow, fissure eruption, deep lava lakes; examples of hot and cold basaltic flows; physical composition of lava rock; and topographic forms of shield volcanoes. Underfoot textures theorized as being typical of lunar terrain ranged from the glassy form of “pahoehoe” lava, through the crusty snow effect of “aa” lava, to the sinking feeling of loose cinders and pumice. The study was conducted by Dr. Ted Foss, head of the Geology and Geochemistry Section at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronauts were Charles Conrad, Jr., Clifton C. Williams, David R. Scott, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Alan L. Bean, Donn F. Eisele, Roger Chaffee, and Richard Gordon, (upi, Houston Chron., 1/11/65; Bryan, Houston Post, 1/14/65)
President Johnson told Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young during a telephone call: “Your mission . . . confirms once again the vital role that man has to play in space exploration, and particularly in the peaceful use of the frontier of space. I am sure you would be the first to say that on this flight, as well as on our other manned flights in space, there were heroes on the ground as well as in space, and the record made by men like Jim Webb, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans, as well as all of those at the Cape, Cape Kennedy, and around the world, is a very proud record under Project Mercury and now on Project Gemini. And to all of those who have helped to make our space flights safe and successful, I want to . . . say ‘Well done’.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/24/65)
Physical condition of GEMINI VII Astronauts Borman and Lovell was “better than expected,” reported Dr. Charles Berry, Gemini medical director. (Waldron, NYT, 12/19/65, 68)
Gemini vil astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., reviewed for several hours where they would put food wrappings and other waste materials during their 14-day spaceflight scheduled to begin Dec. 4. Study of the problem was part of the final phase of training for the mission, (ap, NYT, 11/29/65, 55)
Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, NASA’s Director of Space Medicine, said NASA physicians screening future astronauts were eliminating people with heart and spine defects so slight they would be insignificant on earth. “We are interested in finding minute defects between the left and right heart,” he explained. “If you lose pressure and you have this defect, thousands of little air bubbles may find their way up to the brain. If there is no defect, they are removed from the lungs. We are also looking for congenital defects of the spine. When someone experiences the acceleration astronauts do, however, a small defect may be magnified in effect.” (Kass, Houston Post, 3/11/65) Senators and Representatives from all three states that had helicopter service testified in support of subsidies. Sen. Robert F. Kennedy (D-N.Y.) said: “I think that, really, if we don’t do it now [continue subsidy] it won’t be done and that will affect not just New York and the other two cities but the entire country.” Opposition came from Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) who argued for a “user tax on the people who use helicopters . . .” (Clark, NYT, 3/11/65, 55; Clark, NYT, 3/12/65, 66)
President Johnson, after viewing on television the launching of gemini vii, said: “Once again, two brave Americans have carried the quest for knowledge to the threshold of space. They also take with them our prayers, and our pride. As they orbit the earth in the days and weeks ahead, Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell will broaden our knowledge of space. But they will do more. Their voyage will be a continuous reminder that the peaceful conquest of space is the only form of conquest in which modern man can proudly and profitably engage. In this struggle, all men are allies, and the only enemy is a hostile environment. The victory over the final enemy will belong, not just to Americans, but to all the world. We are proud that these fine young Americans have brought us one step closer to that goal.” (Pres. Doc., 12/4/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn) were briefly united with their families at Ellington afb near Houston. The astronauts had flown to Ellington from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, where they had been undergoing medical debriefing. After a short visit at Manned Spacecraft Center, the astronauts left their families for more debriefing sessions and tests, (upi, NYT, 9/3/65, 10)
Gemini 5 Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Lt. Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (LCdr., usn) and their backup pilots Neil Armstrong and Elliot See met a news briefing at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini V mission, scheduled for August 19. Cooper explained that during the flight the astronauts would try to sight a USN Polaris missile to be launched from the East Coast and an unidentified missile to be launched from the West Coast. It was not disclosed at what point during the mission either of the launches would occur. In addition, Cooper said he and Conrad would attempt to sight rocket engines ignited on a rocket sled at Holloman afb, N. Mex. Also on the program would be an attempt to rendezvous with a Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) which would be ejected from the spacecraft and would drift to a distance of about 60 mi. from the spacecraft. The radar equipment onboard would then assist in performing maneuvers to achieve rendezvous with the Pod, although actual contact was not planned. Cooper said that backup system for reentry would not be used again because the thrust fuel would be used in the rendezvous experiment. No extravehicular activity would be performed during this mission. The astronauts announced they would attempt to communicate with fellow astronaut Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) participating in the USN Sealab ii experiment beneath the Pacific. Flight plans called for a landing in the West Atlantic. Both astronauts felt that personal hygiene would be one of the main problems of the flight. (Transcript)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., were lost briefly over Kenya while flying a small aircraft to Keekerok Game Lodge to visit President Jomo Kenyatta. With Cooper at the controls, they landed at Keekerok only 20 min. late, (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/24/65)
Reasons for choosing the moon crater Alphonsus as the target for RANGER IX were given by David Hoffman in an article in the New York Herald Tribune: “First, they are just plain curious. Rangers 7 and 8 photographed two lunar seas and taught scientists that all such ‘maria’ are pretty much the same. Now scientists want pictorial coverage of the moon’s rugged highlands. “Alphonsus’ walls rise 7,000 to 10,000 feet above its crater floor, and in the basin thus formed astronomers have observed reddish gas seeping from the surface. The question, then, is whether Alphonsus is really a lunar equivalent of a live volcano. “Second, some space experts believe Apollo astronauts, as they descend on the moon, may encounter an emergency. That emergency might force them down in the moon mountains instead of onto a flat lunar plain. Accordingly, NASA wants to know surface roughness of the smoothest part of the moon mountains. “Third, there are some who believe the smoothest areas on the moon actually lie within the great craters (Alphonsus’ diameter is 70 miles). If this proves true, astronauts might select a crater floor as their touchdown point, assuming there is no volcanic activity.” (Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/23/65)
President Johnson nominated Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (usn) and John Young (usn) for promotions. Commander Schirra was nominated for captain and Lt. Commander Young for commander. Each had received his current rank in 1961, before the space flights. All the original astronaut team had now been promoted, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/23/65, A12)
At the United Nations, Astronauts James A. McDivitt (L/'Col., usaf) and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) presented Secretary General U Thant a small U.N. flag carried by White on his June 4 walk in space, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/65)
usaf would train about 15 astronauts to operate manned orbiting laboratories, the Washington Post reported. Trainees would be chosen from graduates of the Aerospace Flight School, Edwards afb. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of Western Test Range, suggested that in later Gemini flights the two-man crew might include one USAF astronaut, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/27/65, A7)
In answer to the query “Is a permanent role waiting in space for military astronauts,” Robert Brunn in the Christian Science Monitor quoted an Air Force official as saying: “No strategy is known for space as yet. We can’t use space the way the cowboys and Indians used high ground for advantage, nor the way the Air Force in World War II climbed to altitude and dove out of the sun. “Something with military importance may turn up in the next five years. The Air Force doesn’t know what the usefulness of space will be. . . .” (Brunn, CSM, 10/13/65, 14)
Modest turnout of spectators at the Sept. 14 motorcade in Washington, D.C., for Astronauts Cooper and Conrad received editorial comment in the Washington Evening Star:	. . We think it is an encouraging trend. Just possibly the lack of hoopla and gapers suggests that America has accepted the space program as serious business instead of a circus of stunt men.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/16/65)
A descriptive report on the three generations of Soviet manned spacecraft—vostok i through vostok vi, first generation; voskhod i, second generation; and voskhod II, third generation—was prepared by Space Daily, in collaboration with Soviet space officials and the Novos-ti Press Agency: “The Soviet’s first three generations of manned spacecraft are injected into orbit within a standard cone-cylinder configuration with a maximum length of 30.3 feet and a maximum diameter of 8.7 feet . . . “The launch-to-orbit vehicle is comprised of four major components: the last stage of the rocket; the instrument and service module; the cosmonaut cabin and re-entry capsule; and the nose cone and fairing. . . . “The cabin for the first two generation spacecraft remained in external configuration essentially the same. The major modification . . . was the internal arrangement providing a capability for two astronauts instead of one which included the requirement for an additional hatch. The third generation spacecraft has required not only a major modification for the internal arrangement, for the third cosmonaut, but has forced a configuration addition to the 7.5 foot sphere with the attachment of the airlock. . . . “For the first generation spacecraft the cosmonaut was seated in the center of the sphere with his back to re-entry portion of the sphere. The capsule had three hatches: the egress hatch, the parachute compartment hatch and an equipment access hatch . . . The parachute compartment was located to the left and rear of the cosmonaut . . . Antennas for the radio system of the re-entry capsule were located 180 degrees from the stagnation point of the heat shield. Even in that location it is possible that heat build-up destroyed all protruding systems as evidenced by the landed VOSTOK. . . . “The first generation vehicles weighed about 10,430 pounds, after ejection of the nose cone and fairing and separation of the third stage of the booster. . . . The cabin for the first and second generation missions weighed about 5300 pounds. “In addition, voskhod ii represents an advancement to a more operational type of vehicle with an arrangement indicating its role for extensive Earth-orbital operations. “The airlock for the voskhod ii mission would represent the farthest evolution of the Soviet manned spacecraft program ... a cylindrical projection to the basic vehicle, positioned within the nose cone and fairing above or forward of the cabin in the antenna region. With respect to the cosmonauts the airlock would be above and to the front as they remained in their seats; its position would be 180 degrees from the stagnation point of the heat shield.” (SBD, 5/13/65, 68-70)
Astronaut Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) and David S. Lewis, president of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., launched Operation Zero Defect at the McDonnell plant in St. Louis, Mo., county. They addressed an outdoor gathering of 3,400 employees, asking them to continue doing a good job of producing spacecraft and Phantom F—4 jet fighters for usaf, usn, and the Marines. (St. Louis PostDispatch, 8/2/65)
geminis vii and vi apparently approached within one foot of each other during their rendezvous, Robert Aller, NASA Chief of Mission Planning, told the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., when he narrated films of the rendezvous. Aller also reported that GEMINI vii command pilot Borman appeared to have reentered the earth’s atmosphere without his helmet on. Mission rules ordinarily required astronauts to wear their suits and helmets during launchings, space maneuvers, and reentry. (Clark, NYT, 12/24/65,1)
faa awarded two research contracts to obtain jet operations data on atmospheric turbulence: General Dynamics/Convair Corp. was awarded a $30,100 contract to develop a test program for obtaining highly precise data on the responses of pilot and aircraft to turbulence encountered in regular jet airline service; a $23,700 contract was awarded Eastern Air Lines to conduct a meteorological study of clear air turbulence (Cat), (faa Release 65-118) On Dec. 16, gemini vi Astronaut Schirra reported to Mission Control that an unidentified satellite in a low trajectory in polar orbit was trying to contact him. Before ground officials could respond, he and Stafford played Jingle Bells with a harmonica and bells. GEMINI VI began reentry northeast of Canton Island in the Pacific during its 15th revolution; four retrorockets fired automatically in the correct sequence, each providing 2,500 lbs. thrust. Reentry was normal and was the first controlled reentry to a predetermined landing point in the U.S. manned spaceflight program. Gemini vi splashed down in the Atlantic at 10:29 a.m. est, 700 mi. south of Bermuda—only 14 mi. off target—after a 26-hr., 1-min. flight. Assisted from the spacecraft by Navy frogmen, the astronauts arrived by helicopter at the carrier Wasp at 11:20 a.m. for medical debriefing. Recovery and rendezvous section of the GEMINI VI spacecraft splashed down near the spacecraft itself and was retrieved by another team of swimmers. This was first time the service section—complete with rendezvous radar equipment—had been recovered. Main parachute also was retrieved, (nasa Release 65-362; NASA Proj. Off.; Transcript; NYT, 12/16/65, 1, 28, 29, 30; 12/17/65, 1, 28; 12/18/65, 1, 16; 12/19/65, 1, 68, 69; WSJ, 12/17/65, 1; 12/20/65, 1; Wash. Post, 12/16/65, Al, A14, A15; 12/17/65, Al, A8, A17; 12/18/65, Al, A7; 12/19/65, Al, A16, A17; 12/20/65, Al, A3; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, Al, A14; 12/18/65, Al, A3; 12/19/65, Al, A8, A9; Time, 12/24/65, 32-36; msc GEMINI VII/GEMINI VI Fact Sheet)
The three-orbit flight by Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young was in some ways the most remarkable space trip yet accomplished by this country’s astronauts,” said an editorial in the New York Times. “Particularly impressive was the apparent success of a series of maneuvers to change the Gemini’s orbit—maneuvers that will be required to join two spacecraft in orbit, notably on the return leg of the projected manned flight to the moon.” (NYT, 3/24/65, 44)
Hopper,” a versatile rocket-propelled Lunar Flying Vehicle (Lfv) to transport Apollo astronauts on exploration flights of the moon’s surface, had been designed by Bell Aerosystems Co. as a result of a 12-month study conducted for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Bell announced. The 400-lb., four-legged, rectangular Lfv would be desk size and propelled by a cluster of five 100-lb-thrust rocket engines; it could fly 50 mi. nonstop. Bell also disclosed receipt of a $489,898 follow-on nasa contract to design a Manned Flying System (Mfs) capable of carrying one astronaut-scientist and 300 lbs. of equipment or two astronauts. Intended primarily as an exploratory device, the Mfs would be able to fly 15 mi. round trip without fueling. (Bell Aerosystems Co. Release)
nasa’si gemim hi spacecraft ('’'Molly Brown*1). with Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) as command pilot and Astronaut John W. Young (LCdr., USN I as pilot, was successfully launched from Eastern lest Range on three-orbit GT-3 mission by a two-stage Titan II. Within six minutes alter Jitt-olT. GEMIM ill and its two astronauts were injected into elliptical orbit with apogee. 224 km. (139 mi.lt perigee, 161 km. (100 mi.): period. 83 min. Speed of spacecraft was 16.600 mph. Toward the end of the first orbit. 03 min. after launching, the first maneuver was performed: Grissom fired two small thruster rockets that pushed ‘’backward” on the spacecraft, slow ing it down by about 45 mph. Lessened velocity caused GEMINI III to drop in altitude to a near-circular orbit with apogee, 169 km. (105 mi.): perigee, 153 km. <93 mi.). Second maneuver occurred during second orbit: Astronaut Grissom used the thrusters to turn the spacecraft broadside to its Right path. Then he gave a burst that pushed the craft about 1 50th of a degree from the original course; short hursts, fired rapidly, slowed the craft ami he turned it Into a course nearly parallel to his original one. Third maneuver came in the third orbit: Grissom fired the spacecraft thruster rockets, dropping into an orbit with perigee of 82 km. (52 mi. I. Manually controlling reentry, the astronauts turned the spacecraft's blunt end forward, ejected the section carrying the retrorockets. Four hours and 53 min. after launching, GEMINI in safely landed in the Atlantic Ocean off Grand Turk Island, considerably off target and some 50-60 mi. away from the recovery ship, Intrepid. Navy frogmen from hovering aircraft fastened a float around gemini iii. Original plans had called for the spacecraft, with the astronauts still inside, to be hoisted aboard the recovery ship and immediate medical checks made. When Grissom became seasick the men were picked up by helicopter and landed on the Intrepid; the spacecraft was recovered later. The astronauts helped perform two experiments. One was the irradiation of human blood to test the combined effects on it of weightlessness and irradiation. The other was to squirt small jets of water into the plasma sheath that surrounded the spacecraft as it reentered the earth’s atmosphere, testing a theory that a fluid flowing through the ionized layer of atoms would permit radio signals to penetrate the communications blackout common to reentry. Gemini officials said that, so far as was known, this was the first time a manned spacecraft had maneuvered in orbit, changing its orbital path, (nasa Release 65-81; nasa Transcript; Clark, NYT, 3/24/65, 1, 22; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/24/65; Bishop, WSJ, 3/24/65)
In an article in the New York Times discussing the “marriage” of medicine and electronics, William D. Smith said the monitoring of the astronauts’ health while in flight had produced several electronic medical systems. He added that NASA was expected to spend about $50 million during 1965 on electronic medical equipment. (Smith, NYT, 10/24/65, FI)
Dispatch to Moscow from Tass’ New York correspondent, Leonid Ponomarev: “The flight of the U.S. spaceship Gemini-5 . . . proceeded normally for only two hours, although the flight program was calculated for eight days. “The main reason [was] that a new system for providing electric power. . . was being used in the Gemini-5 spacecraft for the first time. . . . “It is a noteworthy fact that the new system for providing electrical power has never once been tested in spaceflight conditions. From the test stands on earth, the installation was put directly into working conditions in space. “There are several reasons that explain this haste and a certain degree of risk. The program chiefs were given the task of ‘catching up with the Soviet Union’ at any price regarding the length of flight in space. However, the present power of U.S. rockets and the size of the astronauts’ capsule are utterly inadequate for lifting and storing reliably tested battery-powered electrical power installations, which would weigh more than the new system. U.S. scientists were compelled to rapidly create a system, new in principle, in order to provide power for the Gemini-5 spacecraft for eight days so that it could fulfill its tasks.” (Tass, 8/22/65
Vice President Humphrey, in France for the International Air Show at Le Bourget with Astronauts White and McDivitt, met for 80 min. with President de Gaulle. (Tanner, NYT, 6/21/65; Newport News Daily Press, 6/22/65)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. reported that tests conducted for USAF had indicated that a spin in a centrifuge might recondition astronauts living for weeks or months in a state of weightlessness. Previous research had indicated that long stays in the weightless state could have a debilitating effect on the body and cause the heart and circulatory system to lose their tone, (nyt News Service, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 2/9/65)
Principal source of advanced technology in the U.S. had been and would remain the aerospace industry, postulated an article in Aerospace. Only in its programs were technical goals high enough and national requirements urgent enough to move forward in major steps. As these steps were completed and technical goals achieved, the entire economy fell heir to the new technology. Key goals in defense and space programs were listed as: (1) lowering costs; (2) improving the efficiency of motors, generators, and all other energy conversion devices and processes; (3) improving design, that is, reducing the weight and increasing the strength of all machines, by either improved knowledge of the machine or by using lighter, stronger materials; (4) improving the accuracies to which machines could be controlled; (5) improving reliability; (6) improving communications between men, between men and machines, and between machines. (Aerospace, Winter 1965) During 1965: In 1965, NASA attempted 28 missions with 23 successes, a score of 82% mission success. Two spacecraft were launched on a single booster. NASA attempted 30 launches of space boosters and had 26 successes, a score of 87% launch vehicle success. Of the 92 payloads orbited by the U.S., NASA orbited 25—five of which were two-manned spacecraft and four were escape-mission probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 64 payloads, of which one was a manned spacecraft and seven were escape-mission probes. France entered the space age with two satellites, one orbited by France herself (a—i) and one by the U.S. (fr-i ) . Most spectacular of NASA’s space missions were the real-time reception of close-up lunar photographs by ranger ix, first U.S. extravehicular activity by gemini iv Astronaut White, man’s first close look at Mars (including 21 photographs) by mariner iv, and manned rendezvous to within one foot by gemini vi and vn. The Gemini program began 1965 with GT-2 unmanned suborbital flight; this was followed by four two-man orbital flights which logged more than 1,300 manhours in space, gemini v and vn, long-duration missions (8 and 14 days respectively) proved man can withstand extended conditions of spaceflight and validated plans for manned Apollo lunar flights. At the year’s end Gemini spaceflights had set for the U.S. more than 10 records, among them the record for total manhours in space: 1,354 hrs., 38 min., vs. U.S.S.R.’s 507 hrs., 16 min. 1965 was a year of extensive ground tests of the Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn launch vehicles. There were static firings of engines for the various Saturn IB and Saturn V stages, highlighted by full-duration firing of all three Saturn V stages. Saturn I program ended with a record of 10 successes out of 10 attempts, its three 1965 launches orbiting Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites. Fire II provided valuable data for Apollo on reentry from simulated lunar trajectory. In lunar and planetary achievement, rangers viii and IX provided more than 13,000 lunar surface photographs and brought that project to a close. Atlas-Centaur ac-6 launched a dummy Surveyor on a simulated lunar transfer orbit and proved itself capable of operational Surveyor missions. NASA stepped up its interplanetary research with pioneer vi, first of four projected interplanetary satellites. tiros ix became the first weather satellite to provide close to 100% coverage of the earth daily, and tiros x was the first in a series of interim operational satellites for the. U.S. Weather Bureau. Five Explorer scientific satellites, oso n, Canada’s alouette ii, and France’s FR-I were orbited. NASA orbited secor v for the U.S. Army, SOLRAD ix (explorer xxx) for the U.S. Navy, and early bird i communications satellite for the Communications Satellite Corporation. NASA turned over syncoms II and III to dod for operational use at the completion of their r&d function. The five NASA mission failures: vehicle test of Atlas-Centaur ac-5; test of Apollo launch escape system on a Little Joe II booster; failure of OGO ii, which did return good (but incomplete) experiment data; failure to orbit a third Orbiting Solar Observatory; and failure of Gemini 6 because Agena Target Vehicle did not achieve orbit. In 39 successful launches, dod orbited 67 satellites. In addition, there were four unsuccessful DOD space launches, losing five payloads. Decision was made that DOD proceed with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, and launches were begun of the powerful Titan iii-C which would eventually orbit the Mol. Highlighting the U.S.S.R.’s busy space year was man’s first extra-vehicular space activity, by voskhod ii’s Cosmonaut Leonov. Soviet lunar exploration intensified, with apparent soft-landing attempts by lunas v through viii, as well as photographs of the moon’s hidden side by interplanetary probe zond III. U.S.S.R. launched VENUS II and III on the long flight toward the planet Venus. (Western experts speculated that cosmos lx was an unsuccessful lunar soft-landing attempt and cosmos xcvi an unsuccessful Venus probe.) U.S.S.R. orbited 52 Cosmos satellites, two heavyweight Proton spacecraft, and her first communications satellites—two Molniyas I. (nasa Release 65-368; msfc Release 65-312; nasa hhr-8; nasc Staff; nasa A&A 1965; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/12/65) During 1965: Some nasa research highlights of 1965: NASA launched 191 scientific sounding rockets to obtain a variety of scientific data and about 10 for advanced research an d techno!-ogy. By the end of the year, the three x-15 research aircraft had made 156 flights, 32 of them in 1965. Tests proceeded of the modified x—15 (No. 2), expected to exceed 5,000-mph flight speed, nasa supported the National supersonic transport program and evaluated wind tunnel models of the two proposed Sst designs. NASA continued using usaf XB-70 aircraft for research in flight problems of Sst and large supersonic aircraft in general. Feasibility studies of adapting V/Stol concepts to commercial transportation and wind-tunnel studies of several V/Stol designs continued. As part of research toward efficient design of hypersonic aircraft, comparative performance and heat transfer measurements were obtained on a variety of aircraft wings, bodies, and wing-body combinations. Ramjet engine research was in the engine design concept phase. NASA developed and tested a new near-field theory useful in predicting sonic boom characteristics of Sst configurations during transonic climb-out. Flight research of M-l lifting body was advanced, and construction of HL-10 lifting body was being completed. Solid propulsion technology was advanced with static-firing of the 260-in. solid-fuel rocket motor. In nuclear rocket technology, three Nerva reactor experiments were completed and the new Phoebus advanced graphite reactor test program was begun. The success of a 2,600-hr. ion engine test provided evidence that life-times of 10,000 hrs. for electric rocket thrusters may be within reach. Among highlights in electronics and control was reentry communications experiment on GEMINI hi demonstrating feasibility of water injection to overcome communications blackout during reentry. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 25-38; ossa & oart S.Rkt. Proj. Off.; NASA Release 65-368) During 1965: About 90% of NASA’s budget was going to contractors to pay for work being done by nearly 400,000 people of about 20,000 prime and subcontractors. In the university program, NASA was doing business with about 200 universities in every state on space-related projects at the year’s end. NASA’s requirement to transfer its technology to other sectors of the economy had developed into an information system with more than 200,000 technical documents abstracted, indexed, and filed in a computer-based nationwide system. (NASA Release 65-368)
ComSatCorp had filed a contract with fcc for purchase of four satellites from Hughes Aircraft Co. to supply communication services for nasa’s Project Apollo and for other commercial services. Two spacecraft would be placed in synchronous orbits at about 22,300 mi.: one would be located over the Pacific between Hawaii and Midway Island; the other over the Atlantic near the west coast of Africa. Of the other two, one would be used as a reserve for replacement and one as a backup in case of a launch failure. Contract also provided an option for purchase of up to 15 of the satellites. Delivery date of the first satellite would be eight months after ComSatCorp would give Hughes notice to proceed, with one additional spacecraft of the four to be delivered every 21 days thereafter. (ComSatCorp Release) Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa for Manned Space Flight, introducing the symposium, noted three important general conclusions to be drawn from the results. First, data on man himself indicates that astronauts can adapt to the space environment, giving great confidence that manned space flight effort can move according to pian without the necessity of introducing special requirements such as artificial gravity. Second, further substantiation of the Mercury program evidences that man can see things from space which are not programmed on instruments to see. Third, the outstanding quality of photographs of earth from space demonstrates the feasibility of a number of significant applications of manned space flight for improvement of life here on earth, (nasa Release 65-321; nasa Rpt. of Symposium)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at a press conference during the 23rd annual Hampton County (S.C.) Watermelon Festival that the Gemini V manned space flight would be an eight-day mission—the time required to fly to the moon, explore its surface, and return to earth. Webb also disclosed that NASA would announce next week the selection of six scientist astronauts. Speaking at “Mendel Rivers Day” ceremony, Webb pointed out that Congressman Mendel Rivers, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, “has steadily supported the Nation’s effort to build strength in space.” Webb also said: “Thoughtful students of national power and its uses are increasingly aware that America’s security as well as her leadership of the Free World, depends directly upon our progress in mastering and using space. “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration cooperates closely with the Department of Defense, to ensure that the technological progress we make in developing the peaceful uses of space will be drawn upon as needed to help keep the peace—in space and on earth. “As you can readily understand, the development of military space systems follows those basic research fields which provide the scientific understanding and technological capability to make such systems possible. It is NASA’s job, as the space research and development agency, to provide this basic knowledge and know-how.” Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young accompanied Webb to this festival, (nasa Release; Text; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 111-14)
President Johnson commented on the success of the gemini v flight during a news conference at his Texas ranch: “This is a moment of great achievement, not only for astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, but for those whose hopes have ridden with Gemini 5. “I am so happy that Mr. Webb and Mr. Seamans, who had so much to do directing this very successful venture, are here to share with us the pride we all feel today, And I deeply regret that our late, beloved President Kennedy, under whose leadership all of this work was so carefully planned and thought out, can’t be here to enjoy the fruits and success of his planning and his forethought. “The successful completion of the eight-day, 3-million mile flight of the Gemini 5 proves, I think, not only man’s capacity for endurance in space, but it proves that man is in space to stay. “We can be, and we are enormously proud of every member of our space team. That means all the scientists, and the technicians, and the controllers, and the trackers—to everyone who contributed in any way. As President of this country, I want, this afternoon, to extend the thanks of the entire nation for a job well done. To Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, and to their wonderful families, I want to simply repeat again: we are all very deeply proud of you. “The difficulties and disappointments of this flight have served to increase our appreciation, respect and trust for the skill and ability of all the men involved—at all their posts of duty. We can face the challenges and opportunities with far greater confidence and certainty —and this is an unmistakable gain. “Only seven years ago we were neither first nor second in space— we were not in space at all. Today the capacity of this country for leadership in this realm is no longer in valid question or dispute. Openly, proudly, we are proceeding on our course willing always to share our knowledge, our gains with all mankind. I would repeat and renew this country’s invitation to all nations to join together to make this adventure a joint adventure. “This globe seems smaller today than ever before. “Somehow the problems which yesterday seemed large and ominous and insoluble today appear less foreboding. As man increases his knowledge of the heavens, why should he fear the unknown on earth? As man draws nearer to the stars, why should he not also draw nearer to his neighbor? “As we push ever more deeply into the universe—probing its secrets and discovering its way—we must also learn to cooperate across the frontiers that divide earth’s surface. “No national sovereignty rules in outer space. Those who venture there go as envoys of the human race. Their quest must be for all mankind—and what they find belongs to all mankind. That is the basis of the program of which astronauts Cooper and Conrad are a part. . . . “This flight of Gemini 5 was a journey of peace by men of peace. Its successful conclusion is a noble moment for mankind—and a fitting opportunity for us to renew our pledge to continue our search for a world in which peace reigns and justice prevails. “To demonstrate the earnestness of that pledge, and to express our commitment to the peaceful uses of space exploration, I intend to ask as many of our astronauts as possible—when their schedule and program permit—to visit various capitals of the world. Some, I hope, will be able to journey abroad soon. “Gemini is but the beginning. We resolve to have many more such journeys—in space and on earth—until man at last is at peace with himself.” (Transcript, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 170-72)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., arrived in Izmir, Turkey. Only about 5,000 of the city’s 750,000 residents turned out to watch their motorcade drive the 15 mi. into Izmir from the NATO air base at Cigli. Spokesman for the Turkish Foreign Office said the visit was an “unofficial culture visit,” and the governors of three cities on the astronauts’ itinerary were instructed not to welcome the party. Coolness was attributed to U.S. stand on Cyprus in 1964.	(Wash. Post, 9/19/65)
Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. successfully tested a life-support back pack designed to meet requirements of the lunar surface suit for the Apollo lunar-landing mission. System functioned as planned for over three hours inside a vacuum chamber while the test subject walked on a treadmill to simulate the metabolic load of an astronaut on the lurain. The 65-lb. portable life support system supplied oxygen, pressurized to a minimum 3.7 lbs. psi, controlled its temperature and relative humidity, and circulated it through the suit and helmet. The pack pumped cooled water through the tubing of the undergarment for cooling inside the pressure suit. A canister of lithium hydroxide trapped carbon dioxide and other air contaminants to purify the oxygen for reuse. ( upi, NYT, 12/6/65, 42)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara directed usaf to proceed with development of a reconnaissance version of the F-111. New version would be called the HF-IIIa and would be developed by General Dynamics Corp., prime contractor for the USAF F-l1 1a and USN’s F—1 11b tactical aircraft. More than $12,000,000 had been authorized for the initial development program, which would be directed by AFSC. (OOD Release 373-65) orbit with 203-mi. (327.4-km.) apogee; 100-mi. (161.2-km.) perigee; 89-min. period; and 28.9° inclination. Immediately after spacecraft separation, Gemini vii turned blunt end forward and began stationkeeping on Titan n’s second stage at distances from 20 ft. to 50 mi. for 17 min. Several hours later Borman made the first of a series of course corrections to position gemini vii for the scheduled rendezvous with Gemini vi by firing the thruster rockets 1% min. to raise the apogee from 100 mi. to 138 mi. Apparent loss of pressure in spacecraft’s fuel cells during flight’s early stages was later determined to be faulty indicator light. On Dec. 5, the astronauts encountered difficulties at first in sighting the rectangular panels displayed near Laredo, Tex., but later they successfully identified the patterns of panels and provided evidence that their visual acuity was not degraded over the 14-aay period. On Dec. 6, Lovell removed his 16-lb. spacesuit, becoming first U.S, astronaut to fly in undergarment. The astronauts visually tracked Polaris a-3 missile fired from uss Benjamin Franklin, submerged nuclear submarine off Cape Kennedy, and successfully tested onboard radar receiving unit needed for rendezvous. On Dec. 7, Borman fired thruster rockets to achieve a higher orbit for rendezvous attempt: apogee, 197 mi. (301.7 km.); perigee, 145 mi. (233.8 km.). On Dec. 8, clouds over New Mexico caused astronauts to cancel scheduled experiment to communicate with ground by laser beam. On Dec. 9, Borman executed a posigrade maneuver to circularize GEMINI vii’s orbit, firing thruster rockets one minute 18 sec. to raise perigee to 185.8 mi. (299.7 km.); 43 min. later, he fired braking thrusters 15 sec. to lower apogee to 188.3 mi. (103.7 km.) and provide a proper target orbit for Gemini 6. Dr. Berry recommended that Borman apply ointment to ease the nasal dryness caused by the 100%-oxygen atmosphere of his spacesuit. On Dec. 10, when temperatures in gemini vii’s cabin rose to 85°, Flight Director Christopher Kraft ordered Lovell to put on his space-suit to permit Borman to remove his. One astronaut was to wear his spacesuit at all times during the mission. Dr. Berry recommended that Lovell apply antihistamine ointment to ease nasal dryness. On Dec. 11, laser experiment was conducted with partial success: the Hawaiian ground station received signals from the spacecraft when Lovell locked his hand-held laser onto the ground-based one, but contact was not precise or strong enough to carry a human voice. On Dec. 12, the astronauts tried again to establish ground laser communications over White Sands Missile Range, but were able to pick up only two quick flashes from the ground beacon. On Dec. 13, when gemini vii’s fuel cell warning light flashed on, the astronauts flushed excess water from the system by forcing in additional oxygen borrowed from the cabin’s oxygen supply, thereby correcting die difficulty. A taperecorder malfunction prevented the spacecraft from supplying automatic data on performance of its systems between tracking stations. On Dec. 14, Borman observed reentry of a Minuteman missile fired from Vandenberg afb to Eniwetok—first time a missile reentry had been sighted by an astronaut. Both gemini vii astronauts were beginning to feel the strain of their ten days in space: “Jim and I are beginning to notice the days seem to be lengthening a little,” Borman said. “We’re getting a little crummy.” On Dec. 15, gemini vii and Gemini vi achieved their historic rendezvous in orbit (see Dec. 15—16). On Dec. 16, a report from gemini vii Astronauts Borman and Lovell that three of the six fuel cell stacks were not operating aroused apprehension that the flight might end prematurely. Next day gemini vii’s fuel cells began to function satisfactorily, thereby assuring a full-duration mission. Astronauts Borman and Lovell checked out all their spacecraft’s systems and received reentry instructions. On Dec. 18, gemini vii began a normal reentry when its four retrorockets fired automatically in correct sequence above the Pacific southeast of the Philippines. After a controlled reentry to the predetermined landing point, the spacecraft splashed down in the Atlantic at 9:06 a.m. est, 700 mi. southwest of Bermuda—only 7.6 mi. from target. The astronauts, after their record-breaking 330-hr. 35-min. spaceflight, were assisted from the capsule by Navy frogmen and taken to the carrier Wasp for medical debriefing, (nasa Release 65-362; NASA Proj. Off.; Transcript; NYT, 12/5/65, 1, 72; 12/6/65, 1, 43; 12/7/65, 24; 12/13/65, 1, 46; 12/15/65, 23; WSJ, 12/9/65, 1; 12/13/65, 1; 12/14/65, 1; Wash. Post, 12/6/65. A3: 12/7/65. Al, A3; 12/9/65, A9; 12/10/65, Al, A3; 12/12/65, Al, A8; 12/13/65, Al; 12/14/65, A3; Wash. Sun. Star, 12/5/65, Al, A8; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/6/65, Al, A12; 12/7/65, A3; 12/8/65, A3; 12/12/65, A7; 12/15/65, Al, A2, A6; Time, 12/24/65, 32-36; msc Gemini VII/Gemini VI Fact Sheet)
A crowd of two million gathered in Chicago during the parade and motorcade honoring Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf), accompanied by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey. Honorary citizens medals were presented the astronauts at a special City Council meeting. Civil rights leaders postponed a demonstration protesting de facto school segregation in deference to the celebration, (ap, Wash. Post. 6/16/65; Wehrwein, NYT, 6/15/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said during a panel discussion at the Military Electronics Convention in Los Angeles: “I think I can report that our ten-year aeronautical and space effort [beginning in 1961] has been well organized, it has stabilized at the 51/^ billion level, and has retained a well-worked-out balance among its various components. At the end of this ten-year period, we will have received back from our operating spacecraft the basic measurements of the space environment which will give us a much better scientific understanding of this environment and our engineers will have proved out the developmental concepts and engineering designs for effective operations of all kinds in space. Further, we will have a launch capability of six Saturn ib’s and six Saturn V’s per year, meaning that we could put almost two million pounds into orbit per year, if required. We will have logged more than five thousand hours of astronaut spaceflight time and learned a great deal about the relationship between man, equipment, the task assigned, and performance in the space environment. . . .” (Text)
Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James Lovell (Lcdr., usn), primary crew for Gemini vn, said they would attempt to communicate with a ground station via laser beam during their 14-day mission planned for early 1966. The laser—a beam of intense light— can transmit voices or other messages. Ground station at White Sands, N. Mex., aiming by radar, would fire the first laser signal at Gemini 7 as it passed overhead. The Gemini 7 crew would attempt to answer by pointing their capsule downward, aiming, and shooting a 10-lb., hand-held transmitter toward the ground. (Transcript; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/7/65; upi, Wash. Post, 7/7/65; upi, NYT, 7/7/65, 20)
m2-f2 manned lifting body research vehicle was rolled out at Northrop Norair’s Hawthorne, Calif., plant and accepted for nasa by Paul Bikle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center. The craft would be dropped from beneath the wing of a b-52 bomber at high speeds in tests to determine how this configuration would perform in the critical period during reentry if it were carrying astronauts, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/17/65, A3; arc Astrogram, 6/24/65, 1)
Saturn V launch vehicle Is-ic stage) was static-fired for the first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The five F—1 engines were ignited in a test which lasted 6V(> sec. during which they generated a thrust of 7.5 million lbs. (160,000.000 hp.). This was the first full cluster test and was made on a recently completed 400-ft.-tall test stand. The S—ic was the first stage of 364-ft.-tall Saturn V-Apollo combination that would ultimately take astronauts and equipment to the moon. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller congratulated MSFC personnel on the successful test: “. . . As this was one of the key milestones in the whole lunar landing program, its successful performance. 12 weeks ahead of schedule, has a great bearing on our program.” (mfsc Release 65-92; Marshall Star, 5/5/65, 5)
Four Ohio college students ended a six-week isolation test at WrightPatterson afb, Ohio, to study diets, effect of continuous wearing of a spacesuit, and microbiology of the human body. The four, comprising the eighth group to take part in space tests conducted by the Aerospace Research Labs., spent the first three weeks on a balanced but monotonous diet and the last three weeks on a liquid diet with the same nutrients as their earlier meals. All agreed that astronauts would probably be able to wear spacesuits for long missions but that “something would have to be done” about the proposed liquid diet, (ap, NYT, 5/19/65; ap, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 5/19/65)
“U.S. space officials are in no particular hurry to develop a ground landing because water landings have worked so well,” reported the Washington Post. The article said that the “Soviet landing system— partly due to the Russians’ large and sparsely populated land area and their lack of sea forces—required Russian astronauts to parachute out of the descending spaceship.” This put stress on the airman—especially after long periods of weightlessness, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/8/65, A14)
Within an hour after landing on the Lake Champlain, Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn) received a telephone call from President Johnson congratulating them on their courage in the face of disappointments and discouragement: “You have certainly proved once and for all that man has a place in the exploration of the great frontier of space.” (Clark, NYT, 8/30/65, 1)
Gemini astronaut parachute system was successfully tested in drops from a c-130 at 15,000 ft. altitude by USN Chief Warrant Officer Mitch Kanowski and usaf Maj. Dan Fulgham over the Naval Air Facility El Centro. Parachutes deployed at 9,000 ft. as they would on actual Gemini missions. Additional tests would be made in drops from altitudes up to 35,000 ft. (Miles, L.A. Times, 3/9/65)
Pope Paul vi, in a mid-day Pentecostal message to a crowd in St. Peter’s Square, blessed Astronauts McDivitt and White: “Our benediction goes to all on earth and rises also to the skies for those who are exploring astral paths.” {NYT, 6/7/65, 33)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nine fellow aquanauts rose 205 ft. from Sealab II in a pressurized personnel transfer capsule. They would decompress on the support ship Berkone for about 30 hrs. before being exposed to atmospheric pressure. Carpenter had completed a record 29 days and 14 hrs. in the ocean-bottom laboratory; his associates had been below 15 days as had another team before them. A third team of ten men would complete the Navy’s 45-day experiment in underwater living and working. President Johnson phoned congratulations to Carpenter. [Wash. Post, 9/27/65)
A simple, two-door pneumatic tube device for garbage disposal during the two-week Gemini vi manned space flight scheduled for December was being considered by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center officials, the Houston Post reported. The astronauts would open the first door, stuff in the material to be disposed of, close the first door, and open the second door. Space being a nearly perfect vacuum, the material would be forced out of the tube. (Houston Post, 9/17/65)
Man can withstand spaceflights as long as 30 days without suffering serious biological damage, L/Col. Edward C. Knohlock, director of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and member of the medical debriefing team for Project Mercury flights, told the annual convention of the American Association of Clinical Chemists in Chicago. Although gemini v relayed signals on the rate of breathing, body temperature, heart beat, and perspiration, the more sophisticated equipment needed to reflect the astronauts’ body chemistry would be available on the proposed 14-day flight of a larger manned orbital laboratory. (Powers, Chic. Trib., 9/2/65)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) were flown from Mayport, Fla., to Ellington afb near Houston for reunion with their families. (Clark, NYT, 6/10/65, 1,47)
Extravehicular equipment for Gemini vin. underwent two qualification tests in the 20-ft. vacuum chamber at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The Extravehicular Life Support System was combined with the Extravehicular Support Pack (Esp), a 92-lb. backpack in which the astronaut would carry his oxygen and maneuvering gas supply. First test evaluated capability of the oxygen bottle in the pack to supply the extravehicular astronaut with air at a high rate of flow. Second test was a propellant blowdown qualification in which the space gun was fired in 30-sec. bursts to exhaust the freon supply. A vacuum equal to 150,000-ft. altitudes existed in the chamber, and the walls of the thermal box had been cooled to —300° F to simulate the conditions of orbital night for both tests. (MSC Release 65-105)
Philadelphia’s Mayor James H. J. Tate, presenting a bronze medal to Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Cdr., usn), said: “I cannot imagine a more appropriate time to honor a space explorer than on the anniversary of the day back in 1492 when an Italian explorer named Christopher Columbus first set eyes on the New World and made a similar enormous contribution to history.” (NYT, 10/13/65, 47)
NASA announced award of $3,713,400 contract to Raytheon Co. to provide digital systems for Project Apollo. Options for additional displays and consoles, if exercised, could add $400,000 to basic price. The equipment was for use at NASA control centers and critical tracking stations to give instantaneous display of information received by encoded radio signals during Apollo flight permitting immediate decisions concerning welfare of the astronauts and conduct of the mission, (nasa Release 65-79)
Four airmen emerged with high voices and a hunger for meat after five weeks of confinement in a simulated space cabin at the USAF School of Aerospace Medicine. Scientists were studying a helium-oxygen atmosphere for possible future space cabin work because it did not produce decompression sickness in astronauts and was less hazardous in terms of spacecraft fires. (Chic. Trib., 4/8/65; M&R, 4/12/65, 10)
More than 900 representatives of news media had been accredited, making the GT-3 mission of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young the most intensely covered event in the history of space exploration. Nearly 1,200 newsmen had requested credentials from NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/65)
Astronauts McDivitt and White, onboard the carrier Wasp for medical debriefing, received a congratulatory telegram from Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, first man in space: “We send you our congratulations after the success we witnessed of the spaceflight in ship Gemini 4. We express hope that spaceflights will be to serve the world and make progress for humanity.” (ap, Haughland, Wash. Post, 6/10/65, Al, All)
Menu released by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center in a request for bids from industrial firms interested in furnishing the Apollo astronauts with food for the journey to the moon included bacon and eggs, frosted flakes, toast, fruit juice, and a strawberry cereal bar. Food allowance of 8 lbs. would be dehydrated to reduce its weight. Astronauts would add water to the food from their drinking water supply. (Schefter, Houston Chron., 2/5/65)
The 2 million people of Melbourne, Australia, saluted Astronauts McDivitt and White as GEMINI iv passed overhead by turning on all the lights in the city. McDivitt said to the Carnarvon tracking station: “Tell them I thank them for lighting the night for me.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/65, A6; Houston Chron., 6/7/65)
Vice President (and nasc Chairman) Hubert H. Humphrey, visiting Cape Kennedy for the day, congratulated Astronauts Grissom and Young and commended all participants throughout the world for “this tremendous flight of three orbits. . . this step forward commits us to the next project. Once we have completed the Gemini series, we move on to the Apollo Project and we move on even beyond that. . . . Let me say that the American economy is better because of the space program. American education is better because of the space program. American industry is better because of the space program and Americans are better because of the space program. We are emphasizing here one great character of American life—excellence, performance, achievement. . . . These are efforts well made and money well spent. . . .” (Transcript)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded two parallel one-year contracts to two firms to study feasibility of developing a drill for probing some 100 ft. below the moon’s surface: Northrop Space Laboratories received $509,992; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Defense and Space Center, $570,624. Astronauts on post-Apollo lunar missions would use the drill as a geological research tool to bore holes for geophysical measurements, (msfc Release 65-194)
NASA announced Pegasus C meteoroid detection satellite was equipped with small aluminum sub-panels that at some future date an astronaut could, if desired, detach and bring back to earth. The panels would provide the first actual samples of meteoroid impact and would have tested some 43 types of thermal coatings. Pegasus C would be launched July 30, 1965, into 332 mi.-altitude circular orbit at 28.9° inclination—close to a nominal manned flight path—rather than into an elliptical orbit like that of pegasus i and ii. (nasa Release 65-228; msfc Release 65-175)
Bodies of nasa Director of Space Medicine Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, his wife, and pilot were found near the wreckage of their two-engine aircraft about 40 mi. southeast of Aspen, Colo. Aircraft had been missing since Dec. 12. Coroner’s report later said that the cold and not injuries had apparently caused the deaths. A space medicine pioneer, Dr. Lovelace had parachuted from record 44,000-ft. altitude in 1944, had helped determine criteria for selection of Mercury astronauts, and had founded the famous Lovelace Clinic. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, A18; Wash. Post, 12/16/65, A3; NYT, 12/16/65, 50; ap, NYT, 12/18/65,16)
Existing contracts with the Boeing Co. and the Bendix Corp. had been extended to incorporate modification of the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) as a shelter for use with a Local Scientific Survey Module (Lssm) for astronaut surface mobility, msfc announced. Boeing would receive $565,000 and Bendix $570,000 for the new work. Both contracts would run for about nine months. The two firms had completed individual studies of a possible lunar mobile laboratory (Molab) under the original terms of the contracts. The Molab would be much larger than the Lssm now being studied, (msfc Release 65-173)
An explosion two minutes after launch ruined a USAF attempt to send a plastic replica of an astronaut’s body into space aboard an Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb. The dummy was instrumented to measure space radiation at various depths of the body. Cause of the explosion was not immediately determined, (ap, Wash. Post, 5/29/65)
New sunspots heralding the start of a new 11-yr. cycle were discussed at sessions on the International Years of the Quiet Sun held in Washington, D.C., under auspices of the American Geophysical Union and the International Scientific Radio Union. Scientists said the asymmetrical birth of the new cycle suggested it might not reach as intense a maximum as usual. The cycle was of vital interest to planners of a manned moon landing since it had been discovered that some solar eruptions shoot out protons at so close to the speed of light they could kill an astronaut. While astronauts were on the moon, or inside the Lem, they would be poorly protected against such a proton shower. Dr. Herbert Friedman, of the Naval Research Laboratory, said during the symposium they would be comparatively safe if they could return to their orbiting command capsule. The goal, therefore, he said, was to learn enough about these events so that astronauts could have sufficient warning to take refuge in their spacecraft. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/23/65)
NASA had awarded a six-month, $117,175 cost-plus-fixed-fee study contract to Ball Brothers Research Corp. to define and determine engineering requirements for a solar telescope mount to be used on proposed Apollo applications manned missions. System would provide a capability of observing the sun with relatively large astronomical-type telescopes and in having an astronaut available to correct errors in alignment and make other adjustments, (nasa Release 65-302)
Editorial commentary in Washington Post on GEMINI VII-VI flight: “On the crowded globe beneath the soaring astronauts men were still fighting each other, cursing each other, starving each other and maltreating each other. Not yet have mortals risen above man’s inhumanity to man. Not yet have they surmounted the emotions that set at naught the generations of light and learning. Not yet are they wise enough to govern their passions. But hope soars aloft with the astronauts. The creatures who can do this, the beings who can defy gravity, disregard distance, conquer space, circumnavigate the planet and mingle with the stars, may yet make the larger conquests of mind and spirit that are necessary if human beings are to live together in peace.” (Wash. Post, 12/16/65, A20)
Statement made by President Johnson on the death of the NASA Director of Space Medicine: “A day of great achievement in space was marred by news of the death of Dr. William R. Lovelace, II. His life was too short, although his legacy to space medicine will endure and will be a resource of assurance to future astronauts whose names and deeds are yet unknown.” (Pres. Doc., 12/20/65, 593)
Apollo Spacecraft 009, first Apollo flight spacecraft of the type that would carry three U.S. astronauts to the moon and back, was accepted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center during informal ceremonies at North American Aviation, Inc.’s, Downey, Calif., facility. Largest U.S. manned spacecraft built to date, Spacecraft 009 included a command module, service module, launch escape system, and adapter. {Marshall Star, 10/27/65, 1, 10; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/22/65, 1)
Dr. John W. Salisbury and Joel Adler of Cambridge Laboratories reported to 132d meeting of the AAAS in Berkeley, Calif., that American astronauts landing on the moon might encounter lunar dust that would stick like wet snow to their windows, faceplates, and camera lenses. Salisbury and Adler said they had reached those conclusions by two separate experiments. (Wash. Post, 12/30/65, A4) Medical and physical data from the two-week GEMINI vn flight indicated that man could withstand a lunar mission without any serious harm, reported Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for NASA MSC, at the AAAS meeting. Dr. Berry revealed that the astronauts’ heart rates and blood pressures during the flight had remained within normal ranges and that within 10 hrs. after splashdown, Borman had regained 4.8 lbs. of the 9.6 lbs. he had lost; Lovell, who had lost 5.9 lbs., had regained 6.6 lbs. Berry, who doubted the astronauts could have endured 14 days in spacesuits, attributed much of the success of the mission to the freedom of flying in underwear. He reported that the electroencephalogram studies recording brain wave activity had shown no abnormalities during the first two flight days, but that the electrodes on the astronauts’ scalps had come loose before the end of the planned 4-day experiment. As to the radiation dosage hazards on the 14-day flight, Dr. Berry said the measured amounts were “peanuts.” The calcium balance studies which required measurements of calcium loss to sweat, blood, urine, and feces might take “several more months to complete,” he added. Astronaut Edward H. White (L/Col., usaf) accompanied Dr. Berry to the meeting to brief scientists on preparations necessary to plan and execute successful space missions. (Haseltine, Wash. Post, 12/30/65, Al)
The Life Sciences Committee of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board recommended to NASA that American astronauts returning from the moon and planets be kept in quarantine for at least three weeks to prevent possible contamination of the earth by extra-terrestrial organisms, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. Recommendation was in a report entitled “Potential Hazards of Back Contamination from the Planets.” Other recommendations included the need to avoid decontamination of returning equipment until it had been subjected to biological study; the possible need for the astronauts to shed their outer garments on the moon and Mars before returning home; the need to conduct immediate research on any samples of extraterrestrial life brought to earth; and trial runs to acquaint astronauts with methods for minimizing chance of contamination. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/23/65)
Funeral in Washington for late Deputy Administrator of NASA, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, attended by hundreds of friends and high Federal officials. Pallbearers were Gen. James H. Doolittle (Chairman of the naca, 1956-58), Dr. T. Keith Glennan (nasa Administrator, 1958-1961), and Astronauts Scott Carpenter, Gordon Cooper, James McDivitt, and John Glenn, (eph)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey and his party, which included Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.) and Sen. Fred Harris (D-Okla.), visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were briefed on the Gemini program by Charles W. Mathews; on the Apollo program by Dr. Joseph F. Shea; and on the life support systems by Richard Johnston of Crew Systems. Mr. Humphrey—it was his first visit to MSC—took a “ride” in the Gemini docking trainer with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and then he and his party observed a simulated Gemini liftoff at the Mission Control Center and a portion of a mission, (msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1; Houston Post, 7/14/65)
Dr. George Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at a news conference in Cocoa Beach, Fla., that Astronauts McDivitt and White would attempt to steer the Gemini 4 spacecraft to a rendezvous with the spent second stage of its booster rocket. This plan was outlined for the flight: When the Gemini 4 spacecraft separated from the second stage six minutes after launching, Maj. James A. McDivitt, as command pilot, would fire jet thrusters to hold a tight formation with the spent stage, which would trail the astronauts by about 300 ft. Throughout the first orbit, the astronauts would make a complete check of all their systems. At the start of the second orbit they would begin preparing for Maj. White’s emergence by unpacking life support packs, the maneuvering unit, and the 25-ft. lifeline. Sweeping over the Indian Ocean during this orbit, they would begin to depressurize the spacecraft cabin and pressurize their spacesuits. Over Hawaii, Maj. McDivitt would maneuver the spacecraft to within 25 ft. of the second stage. Maj. White would open his hatch and at a point west of Guaymas, Mexico, he would leave the vehicle. That would be about three hours after launching. Using the hand-gun maneuvering unit, Maj. White would slowly rotate toward the second stage, which is 27 ft. long and 10 ft. in dia. and would be equipped with two flashing lights. The astronaut would carry a 35-mm movie camera to take pictures of the earth, star background, the booster, and the spacecraft. After 10 min., over Florida, Maj. White would begin returning to the spacecraft. The cabin would be repressurized and the suits depressurized. Then Maj. McDivitt would fire thrusters so that the spacecraft would move about 16 mi. away from the booster. During the fifth orbit, about three hours later, the Gemini again would be maneuvered so that it would approach the second stage high over Africa. The craft would close to within 10 ft. this time to determine how well they can approach an orbiting craft, sighting on the flashing lights. (Transcript; Appel, NYT, 5/29/65, 1)
Gemini Astronaut John W. Young (LCdr., usn) was presented the Navy’s astronaut wings by Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze. (ap, Wash. Post, 5/4/65)
Scientists at Boeing Co., Seattle, had devised a “trampoline” bed designed to exercise the blood vessels in a weightless environment, it was reported. Compared in effect to a cocktail shaker, the device, by its to-and-fro motion, would send the blood surging from the head to the feet and back again. Some scientists had feared that days of inactivity in a weightless environment without exercising the blood vessels could result in death to an astronaut, (ap, Newport News Daily Press, 2/4/65; ap, Huntsville Times, 2/4/65; Orl. Sen., 2/4/65)
President Johnson announced during an impromptu visit to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center—his first—that he had nominated Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) for the rank of lieutenant colonel. In a speech before nearly 5,000 MSC employees, Mr. Johnson said: “The race in which we of all generations are determined to be first is the race for peace in the world. “In the labors of peace—as in the explorations of space—let no man doubt for the moment that we have the will, and the determination, and the talent, and the resources required to stay the course and see those labors through.” (Text; Stern, Wash. Post, 6/12/65, A3; Semple, NYT, 6/21/65; msg Roundup, 6/25/65, 1)
Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James A. Lowell, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had been assigned as the prime flight crew for the Gemini 7 mission scheduled for the first quarter of 1966, NASA announced. Backup crew for the flight, which would last up to 14 days, would be Astronauts Edward H. White, n (Lt. Col., usaf) and Michael Collins (Maj., usaf). Borman and Lovell had been the backup crew and White the pilot for Gemini iv. (nasa Release 65-218)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to President Johnson and the Cabinet on both the two-man gt—3 flight and the ranger IX photographic mission. Mr. Webb made these points:	“The most significant accomplishment of the GT-3 flight was that ... it provided verification of the basic design, development, test and operations procedures NASA is using to develop manned spacecraft, man-rated launch vehicles and a world-wide operational network. . . . “We now know that at least two spots, and perhaps three, when we look more carefully at the ranger ix pictures, are at least smooth enough for the Lem [manned moon landing], . . .” An American astronaut probably would be able to open his spacecraft and partly emerge from the cabin during the gt-5 flight. Mr. Webb said under questioning that there might be some possibility of achieving this in the next Gemini flight, but that gt-5 was more likely. He regarded a Russian cosmonaut’s leaving a space vehicle briefly as spectacular but said the U.S. was more intent on developing a space suit that would enable American astronauts to work outside on space vehicles and develop or put together space centers. (Text; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/26/65)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young had congratulated Soviet Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Aleksey Leonov on the voskhod II flight, Izvestia disclosed, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/28/65)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), carried two one-dollar bills during the GEMINI v mission to prove on landing that they were the same spacemen who were launched, upi reported. A representative of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale recorded the serial numbers on the bills before the launch and would check them after the landing. The Federation Aeronautique Internationale, with 54 member nations, is the agency that certifies world aviation and space records, (upi, NYT, 8/25/65, 1)
The New York Times editorialized: “. . . The care that has marked every phase of the [Gemini v] flight thus far provides assurance that the decision on whether to call the capsule back to earth before that time will be based solely on the best judgment of the scientific team as to whether any element of needless risk would be involved in keeping the astronauts aloft. Their safety must, of course, take precedence over the fact that the eight-day goal is the most important single objective of the flight. “This is no maiter of oneupmar.ship over the Russians, whose Valery Bykovsky stayed up for five days in 1963. The eight days it is hoped to keep Gemini 5 in space are roughly the time that woud be required for a round trip to the moon. If Colonel Cooper and Commander Conrad can function effectively in a state of weightlessness for that long and then return without injury, they will have given strong support to the hypothesis on which the whole program for a manned moonshot is based. “Whenever that shot is made—and remain convinced that it is foolhardy to chain it to any fixed deadline—it will have to be based on the fullest possible advance knowledge of man’s ability to cope in another environment with challenges his evolution on earth never required him to encounter.” {NYT, 8/26/65, 29N)
The White House announced that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., would leave Sept. 15 on a six-nation goodwill tour to Greece, Turkey, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Kenya, and Nigeria. The astronauts would be accompanied by their wives, Cooper’s daughters, Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts, and President Johnson’s Army aide, Maj. Hugh Robinson. (Pomfret, NYT, 9/12/65, 1, 33)
U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg told the U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee that progress had been made on a start toward a basic international law for space and for the assistance and return of astronauts forced down on foreign soil. He said that an additional topic should be brought under study by the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space: “Within a few years, the need for a treaty governing activities on the moon and other celestial bodies will be real. My government plans to present a definite proposal as to the contents of such a treaty.” (upi, Wash. Post, 12/20/65, A15)
Izvestia, official Soviet newspaper, said that the “walk” in space by Astronaut Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) had given an impetus to U.S. plans for using outer space for military purposes and cited a recommendation by a Congressional committee for an orbital laboratory run by the Pentagon: “These are the evil ‘uses’ of man in space being thought up here by some influential people in Washington where, incidentally, not one official word has been said about the peaceful purposes of the flight of Gemini 4.” (ap, NYT, 6/6/65, 82)
In a newspaper interview, Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin expressed surprise that the U.S. had shown primarily military aviation equipment at the Paris International Air Show. He said he regretted he could not meet longer with American astronauts McDivitt and White. (Tass, Zarya Vostoka, 7/4/65, 3)
U.S. and Soviet astronauts had accumulated 19,610,000 accident-free miles—greatest total in the history of transportation—reported the National Geographic Society. A compilation released by the society showed that U.S. astronauts had traveled 10,692,000 mi. and Soviet astronauts, 8,918,000 mi. (upi, Houston Chron., 9/3/65)
gemini v astronauts Cooper and Conrad flew to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, following a night onboard the aircraft carrier Lake Champlain. Upon their arrival, Florida Governor Haydon Burns presented them with plaques in recognition of the record-setting, eight-day mission. Intensive medical examinations begun on the carrier were continued on Merritt Island. (Toth, Wash. Post, 8/31/65; Clark, NYT, 8/31/65)
The appropriateness of President Johnson’s comments on the achievements of Astronauts Cooper and Conrad during the GEMINI v spaceflight was discussed editorially in the New York Times: “He did not gloat over the evident Soviet discomfiture at the United States forging ahead in the space race. Nor did he follow the repeated Soviet practice of claiming that a particular achievement in the cosmos somehow ‘proved’ the superiority of one political system over another. Instead, he appealed to all nations to join together for the conquest of space, an arena in which cooperation could help ease world tensions. “. . . the President’s statement . . . should help to dispel . . . fears. He has made clearer than ever that this country sincerely wants full cooperation in space. If Gemini 5’s flight helps to bring that objective closer, its immediate political contribution will rival its enormous gains for science and for technology.” (NYT, 8/30/65, 24C)
Lt. Frank K. Ellis (usn), double-amputee pilot whose name was among astronaut candidates submitted to NASA by Chief of Naval Operations Adm. David L. McDonald, had been nominated for “special capacity” work in the space program, unidentified nasa sources revealed. While not nominated to become an actual astronaut, Ellis would be considered for work that would use his aeronautical knowledge. He lost both legs in a jet crash in July 1962. (cns, San Diego Eve. Trib., 12/3/65)
Final approval for the Aug. 19 launch of Gemini V on an eight-day orbital mission was given by Mission Director E. E. Christensen. Astronauts L.	Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (Lcdr., usn) passed a final physical examination, weather conditions were favorable, and the tracking network was in good operating condition. The astronauts and their backup pilots, Neil Armstrong and Elliot See, Jr., went through a complete review of the mission, (ap, NYT, 8/18/65, 12C)
Columbus Association of Genoa, Italy, announced that Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., had been selected to receive the 1965 Columbus Prize, (ap, Wash. Post, 9/25/65)
The Gemini 6 spacecraft underwent final checkout of all systems; its crew, Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas Stafford, received final briefings. NASA announced that Gemini VI would be launched December 12, one day ahead of schedule. (WSJ, 12/10/65, 1; Wilford, NYT, 12/11/65, 1, C54)
PEGASUS ill meteoroid detection satellite was launched into orbit from Eastern Test Range, with a Saturn I booster—last(sA-lO) in a series of ten launch vehicle test flights. Initial orbital data: apogee, 336 mi. (541.9 km.); perigee, 324 mi. (522.6 km.); period, 95.5 min.; inclination, 28.9°. Main assignment of the 3,200-lb. spacecraft with wing-like panels was to add information on the frequency of meteoroids in near-earth environment, for use in the design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft. Eight of its detachable panels carried 352 thermal surface samples collected from the aerospace industry. If NASA should program an astronaut-PEGASUS III rendezvous, the astronaut would detach as many panels as possible and return them to earth for study. Also orbited was Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-9), which served as shroud for PEGASUS III. Apollo launch escape system was jettisoned during launch vehicle’s ascent. PEGASUS ill—expected to return meteoroid data to ground stations for at least one year—was identical to PEGASUS II, in orbit since May 25, 1965. pegasus I was sent into orbit Feb. 16, 1965. (nasa Release 65-232; msfc Release 65-185; msfc Release 65-190)
Former astronaut Col. John Glenn (usmc, Ret.) was suffering no effects from last year’s ear injury, reported the Wilford Hall Air Force Hospital in Houston. (Houston Chron., 7/23/65)
A pressurized suit identical to that worn by Astronaut Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) during his walk in space June 4, was donned by George C. Wiswell, Jr., founder and head of Marine Contracting, Inc., for a repair job 200 ft. below water at the American Electric Power Co.’s Smith Mountain Dam near Roanoke, Va. Wiswell headed a team of divers who lived in a pressurized tank for a week at the bottom of the dam, using a pressurized diving bell while making the necessary repairs. “The job could have been done by conventional methods,” Wiswell asserted, “but the divers would each have been limited at that depth to 20 min. of work a day.” With the David Clark Co.’s “aquanaut” suit, four hours work each day for each man was possible, he said. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/65, 35) During August: Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, announced the assignment of B/Gen. Daniel E. Riley as commander of the USAF Contract Management Div. (afcmd) at Inglewood, Calif. General Riley replaced Col. Fred L. Rennels, who had been commander of AFCMD since its activation in January 1965 and who was named vice commander to General Riley, (afsc Release 132.65)
250 photos taken by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., during the GEMINI v spaceflight were released by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, (ap, NYT, 9/10/65, 17)
Gemini vii Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell flew from the carrier Wasp to KSC where they had a brief reunion with GEMINI VI Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford, who were departing later in the day for msc for further medical debriefing, (ap, NYT, 12/20/65, 10C)
Kenneth Gatland, Vice-President of the British Interplanetary Society, urged U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration in New Scientist article. “. . . it seems we are faced with the ludicrous situation of the world’s two most powerful nations, each with massively expensive rival programmes, heading for a common objective which each proclaims is being pursued in the highest interests of peaceful scientific exploration.” A joint venture would have the advantage of providing for contingencies such as rescue of astronauts possibly stranded on the moon or in lunar orbit—a capability not included in Project Apollo. “This situation can only be satisfactorily resolved by the provision in lunar orbit of a second soft-landing vehicle and back-up crew capable of mounting an emergency rescue operation. To achieve this would require a specially adapted version of the craft already designed to soft-land astronauts. “This is where the merit of US-Soviet cooperation lies for, as an international venture, a project to land men on the Moon would surely not be undertaken as envisaged in project Apollo; and certainly not with such rigid constraints on time. In all probability it would be planned as an operation rather than a solo mission, with logistic support from a second space vehicle placed in lunar orbit ahead of the main expedition. . . . “The essential requirement in terms of the eventual lunar expedition is that launchings should be coordinated so that expedition components arrive in lunar orbit together. By the mid-1970’s, orbital rendezvous techniques should be well established with the ability of men to move between orbiting vehicles. An agreed crew could then descend to the lunar surface while another ship remains in reserve orbiting the Moon in case of need. Alternatively, a reserve vehicle might be landed, unmanned, in advance. . . . “Although at this stage such ... [a combined lunar expedition] would have little influence on overall costs, it could mean a great deal to the safety of initial manned missions. “Such a move would demand concessions on both sides. It would mean America abandoning her 1970 target date for placing men on the Moon, and while allowing Russia to keep her rocket secrets she would have to be prepared to reveal her programme for manned spaceflight. . . .” (New Scientist, 3/25/65, 774^76)
In a letter of explanation to Congress, NASA discussed priorities in the fy 1966 budget: “. . . As the President pointed out when he submitted the budget to the Congress, ‘It is a budget of priorities. It provides for what we must do, but not for all we would like to do.’ In assessing priorities and the most urgent national needs, the 260-inch solid propellant rocket program, the M-l liquid hydrogen-oxygen rocket engine capable of providing l1/^ million pounds of thrust, and the snap-8 nuclear electric power generating system to provide 35 kilowatts of electrical power in space could not be supported in the Fiscal Year 1966 budget. “. . . [nasa] is, therefore, preparing plans for reprogramming Fiscal Year 1965 funds so as to logically phase out these program activities in such a way as to obtain as much technical information as is possible for future use. . . . Every effort is being made to achieve the greatest possible benefit from the funds already invested.” (Text) *	Prof. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, discussing RANGER viii photographs in an interview with John Lear, World Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc., suggested that long, narrow rills and irregular depressions could be caused by moon’s surface collapsing into crevasses opened by the movement of a glacier hidden beneath lunar dust. He attributed gently rounded shapes to a shifting of small particles by electrical forces which, on earth, were inhibited by atmosphere. Concerning the manned expedition, Gold indicated: “The presence of ice oceans could give rise to many problems. But once these were solved, the ice itself could be mined and used to make hydrogen for fuel for rockets returning to Earth.” Referring to the electrically-charged particles: “Many particles would be dislodged mechanically by the landing of a spacecraft or the footstep of a man. Once loose, the dust would jump in response to electrical attraction or repulsion. If particles landed on the astronaut’s visor, brushing wouldn’t remove them but would instead intensify the electrical charges affecting their behavior.” Dr. Gold recommended more research on possible control of these electrical forces. (Lear, Houston Chron., 3/2/65; Ind. Star, 3/7/65; wbe Sci. Serv.)
A blotting material to absorb excess moisture, which might have caused the eye and nose irritation of Astronauts Edward White (L/Col., usaf) and James McDivitt (L/Col., usaf) during the June 3 Gemini IV flight had been eliminated from the Gemini v spacecraft, msc spokesmen said. (Houston Chron., 8/11/65)
Among the aerospace pioneers selected for San Diego’s new International Aerospace Hall of Fame were Scott Crossfield, Charles A. Lindbergh, Gen. James H. Doolittle, Astronauts John Glenn and Alan Shepard, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Orville and Wilbur Wright, Robert H. Goddard, Jacqueline Cochran, and Amelia Earhart. Representatives of 287 organizations from throughout the world were on the nominating committee. Oil paintings of the honorees were unveiled at a dinner given in conjunction with San Diego’s Space Fair 65 observance. (naa S&ID Skywriter, 3/19/65, 1)
Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham suffered a simple compression fracture of a neck vertebra during exercise unrelated to astronaut training. Cunningham would be grounded during the three months he would wear a neck brace but would continue other phases of astronaut training. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/65)
At a meeting of the American Chemical Society in Atlantic City, Dr. Emmanuel Roth of the Lovelace Foundation proposed neon as a gas that astronauts might breathe during spaceflights: “Its permeation coefficient is lowest. That is, neon does not go into solution or diffuse through tissue as readily as other gases do. As a result, the deadly bubbles form at a much slower rate.” No tests of neon with human subjects had been run. (Newsweek, 9/27/65)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden told the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C., that NASA planned to select 10 to 20 scientists to begin astronaut flight training this summer from over 900 applicants. Dr. Dryden said the Mercury astronauts had demonstrated man’s ability as a sensor and manipulator, and to some extent as an evaluator, in orbit. “Early Gemini and Apollo flights will further examine these capabilities so that, in the future, man’s full potential can be exploited.” (ap, NYT, 3/19/65)
Hamilton Standard delivered to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center a prototype portable life support system (Piss) to be used by Project Apollo astronauts. Weighing about 60 lbs., unit was designed for use with water-cooled undergarment astronauts would wear beneath a spacesuit during lunar surface exploration. Water-cooled undergarment would cool the astronaut by conducting the metabolic heat generated by his motions into water which would circulate through a web of plastic tubing in contact with the skin. Water would carry the heat into the portable life support system which would recool and recirculate it. Contract called for delivery of 52 packs. Testing of the undergarment and the Piss would be conducted at msc. (Houston Post, 8/3/65)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief physician for the astronauts, said in an interview with the New York Times that spaceflights had caused subtle, temporary changes in the human body that must be watched with care for possible importance to longer future flights. Measurements of the apparent density of heel and finger bones of the GEMINI IV astronauts, who flew for four days, and the GEMINI v astronauts, after an eight-day flight, had indicated that calcium was being lost, or at least shifted to some other part of the body. “We have really found no gross changes,” he said. “In my opinion, we are going to see the body adapt to space flight. You are never going to have the guy’s bones turn to jelly so that when he stands on his leg it just goes ‘pfft.’ ” (Clark, NYT, 10/23/65, 58)
A dummy model of the Gemini spacecraft, dropped from 11,000 ft. altitude by a c-119 aircraft, parachuted into the Atlantic Ocean and was recovered by three usaf pararescue men. This was a practice mission in case Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and John W. Young (usn) had to abort their gt-3 flight during the launching phase, (ap, Orl. Sent., 3/11/65)
Maj. Virgil I. Grissom and LCdr. John W. Young, the Gemini astronauts, returned home to Houston and to an enthusiastic welcome by a crowd of some 12,000 persons. The astronauts walked by much of the crowd, shaking hands. “We’ve had a pretty tough week, then came a couple of days of debriefing, then three parades, but today is the best of all—when we get to come back home,” Major Grissom said. Commander Young said, “We’re sure happy to see all you smiling Texans.” (upi, NYT, 4/2/65, 12)
Eleven of America’s 34 astronauts left NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for a 10-day field trip into the volcanic regions of Iceland. Making the expedition were Edwin Aldrin, William Anders, Charles Bassett, Alan Bean, Eugene Cernan, Roger Chaffee, R. Walter Cunningham, Donn Eisele, Russell Schweickart, David Scott, and C. C. Williams. The trip would be part of the astronauts’ training in the type of geological formations they might find on the moon, (upi, Orl. Sent., 7/7/65)
Dr. Roman Smoluchowski of Princeton Univ. said at the American Physical Society’s meeting in Washington, D.C., that there was no life on Mars. All seasonal changes in the color of the planet could be traced to bombardment of minerals with energetic radiation under varying temperatures. Dr. Jane Blizard of Boulder, Colo., also speaking at the APS meeting, suggested that any astronaut braving a 400-day journey to Mars would be likely to get a fatal dose of radiation. Maybe, she said, long range forecasting of solar storms can be perfected in time. Or maybe “superconductive magnetic doughnuts” could be devised to shield spacecraft from barrages of protons spewed out in solar storms. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/65)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., had demonstrated during their August 21-29 GEMINI v flight that a manned weather satellite could become a valuable part of Weather Bureau forecasting, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. U.S. weather forecasters needed information on tropical storm Doreen moving through the Pacific. Cooper and Conrad observed the storm and fixed its position, acquiring the information earlier than tiros x meteorological satellite and more precisely than a ship 150 mi. from the storm. The San Francisco Weather Bureau Office had been able to combine GEMINI v data with that from tiros X to prepare an advisory on Doreen. (Simons, Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A3)
Gemini GT-3 Astronauts Grissom and Young were feted as heroes in Chicago, where they motorcaded from O’Hara International Airport through the city to City Hall. An estimated one million thronged the streets shouting joyous ovations and flinging a deluge of tickertape and confetti. At luncheon with city officials the astronauts were given honorary Chicago citizenship medallions, and later a reception was given in their honor. Accompanying the astronauts were members of their families and NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Mrs. Dryden. (Wiedrich, Chic. Trib., 3/31/65)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff discussed future manned aerospace flight before the American Astronautical Society meeting in Chicago: “A great deal of lifting-body research is being performed by NASA and the usaf. In the not too distant future we will enter into the truly second generation manned spacecraft era by relying more on a higher l/d (lift-drag ratio) such as a hypersonic l/d of about 1.3. . . . The lifting body second generation manned spacecraft gives operational versatility for reentry from a number of orbit planes and gives a recovery capability at a number of landing sites within the United States. This versatility also increases the margin of safety for the astronauts. . . .” (Text)
The Christian Science Monitor asked Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of the Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and editor of Science magazine, to present elements of the debate on the question “Man in space: is it worth $40 billion?” Dr. Newell presented the case for manned space flight: “The manned space flight effort serves to round out the total program. Its primary aim is to develop a broad space capability that will secure to this nation strength, security, flexibility, and freedom of choice in space. Landing men on the moon and returning them to earth has been chosen as the means to this broader, more substantive end, and it is not to be considered as the only justification for our manned space effort.” Dr. Abelson, speaking for the critics, said: “The unmanned program has been a substantial contributor to our international prestige. Moreover, prestige based on science and technology tends to be enduring. ... “Our Apollo program was launched for reasons of international prestige. The yield has not been very good or very lasting. How many citizens can now recall the names of the astronauts and of their capsules? We can expect much the same reaction when we finally accomplish a moon landing.” (CSM, 4/9/65)
iTT-designed portable transmitter onboard the Wasp sent pictures of splash-down and recovery of Gemini vi Astronauts Schir-ra and Stafford to early bird i comsat which relayed them to the Andover, Me., ground station from which they were transmitted to major television networks in U.S. and Canada. It was the first time recovery of astronauts had been shown in real-time on television. (Gould, NYT, 12/17/65, 28)
In a Cabinet report for President Johnson, NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden said: “The primary objective of the Gemini V mission to demonstrate man’s ability to function in the space environment for 8 days and to qualify the spacecraft systems under these conditions was met. This milestone duplicated the period required for the manned lunar exploration mission. “Gemini V also demonstrated the capability of man to withstand prolonged periods of weightlessness. The adaptability of the human body was indicated by the performance of the astronauts. For example, their heartbeat rates gradually dropped to a level significantly lower than their preflight normal rates, but by the fourth day, adapted to the weightless condition and leveled off. Upon return to Earth, the heartbeat rates were slightly higher than normal, as expected, but returned to normal rates during the second day. This has assured us of man’s capability to travel to the Moon and return.” (Pres. Doc., 9/20/65, 258)
GEMINI VI Astronauts Schirra and Stafford were made honorary members of the American Federation of Musicians for their rendition of Jingle Bells during the Gemini vii-vi mission, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/21/65, A2)
On arrival at KSC, Astronauts Schirra and Stafford personally thanked the 400 men responsible for the successful GEMINI VI launching. The astronauts would undergo medical examinations and debriefings for three days and then fly to MSC for a reunion with their families, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/18/65, Al; upi, NYT, 12/18/65,16)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young gave the official name “Gemini 3” and the nickname “Molly Brown” to the spacecraft they would ride into orbit Mar. 23. (msc Historian; AP, Miami Her., 3/17/65)
During the planned 4-day flight June 3, Astronaut Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would leave the Gemini 4 spacecraft for 12 min. “if conditions are favorable,” msc officials announced at press conference. He would be secured to the craft by a 25-ft. safety line. NASA said the decision had been delayed “so final qualification tests could be completed on the spacecraft, spacesuit, secondary life support pack and umbilical.” The 12-layer protective suit that Astronaut White would wear had been worn for more than 200 hrs. and White himself had worn it during more than 60 hrs. of tests. Among other things, it had had pellets fired at it at a speed of 30,000 fps to simulate the impact of small meteoroids. The flight’s command pilot, Astronaut James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) would not open his hatch but would take movies of White through a spacecraft window. Astronaut White would take a 35-mm. still camera loaded with color film on his “walk” in space. Although he had practiced acrobatics, White had no planned program and would “use his own judgment as to what to do while outside the ship.” Exit from the spacecraft was planned for the second orbit. (Transcript; Clark, NYT, 5/26/65, 1, 11; upi, Wash. Post, 5/26/65, A3)
In an article in Foreign Affairs entitled “Slowdown in the Pentagon,” Hanson W. Baldwin said: “The sprawling bureaucracy of big government; the control of major military or paramilitary projects by agencies over which the Defense Department has no direct authority, including the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Bureau of the Budget; congressional legislation and executive regulation—social, political and economic; the tremendous size and complexity of the Armed Forces; overcentralization and overregulation in the Pentagon; too much service rivalry and not anough service competition—all these and other factors have become builtin roadblocks in defense development and contracting. “The creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has provided another type of problem. NASA stemmed from the same kind of political philosophy that nurtured the AEC. Atom bombs were too powerful to allow the generals to play with them; ergo, a civilian agency must control nuclear power—and it must be channeled away from nasty military purposes. The same scientific-political pressure groups that advocated this concept helped (with President Eisenhower’s approval) to establish NASA, again on the theory that space efforts must be controlled by civilians and that space must not be used for military purposes. . . . “But in the case of NASA, the problem has been compounded. For while the aec is essentially a research and production agency, NASA is an operating agency as well. From a small highly efficient aeronautical research agency, it has now expanded into a gargantuan multibil-lion-dollar empire, with tentacles all over the country, managing the biggest program on which the United States has ever embarked—to place a man on the moon. “In its early years, NASA was sluggishly if at all responsive to military needs, and the Pentagon itself was inhibited from any effective space developments (though, curiously, the only effective space boosters available were military ballistic missiles). Gradually the liaison, due to Dr. [Edward C.] Welsh and others, has been greatly improved. Numerous military officers, active and retired, now hold some of the most important positions in NASA, and in addition the Armed Forces have furnished most of the astronauts and by far the most important part of the facilities and services used by the agency. The two-headed control still offers difficulties, but today the main stumbling blocks to the rapid development of military space projects are Secretary McNamara and his Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. Harold Brown, who in his new political role in the Pentagon has become a remarkably unadventurous scientist. “Often the President’s Scientific Adviser, whose contacts with Pentagon and other Government scientists cut squarely across organizational lines, has also acted as roadblock to new developments. He exercises tremendous power without either specific responsibility or specific authority; therefore, his intervention often not only delays but confuses. The Adviser’s great power stems largely from his White House status; unfortunately around him has grown up a small but important office manned by men more impressive as bureaucrats than as scientists, who represent, in effect, another echelon of delay. . . .” {Foreign Affairs, 1/65; CR, 2/4/65, 2007) During January: Committee assignments for both parties were made in both Houses of Congress. New members on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Joseph Tydings (D-Md.), Len B. Jordan (R-Ida.), and George D. Aiken (R-Vt) •	.	. New members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Roy A. Taylor (D-N.C.), George E. Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), Walter H. Moeller (D-Ohio), William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.), Brock Adams (D-Wash.), Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.), Weston E. Vivian (D-Mich.), Gale Schisler (D—111.), and Barber B. Conable, Jr. (R-N.Y.). (Comm. Off.) During January: Marvin L. White. AFCRL’s Space Physics Laboratory, predicted the sun was encircled by “rings” of electric current totaling nearly 200 billion amps. Although total current was high, White postulated that the current density was low because the current was spread over a large area; he predicted current density to be about three trillionths of an ampere per square centimeter, the same order of magnitude as in the earth’s atmosphere. White’s calculations were based on particle flux data from mariner ii. (oar Research Review, 1/65, 1-2) With launch of two balloons to 87,000-ft. altitudes from Chico, Calif., AFCRL began one-year series of high-altitude balloon flights to measure moisture in the stratosphere. Series would consist of vertical soundings—25 in all, at the rate of two per month—in which all data would be obtained in recoverable instrumented payload parachuted to earth when balloon descended to 30,000 ft., and horizontal soundings—five 11-day flights at float altitudes averaging 75,000 ft.—in which data gathered over thousands of miles would be telemetered every two hours to ground stations, (oar Research Review, 5/65,15—16) In an article on detecting extraterrestrial life, William R. Corliss in International Science and Technology described some of the plans for collecting data on possible life-forms elsewhere and some of the factors making the search for extraterrestrial life so challenging. He noted the complications for Martian life-detection if retrorockets were necessary to brake the landing of a scientific package: “First, of course, they add weight to the landing package, right where it hurts the most. Also, their control adds complexity and increases the chance of failure. Finally and perhaps most importantly, they would make the problem of life-detection more difficult and any results more ambiguous; the rocket exhaust would tend both to fuse the surface of the landing area (maybe even killing any existing organisms), and to add combustion contaminants of its own in the most crucial area—around the lander.” He listed the variety of experimental instruments proposed for detecting extraterrestrial life (or clues of life) and explained why the dependability of these instruments—based on different physical and chemical principles—varied widely. (Int. Sci. & Tech., 1/65, 28-34)
Pravda described Lt. Col. Leonov’s exit and return to VOSKHOD II in giving the first detailed description of the inside of the spacecraft. The airlock was apparently built into the place occupied by a third astronaut during the voskhod i flight Oct. 12. After Col. Leonov moved into the airlock, his companion, Col. Belyayev pressed a button that closed the inside door and created a vacuum inside the lock chamber. At the prescribed moment, Col. Belyayev pressed a second button that opened the hatch between the airlock and space, allowing Col. Leonov to climb out. The procedure was apparently reversed for the astronaut’s return, (ap, NYT, 3/30/65)
Four were honored with aiaa awards for achievements in manned flight at the aiaa 4th Manned Space Flight Meeting in St. Louis: the 1965 Astronautics Award to b/g Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of the Western Test Range, for “exceptional direction to Titan III space booster R&D program”; the Octave Chanute Award to Alvin S. White, Chief Engineering Test Pilot/xB-70 Project Pilot, North American Aviation, for “continued significant contributions to the aerospace sciences in the development of flying skills and techniques necessary to flight of an advanced aircraft at unprecedented speeds, altitudes, and weights”; the John Jeffries Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Director of Bioastronautics, usaf National Range Div., for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics, his writings, lectures, and research, and his continued dedication to the study of medical problems relating to the aeronaut and astronaut”; and the Robert M. Losey Award to George P. Cressman, Director of the Office of National Meteorological Services, Weather Bureau, for “his rapid and effective application of numerical weather analysis and forecasting techniques to aeronautical operations.” (A&A, 11/65)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) and four aquanauts began a 45-day, USN-sponsored experiment in 12 x 58-ft. Sealab II to test how well man can function at 205-ft. depth in the Pacific under pressure six times that at the surface. Carpenter would try to stay down 30 days to set a record; the other aquanauts would remain below for varying periods. The group would collect and study marine specimens, map the ocean floor, and explore a deep marine canyon. (Wash. Post, 8/29/65)	•
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), in Western Europe on a three-week goodwill tour at the request of President Johnson, saw the Berlin wall during a helicopter sightseeing trip. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 10/4/65)
Charles W. Mathews, manager of the Gemini program, and Astronauts James McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward White II (Maj., usaf) received NASA’s Exceptional Service Award from President Johnson in a special White House ceremony. Introducing the President, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “. . . we . . . should never forget that at the beginning of the space age, in 1957, the challenge of this new frontier which was laid down to us was first met by the man who is now the President of the United States and who has so graciously invited us here today to indicate again his interest in, and the importance he attaches to, the new systems we have developed for building our national competence in space and using the science and technologies acquired to work toward a peaceful world and a better world. “This great leader of our nation, and of the Free World, is still pioneering, this time on an even more difficult frontier where we must learn to master the restrained but decisive use of the powers which technology gives our nation. Those of us who are responsible for the build-up of our new base of technology believe that power, based on advanced technology, can provide new means to hold back those ruthless forces which answer not to the need of all men for security, freedom, dignity, and opportunity. The pioneering which President Johnson is engaged in today on this new frontier is, if anything, more important than his pioneering actions in 1958 to create our national program in aeronautics and space. “Seldom in the history of the world has one man had to play so vital a role in developing the tools of modern science and technology and then in the development of a national capability to use them to achieve cooperation toward a world consistent with our own ideals and those we have sought for others as well as ourselves.” Accompanying citations noted “outstanding contributions” and singled out Major White as “the first man to engage in self-propelled extra-vehicular activity.” Terming the three “the Christopher Columbuses of the 20th century,” Mr. Johnson said their work had nudged the world toward greater international cooperation. “Men who have worked together to reach the stars are not likely to descend together into the depths of war and desolation,” he said. Later, the recipients were guests at a luncheon held by Vice President Humphrey and received accolades in both the House and Senate. A crowd estimated at 50,000	applauded the motorcade as Mathews and the astronauts rode to the Capitol. In the evening, Majors White (usaf) and McDivitt (usaf) narrated a 20-min. film of the GEMINI IV flight for the chiefs of foreign diplomatic missions. President Johnson, in a surprise appearance, told the astronauts to “take the Presidential plane and travel outside this country again.” He said: “Many people in many lands were thrilled by what you have done. I want you to join our delegation in Paris and go out among the friendly peoples of the earth to share with them the excitement and thrills of your experience.” Astronauts White and McDivitt then returned to the White House where provisions had been made for them and their families to remain overnight. (Text; Clopton, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al, A3; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/18/65; Semple, NYT, 6/18/65, 1, 13; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/18/65)
Parallel problems facing astronauts and aquanauts were noted by Assistant Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. Bioastronautics Div., Dr. J. A. Kraft. “These problems are both biomedical and mechanical. Because of their similarity, we have in the ocean a readily available laboratory environment. In it we can investigate the more significant problems common to both. . . .” One parallel is the changed pressure of the environment: for the aquanaut, pressure problems involve return from extremely heavy pressure to normal pressure at earth’s surface; for the astronaut, pressure problems involve functioning in lower pressure of spacecraft and vacuum of space itself. Other shared biomedical problems: dysbarism, oxygen toxicity, trace contamination, and anoxia. (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 9/19/65) During week of September 19: Medical checkup indicated that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard (Capt., usn) still suffered from labyrinthitis—an inner ear infection. Because of the illness, Shepard had not been selected for any of six Gemini flight crews. He also could not fly aircraft alone, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/28/65, A10)
gemim m Astronauts John W. Young (foreground) and Virgil 1. Grissom in spacecraft immediately prior to launch.
Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of the Fels Planetarium, said in the Philadelphia Inquirer: “As of this moment, the Soviets have tentatively determined that the maximum ‘safe’ period of weightlessness is 24 hr. They hold that after this period, ‘irreversible physiological changes begin to occur in the human system which, if not corrected, will eventually lead to death’. . . . “The Soviets have also discovered a correlation between high accelerations and weightlessness. They believe that when an astronaut is subjected to high accelerations on launch he tends to overestimate or to overcompensate for his movements. Once the astronaut is weightless, then a radical reversal takes place in which the astronaut undercompensates and may suffer disorientation. . . . “The Soviets appear to have concluded that flight crews of the future will be selected as medical teams, and they will further be selected on the basis of biological and bacteriological compatibility. The crew will be concerned with developing means for forecasting their own health during the entire trip so as to preserve it.” (Phil. Inq., 1/17/65)
A Benedictine nun, Sister M. Margaret Bealmear, said she had declined an invitation to apply for astronaut training and that she assumed the letter from NASA Manned Spacecraft Center had been a mistake. Sister Bealmear, a candidate for a doctorate in biology from the Univ. of Notre Dame, said she had received the invitation in December 1964. Invitations had been extended by NASA to select names appearing on a list provided by the National Academy of Sciences. (ap, NYT, 3/16/65, 5; msc Historian)
President Johnson approved the following policy on the promotion and decoration of astronauts: “1. Each military astronaut will receive a one grade promotion as a direct result of the first successful space flight, but not beyond the grade of colonel in the Air Force and Marine Corps or captain in the Navy. Promotions to general officer rank will be accomplished through usual military selection board process. “2. Each Gemini astronaut will be awarded the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service (or Cluster) after completion of a successful space flight. The NASA Medal for Distinguished Service, the highest award which can be given by that agency, will be awarded for exceptional accomplishments in the Gemini program, including but not limited to accomplishments in actual flight. “3. Military decorations associated with space flights, such as awards for exceptional heroism or other distinguished service, will be determined on an individual basis consistent with general policy governing the award of traditional military decorations.” (Text, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 183-84) During August: Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn., wrote in Aerospace: “Almost every aspect of our national life has begun to show a positive and beneficial impact of this nation’s decision to be a major participant in man’s greatest adventure. “There has been the direct economic impact on the communities and regions where the major parts of this large national event are centered. There has been introduced into our national economy a wide variety of radically new industrial techniques. There have evolved new standards of excellence in engineering, testing, design, reliability, environment, control, and the skill and dedication of personnel . . . “In space research, development and exploration, the identity becomes . . . more imperative. Aerospace companies go many routes attempting to achieve that goal. Leading aerospace companies, for example, developed a ‘Zero Defects’ program aimed at reminding, rewinding, and emphasizing to the worker that rejects are expensive and, if undetected, would contribute to tragedy. Other companies have instituted variations of the zero defects promotional program. “A second motivation campaign called ‘The Critical Parts Program,’ to insure that all 98 subsystem assemblies that go into a major space booster system will work, precisely in sequence, has been sold as an industry wide concept. “Another company reports that employes were amused and, more importantly, impressed, when a sign was tacked above the door of its main assembly room that reads: ‘In NASA we trust. Everything else we check . . .’” (Aerospace, Summer 1965, 25)
President Johnson signed into law the High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 (pl 89—220) in White House ceremony. He said: “. . . In recent decades, we have achieved technological miracles in our transportation. But there is one great exception. “We have airplanes which fly three times faster than sound. We have television cameras that are orbiting Mars. But we have the same tired and inadequate mass transportation between our towns and cities that we had 30 years ago. “Today ... an astronaut can orbit the earth faster than a man on the ground can get from New York to Washington. Yet, the same science and technology which gave us our airplanes and our space probes, I believe, could also give us better and faster and more economical transportation on the ground. And a lot of us need it more on the ground than we need it orbiting the earth. . . . “The High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 really gives us, for the first time in history, a coordinated program for improving the transportation system that we have today, and making it a better servant to our people. . . .”	( Text, Pres. Doc., 10/4/65, 329-30)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and his wife left for Europe on a goodwill tour ordered by President Johnson. Cities on the schedule included London, Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Genoa, Rome, Naples, Florence or Venice, Madrid, and Lisbon. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/29/65)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
Gemini astronaut parachute system for use in launch emergency failed to function properly during test at El Centro, Calif. When the jumper stepped from a c-130 aircraft at 23,000-ft. altitude, a “ballute” (combination balloon and parachute) device for stabilizing the fall failed to deploy; the chute was opened manually at 12,000 ft. (upi, Minneapolis Trib., 3/10/65)
The Gemini 4 manned spaceflight had been scheduled for June 3, NASA announced. The four-day flight would last about 97 hrs. 50 min., and would increase the U.S.’s hours of manned space flight to about 257 hrs. No decision had been made about opening the two-man spacecraft and letting one astronaut stand exposed to space. (Clark, Ayr, 5/22/65, 8)
President Johnson telephoned the Nation’s thanks to Gemini Astronauts James McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) and told them that they had written their names “in history and in our hearts.” He concluded: “What you’ve done will never be forgotten. We can hope and pray that the time will come when all men of all nations will join together to explore space together and walk side by side toward peace. And you two outstanding men have taken a long stride forward in mankind’s progress, and everyone in this nation, and I think in the free world, feels in your debt.” The astronauts, aboard the carrier Wasp in the Atlantic for medical tests, were invited to spend the week-end with the President at his Texas ranch. (Kilpatrick, Wash. Post, 6/8/65, A14)
Rep. Joseph Karth (D-Minn.) told the House that the flight of GEMINI V had successfully tested not only the high qualities of Astronauts Gordon Cooper, Jr., and Charles Conrad, but the reliability and suitability of many items involved in America’s space program, including food. He inserted into the Congressional Record: “The Pillsbury items scheduled by NASA for the Cooper-Conrad mission—each ready to eat and requiring no reconstitution—were brownies, gingerbread, pineapple fruitcake, date fruitcake, apricot cereal bars, strawberry cereal bars, toasted bread cubes and cinnamon toast. “Cooper and Conrad were programed to eat 4 meals each day, providing a daily average of approximately 2,500 calories. The selected menu . . . was designed to maintain body weight at zero gravity under light physical activity. The 8 Pillsbury items were designed to provide a high energy source that supplemented the rehydratable foods in the menu for each meal. They required no preparation time and provided solid food consistency. . . .” {CR, 9/9/65, A5095)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young were honored in a White House ceremony where President Johnson conferred NASA Exceptional Service Medals on both men and pinned a cluster on the NASA Distinguished Service Medal awarded Major Grisson for his July Zl, lyoi, suDormtai mercury night. first man to ma!c€ two space flights. NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his direction of space efforts. Harris M. Schurmeier received an Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for his direction of the Ranger program. President Johnson said: “A sense of history is present strongly here today. All of us are conscious that we have crossed over the threshold of man’s first tentative and experimental ventures in space. . . . “Since we gave our program direction and purpose seven years ago, many successes have been achieved through the efforts of a great American team, which now numbers 400 thousand men and women in industry, on campuses, and in government. And this team is inspired and stimulated and led by a former Marine and a great public servant —Jim Webb.” Following the ceremony, a motorcade bearing Vice President Humphrey, the astronauts, and their party took the Pennsylvania Ave. parade route, where thousands had gathered to cheer them, to the Capitol; a luncheon in their honor was jointly sponsored by Sen. Clinton Anderson (D-N.Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller f D—Calif.), chairmen of the Senate and House space committees. At 5 p.m. the group returned to Capitol Hill for a Congressional reception hosted by House Speaker John McCormack (D-Mass.). (NASA Release 65-98; Text; Carmody, Wash. Post, 3/26/65; NYT, 3/27/65, 1)
The radar set that would guide Gemini astronauts on rendezvous missions in space, beginning with the August 19 Gemini v flight, was demonstrated by Westinghouse Corp.—working under an $18 million contract with	NASA—at	Friendship International Airport, Baltimore. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Charles Conrad (Lcdr., usn) would carry a self-contained Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) into orbit on the back end of their spacecraft. An Agena rendezvous radar transponder and flashing beacons would be packaged in the Rep along with batteries and antenna. Midway through the second revolution, at 2 hrs. 25 min. after liftoff, command pilot Cooper would yaw the Gemini 5 spacecraft 90° to the right. Explosive charges would eject the Rep from its canister northward at 5 fps. Gemini 5 would then maneuver away from the Rep to attain a position six miles below and 14 mi. behind the Rep. Subsequent phase adjustment would place Gemini 5 in a co-elliptical orbit—that is, the spacecraft would be at constant altitude below the Rep but reducing the trailing distance, since the spacecraft in its lowest orbit would be traveling faster than the Rep. Range and range-rate data would be displayed to the Gemini 5 crew by the rendezvous radar system. The radar system would continuously compute distance and angles from the spacecraft to the Pod, and calculate the maneuvers necessary to effect rendezvous. At five hours and 36 min. after liftoff, if the mission went as planned, Gemini 5 should be closing in on the Rep just north of the Carnarvon, Australia, tracking station. Gemini 5 would not physically dock with Rep; the experiment would simply provide training for Gemini VI and other rendezvous missions and evaluate the rendezvous radar hardware to be used on the Agena target vehicle in later missions. (Clark, NYT, 7/8/65, 12; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/8/65; Msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1, 2)
gemini vii Astronauts Lovell and Borman completed the medical phase of their debriefing at ksc. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for MSC, said that “a quick look at data available . . . indicates man has fared extremely well in two weeks of space environment.” A detailed medical analysis would be available later, nasa released several terrain photographs taken by Astronaut Lovell during gemini vii’s spaceflight Dec. 4—18. (ap, NYT, 12/22/65, 14; ap, Wash. Post, 12/22/65, A3)
NASA released a photograph of the gemini iv spacecraft taken by Astronaut Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) during his walk in space. The picture was one of an unannounced number that Major White recorded with a 35 mm. camera mounted atop a space gun that he used for maneuverability. Films of Astronaut White floating in space would be made available for public showing “sometime within the next month.” (ap, NYT, 6/11/65, 12)
A home-made U.S. flag, carried by astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John W. Young (LCdr., usn) on the March 23 Gemini iii flight, was hoisted at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center the moment Astronauts James A. McDivitt, (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White ii (Maj., usaf) went into orbit. Flag w'ould be flown only while astronauts were in spaceflight, (ap, Knoxville News Sentinel, 6/3/65)
The world applauded the success of the GEMINI v mission: many leaders in Western Europe sent congratulatory cables to President Johnson, and newspapers in Great Britain, Malaysia, India, and Japan were among those giving the flight front-page coverage. The Soviet Union televised pictures of the astronauts and broadcast news reports of their landing. Only a few dissenting voices were heard— among them the Cuban newspaper Revolucion which described the flight as “cosmic espionage.” Communist China remained silent. {Wash. Post, 8/31/65, A3)
An instrumented experiment package capable of recording lunar phenomena and relaying information to earth, would be installed on the moon by astronauts before their return to earth, reported Howard Simons in the Washington Post. Simons said that NASA officials explained that the package would contain “combination of instruments to measure the moon’s gravity and atmosphere, heat flow and solar wind, proton activity and micrometeorite impacts for as long as a year.” Such information would be helpful in planning the establishment of permanent lunar bases and in studying the history of the earth and the solar system. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/14/65, A9)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., visited Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie in the royal palace in Addis Ababa, then made the fourth stop of their goodwill tour—after Greece, Turkey, and Ethiopia—the Malagasy Republic. They were received cordially. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/65; upi, Miami Her., 9/22/65)
Honorary Doctor of Astronautical Science degrees were conferred on Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) by their alma mater, the Univ. of Michigan where Maj. White received his bs degree in 1959 and Maj. McDivitt, his ms degree in 1959. The astronauts then attended a ceremony dedicating the University’s new $1.7 million space research building and rode in a motorcade through downtown Ann Arbor. NASA’s official representative at the festivities was Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of the nasa Langley Research Center, also a Michigan alumnus. (LaRC Release; ap, Balt. Sun. 6/16/65)
Italy’s Order of Merit was awarded former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), during his visit to Rome. He and his wife were also received by Prime Minister Aldo Moro. (Reuters, NYT, 10/16/65, 54)
Gemini spacecraft, scheduled for a four-day manned flight this summer, was delivered to Cape Kennedy. It was flown by cargo plane from McDonnell Aircraft Corp., prime contractor for manufacture of the craft, where it had undergone simulated flights. Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White II, who would pilot the Gemini 4, also had made simulated flights at McDonnell, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/5/65)
Prospecting for high-grade silver could be done, according to Thor H. Kiilsgaard, Chief of the Resources Research Branch of the U.S. Geological Survey, by using an infrared system mounted on aircraft. He explained that deposits of silver in the earth were associated with hot water and that areas of heat flow could be detected by the infrared devices. If the heat zones conformed with mineral zones or faults, silver might be present. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 2/28/65, 64) During February: The prime and backup crews for the upcoming GT-3 three-orbital mission underwent parachute and egress training exercises. Parachute training, with the astronauts in space suits, was conducted in Galveston Bay, Tex. Egress training from a submerged Gemini boilerplate spacecraft was conducted in a large tank at Ellington, afb. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 2)
Gemini vii Astronauts Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf) and James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), passed their 5-hr. preflight physical examination at ksc. Dr. Charles Berry, Gemini medical director, said he could find no medical problem that might interfere with the scheduled launch of Gemini vii Dec. 4. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/65, A3; Wilford, NYT, 12/2/65, 22)
Gemini vi, scheduled to be launched from Eastern Test Range, with Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf), was canceled by failure of the Agena rocket, vehicle with which Gemini spacecraft was to rendezvous and dock. The mission was to have been the fourth manned flight and the first rendezvous and docking mission in the Gemini program. Simultaneous countdown of both the Titan n-Gemini 6 and the Atlas-Agena had been developed to maximize launch reliability for a “same day” launch. Atlas-Agena liftoff was at 10:00:04 est. The Agena Target Vehicle separated from the Atlas at 10:05:12 with all sequences and parameters nominal at separation. Following a nominal Agena coast period, loss of Agena telemetry and radar beacon track occurred at 10:06:20 after initiation of primary propulsion system burn. Attempt to establish radar or telemetry track by the Canary Islands tracking station and subsequently by the Carnarvon station was unsuccessful. A hold was called at t-42 in the Gemini 6 countdown to determine the status of the Agena Target Vehicle. Mission was terminated at 10:54 a.m. because the Agena Target Vehicle had failed to achieve orbit. Formal Gemini vi mission failure investigation was immediately initiated, (nasa Release 65-237; Marshall Star, 11/3/65, 1; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/25/65, 1; Clark, NYT, 10/26/65, 1)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., received a warm welcome in Ankara, Turkey, in contrast to cool receptions in Izmir and Istanbul. President Cemal Gursel told the astronauts their flight of nearly eight days had demonstrated “great courage ... to your nation and to the whole world.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/20/65)
In a Missiles and Rockets editorial, William J. Coughlin questioned NASA’s wisdom in drawing up mission requirements for lunar exploration. The article said:	“Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA associate administrator, told Congress last year:	‘Ranger will play an important role in the support of Project Apollo.’ . . . “Not a single change has been made in any part of the Apollo system or in the program’s operational plan as a result of the Ranger findings. None is contemplated. The reason for this is simple. The Block in Rangers were incapable of producing any such data. . . . “The case for Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter as supports for the Apollo program ... is not a very strong one. . . . “Dr. Newell sees them as part of what he calls the ‘total program for exploring the Moon.’ . . . [He said] in the following statement to Congress:	‘You will have a lunar landing. That lunar landing will involve a few hours of stay on the Moon, a look that the astronauts can make, a few collections of samples, maybe some simple tests, and maybe the implacement by the astronauts of monitors to be left on the lunar surface.’ “After their departure, Dr. Newell sees the instruments carrying on. Lunar Orbiter wheels overhead. Surveyor explores areas on the moon which Man would have difficulty in reaching. . . . “We suggest that if anyone proposed exploring the Antarctic in such a manner, he would he clapped in the pokey as a nut. Man is going to the Moon and he is going to explore it. Expenditure of billions of dollars on instruments remotely controlled from Earth to do the same job is folly.” (M&R, 4/12/65, 46)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former NASA astronaut and first American to orbit the earth, retired from the Marine Corps after 22 yrs. in the service. Glenn said he would spend much of his time as a consultant to nasa. He would also be a director of Royal Crown Cola Co. ( dod Release 912-64; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/4/65; Wash. Post, 1/5/65; Balt. Sun, 1/5/65; Chic. Trib., 1/5/65)
A temporary injunction was issued banning a steel fabricating firm from running internal combustion engines while GEMINI vu orbited over the Corpus Christi, Tex., area. The Government, in asking for the injunction, said machinery at Safety Steel Services, Inc., interfered with radio signals to the spacecraft and “threatened the safety of the astronauts.” (ap, Wash. Post, 12/9/65)
In what he termed “Coming of Age in Houston,” William Hines wrote in the Washington Evening Star of “a new, mature outlook on the part of NASA.” He said: “There was a conscious effort to deglamorize (but not depersonalize) the [Gemini 4] astronauts, and to' focus attention on the mission rather than on celebrities who would subsequently tell their stories in Life. The decision not to give the spacecraft a name and to use the radio call sign ‘Gemini 4’ was a step in this direction. “The determination of NASA to rid itself of what has been called the ‘Hollywood syndrome’ and handle space flights as transcendental news events instead of tawdry theatrical productions did not come easily, or without prodding from the outside. But once the decision had been made not to try any longer to fool all the people all the time, a new era in public understanding of space dawned.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/65)
Dr. Donald Young and Dr. Ralph Pelligra of nasa Ames Research Center had been studying “the use of high caloric diets for prolonged space flights on the theory that it may be possible for astronauts to use their own fatty deposits as a source of energy.” It might be possible that future astronauts would prepare for spaceflight by eating “certain types of fats that would build up in their bodies,” thus providing them with “storage depots of their own fat” that could serve “as a backup if food supplies were limited.” (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/26/65)
Soviet claim that the Gemini v spaceflight was undertaken with “haste and definite risk” received editorial comment in the Washington Evening Star: “Tass, the official Soviet news agency, should feel a little bit embarrassed at the moment. It has given a big play to a story by Leonid Ponomariov [sic], its New York correspondent. The story has charged that American space officials have been ordered by the Johnson administration to ‘beat the Soviet Union at any price with regard to the duration of orbital flight.’ “. . . our country may indeed be forging ahead. But nothing could be more ridiculous than Ponomariov’s [sic] studied suggestion that Gemini 5 has been put into orbit in a slapdash manner, with callous disregard for the safety of the astronauts aboard, just to steal a space scene from the Soviets. The fuel system and everything else aboard the Cooper-Conrad vehicle are not whimsical improvisations. That has been made dramatically clear by the way in which Gemini’s initial power failure has been eliminated with help from ground control, by the craft’s built-in means of self-correction. “As a result, it seems fairly certain right now that Astronauts Cooper and Conrad will be able to complete their eight-day mission. . . . “God willing, the Gemini flight will succeed to a degree that may persuade the men of the Kremlin to pay serious attention to our country’s standing proposal for a joint Soviet-American effort to promote a manned landing on the moon.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/24/65)
The successful Gemini vii-vi mission received extensive editorial comment. New York Times: “The exploits of astronauts Borman, Lovell, Schirra and Stafford and the extraordinary pictures they brought back from space have thrilled men everywhere. Admiration for their high achievements has—if only for the moment—overcome most of the usual division of this quarrelsome world. . . . “Borman and Lovell in Gemini 7 took the longest journey in history —more than five million miles. They showed that creatures of the earth’s surface can live and work effectively for fourteen days in a weightless environment, in which men must encapsulate themselves as in the womb and bring their own air, food and water to survive . . . they proved that a human organism is up to the task of staying in space long enough to fly to the moon, to do work there for several days, and then to return to this planet. “The unprecedented precision navigation feat of Schirra and Stafford in Gemini 6 was important primarily because, for the first time, it brought two spaceships close enough together to be joined. Their demonstration opens the way for construction in space and vastly expands the potentialities for human activity in that realm. . . .” (NYT, 12/19/65, 8E) Washington Sunday Star: “Now it is all over, but it will be remembered in history as one of man’s finer achievements. . . .” (Wash. Sun. Star, 12/19/65, C2)
Attempt to launch Gemini vi from etr was unsuccessful when an electric plug connecting the Titan II booster to the launch pad fell loose 2}4 sec. early, causing the automatic sequencer to shut down the engine booster 1.2 sec. after ignition. Inside the Titan II a wire extended from the tail plug to tap a circuit which carried current from the batteries to an intervalometer—electric clock—which controls the first 21/% min. of powered flight. When the plug shook loose prematurely and started the clock, signals that liftoff had occurred were sent to the Titan ii’s automatic pilot, local guidance stations, and an automatic sequencing device at KSC Launch Control Center. The sequencer registered the mishap and shut down Titan Ii’s engines. Astronauts Stafford and Schirra remained calm throughout the misfire with Command Pilot Schirra rejecting the option to actuate the ejection seats. The astronauts were removed 99 min. later from the spacecraft and the launch rescheduled for Dec. 15. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/13/65, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/13/65, Al; MSC GEMINI V11/GEMIN1 VI Fact Sheet)
King Constantine of Greece invited Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), their wives, and other U.S. officials in Athens for the 16th International Astronautical Congress, to a royal palace banquet, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and JPL Director Dr. William H.	Pickering were among the guests, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/17/65)
An equipment modification to permit opening of the hatch on Gemini 4 had been successfully tested, William Normyle reported in Aviation Week & Space Technology. Hoses connecting the spacesuits to the spacecraft’s environmental control system were lengthened to permit the astronaut to stand and partially emerge through the hatch. NASA had not yet approved a spacecraft-depressurization and hatchopening exercise for the two-man spaceflight. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 4/5/65, 27)
C. Leo De Orsey, financial advisor and attorney for the seven original astronauts and acting president of the Washington Redskins football team, died, (upi, Houston Chron., 5/1/65; ap, NYT, 5/2/65, 89)
In a report presented at the 55th national meeting of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers in Houston, NASA Lewis Research Center engineer E. W. Ott said that moisture in an astronaut’s breath could escape into his space capsule, accumulate and float at zero gravity, and short out electrical systems it might come into contact with. He said something like this was believed to have happened when Astronaut Gordon Cooper had had to bring his space capsule in under manual control in May 1963. “There is good evidence that water found its way into automatic control equipment and caused malfunctioning.” (Justice, Houston Post, 2/10/65)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief of medical operations at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, had said that new body sensor equipment developed for astronauts had “stretched the doctor’s stethoscope to reach 100 miles,” reported Norm Spray in an article in the Houston Chronicle: “This could open the door for new types of medical research and treatment potentially as important to the family physician as to space scientists, Dr. Berry believes.
Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “A strong smell of sour grapes is beginning to emanate from the Soviet propaganda machine with its waspish comments on recent U.S. space achievements. . . . “This . . . was evident in the Soviet propaganda barrage aimed at the Gemini 5 flight when it became apparent that Astronauts Cooper and Conrad would surpass the world space flight endurance record set by Soviet Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky in June 1963. Tass . . . charged that U.S. space officials were endangering the lives of the two Gemini Astronauts by keeping them in flight after the initial fuel cell problems in a supposedly rash effort to surpass the Soviet mark. Red Star, the official Defense Ministry newspaper, joined in by ‘exposing’ the Gemini 5 flight as a Pentagon plot to develop better space reconnaissance techniques and charged the peaceful scientific aims of space exploration were being subverted in Gemini by its military experiments. . . . “What is really significant about these Soviet sour grapes is that they reflect a realization that the USSR has been overtaken and is being passed in the space race by the U.S. program. The U.S. superiority in unmanned space probes has become clearly recognized by the world with the Ranger lunar pictures and the Mars data from Mariner 4. Gemini 4 and 5 finally erased the Soviet lead in the manned space flight. The solid operational foundation of the Gemini program has made possible the swift and sure pace which promises to eclipse significantly the Voskhod flights in the immediate future. . . .” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 21)
Indonesian Air Vice Admiral Budiardjo, deputy air force chief for logistics, claimed that Indonesia had begun surveys for space flights and would be able to launch its first astronaut by 1968. (ap, Wash. Post, 1/7/65, A13)
Astronaut Walter Schirra said that he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had maneuvered the GEMINI VI spacecraft to within one foot of Gemini VII during their Dec. 15 rendezvous and that although they were backed up by an advanced type of computer, they probably could have effected rendezvous without it. Schirra and the three other astronauts involved in the GEMINI VII-VI flights gave reports on their missions at an msc news conference, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/31/65, Al; msc Gemini VII/Gemini VI Fact Sheet)
Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff reported to the Medical Society of the State of New York at its annual convention that the semicircular canals of the inner ear had been demonstrated to play a key role in motion sickness that astronauts might experience in a rotating, orbiting spacecraft. Capt. Ashton Graybiel at the usn School of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola, expressed optimism that astronauts could be taught to overcome the effects of motion sickness. One way, he said, was to precondition selected persons by teaching them how to avoid movements that would invariably upset them. Another promising development, Dr. Graybiel said, was drug research. (Simons, Wash. Post, 2/16/65)
It was reported that President Johnson was disappointed that the twoman Gemini-Titan 4 spacecraft scheduled for June 3 launching, had no cameras aboard for simultaneous TV transmission of the space walk. The President had hoped that at completion of the four-day flight by Astronauts McDivitt and White, the U.S. would have pictures similar to those released by the Soviet Union after VOSKHOD II flight. TV cameras had been sacrificed for experimental instruments. (Humphrey, Phil. Eve. Bull., 5/27/65)
NASA selected three firms to design the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Packages (Alsep) under separate and concurrent $500,000, six-month, fixed-price contracts. The firms were Bendix Systems Div., Bendix Corp.; Space-General Corp.; and TRW Systems Group, Thomp-son-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc. Packages would contain scientific instruments to measure the moon’s structure and surface characteristics, atmosphere, heat flow, solar wind, radiation, and micrometeorite impacts. They would be carried to the moon on the initial Apollo spaceflights and placed on the surface by astronauts. Instruments would transmit data back to earth for six months to one year. (NASA Release 65-260)
“I certainly have seen nothing in the eight-day data that would lead me to be worried about a 14-day flight,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief physician for the astronauts, told reporters at a news briefing in Cocoa Beach. He said that the GEMINI V astronauts were in good physical condition and were returning to normal as quickly as had the pilots of the four-day Gemini GT-4 flight in June. Changes in such indicators as the heart rate and blood pressure characteristics seemed to reflect adaptation to the weightless space environment and, later, to the stress of returning to normal gravity of earth, Dr. Berry explained. Heart rates became lower in space and rose above normal on returning to earth. At first, on return to earth, blood pressure did not respond as promptly as normal to tilt-table tests designed to show how well the circulatory system copes with sudden changes from horizontal to nearly-vertical posture. Cooper and Conrad lost about TV2 and 8Y2 lbs. respectively, but had gained most of it back. This loss might have been a response to the space environment but was believed to be partly water loss after reentry while waiting in the sun to be rescued, Berry said. Both seemed to be less tired than their predecessors. (Schmeck, NYT, 9/1/65, 1, 15)
New York Times editorial: "Space historians will have to invent new superlatives to describe the contributions of Gemini 11 and astronauts Conrad and Gordon to man’s entry into the cosmos. From the link-up with the Agena in the very first orbit to the incredibly accurate automatic return to earth, the three-day flight demonstrated a new level of capability far surpassing that shown in any previous flight by any nation.” (NYT, 9/16/66, 34M)
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
Astronaut Frank Borman, a 1950 graduate of West Point, gave Academy cadets a souvenir from space—the flag of the cadet company he had commanded—carried on his Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini vii mission, (upi, NYT, 6/2/66, 4) Landing sequence began 2,000 mi. above moon when, traveling at 6,000	mph, surveyor i shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar ejected at 52-mi. altitude, main retrorocket burned until 37,000-ft. altitude, slowing craft to 400 mph. After retrorocket burnout, smaller guidance rockets ignited, slowing surveyor i to 3Yi mph at 14-ft. altitude. Craft then free-fell to lunar surface at 8 mph. Landing—so precise that spacecraft’s three footpads touched lunar surface within 19 millisec. of each other—confirmed that lunar surface could support Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and proved concept of automatically decelerating a spacecraft from 6,000-mph speed to touchdown speed of 3H mph. Photos transmitted by surveyor i before its camera was secured after sunset of first lunar day (June 14) revealed nearly level lunar surface littered with rock fragments [see During June]. "Rubble scattered over the surface is probably a fairly general characteristic all over the moon,” NASA Surveyor Project Scientist Dr. Leonard Jaffe told jpl press conference. Pictures taken June 4 during seven two-second firings of nitrogen gas from spacecraft’s attitude control jets showed no disturbance of the lunar surface. In addition to wide- and narrow-angle lurain photographs, surveyor i obtained pictures of the stars Sirius and Canopus to determine spacecraft’s exact location. Halting communication with surveyor i June 14 to allow spacecraft to conserve battery energy throughout lunar night (June 14-29), JPL announced: "It is very difficult to predict if Surveyor’s batteries will withstand the —260°F cold. If Surveyor survives, the engineers estimate it will be several days after sunrise before the batteries thaw out” [see June 28-29]. Considerably more complex than Soviet luna IX which softlanded on the moon Feb. 3, surveyor i apparatus remained a closed intact system up until touchdown. A tripod-legged arrangement of cameras, antennas, and other equipment which used solar cells to convert sun’s energy into electric power for operation on lunar surface, surveyor i June- 2-14; surveyor i returned this photograph of its footpad resting on the surface of the moou. had a landing system which used radars, a computer, and four rocket engines to adjust its own speed, attitude, and flight path, luna ix was crash-proof, uncontrolled photographic instrument package jettisoned by its carrier rocket immediately before impact, which free-fell under pull of lunar gravity. It had transmitted only 12 photos. The near-flawless performance of SURVEYOR i, an engineering model, far exceeded jfl officials’ expectations. "This, in my opinion, puts the Surveyor program ahead a year,” Robert F. Garbarini, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications for Engineering, told JPL press conference. "We thought it would take three or four flights to get the craft operational.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-127; JPL Transcript; Spivak, WSJ, 6/3/66, 2; WSJ, 6/15/66, 1; Shreveport Times, 6/3/66, 12A; Clark, NYT, 6/3/66, 1, 22; 6/4/66, 12; 6/5/66, 1; 6/6/66, 40M; AP, NYT, 17; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/66, C3; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/6/66, A9; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/15/66, A6; Berman, Wash. Post, 6/5/66, A14; AP, Wash. Post, 6/15/66, A10)
The Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II received editorial comment. Washington Evening Star: "Yesterday’s tragedy is all the more shocking in that it needn’t have happened at all. . . . "It is assumed that Bassett was Togging flying time’. .. See, a civilian, was not eligible for flight pay but as an astronaut was encouraged to keep his hand as an airplane jockey, "It is difficult to see why it is necessary for military men on astronaut duty to fly airplanes to qualify for 'hazardous duty’ pay . . . "Let’s save our spacemen for space, and let’s make it a bit easier for them by amending the military pay act to give uniformed astronauts those fjew hundred extra dollars a month just for being astronauts.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A6) Houston Post: "There is ... an element of irony in the fact that two men preparing for a highly hazardous space mission should die in this prosaic manner, but actually, under the procedures that are followed in space flights, there are just as great risks on the surface of the earth and in its atmosphere as in space, and they probably are much more numerous. If air travel is safer than land travel today, space travel is probably even safer . . .” (Houston Post, 3/2/66) Missiles and Rockets: "By emphasizing the everyday risk taken by all the astronauts in the course of training, the deaths of Capt. Freeman, Mr. See and Maj. Bassett have almost certainly lessened the outcry against the space program in the event of similar losses during space operations. "Each time an astronaut steps into a military jet aircraft, he is running a risk perceptibly greater than that he takes in space. . . . [nasa] takes the greatest of care to assure that manned spacecraft launches are as safe as the best engineering talent in the nation can make them. A launch atop a Titan II, hazardous as it may be, cannot compare with the danger inherent in groping through low fog for an elusive runway in a jet aircraft.” (Coughlin, M&R, 3/14/66, 54)
Gemini xii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., arrived at ksc to begin debriefing. Addressing some 700 workmen, Lovell said "everyone here has done an outstanding job to get us into space”; Aldrin described the four-day mission as a "treat to me as an individual that I would like to have shared with every person in the world.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 11/17/66)
NASA’s lunar ORBITER I (Lunar Orbiter A) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in first U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Aug. 14-31]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 28-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft into 90-hr. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule, lunar orbiter i deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s startracker failed to lock on Canopus and flight engineers were forced to lock it on the moon—-a weaker navigational reference point. Assistant Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC was "still quite confident” about achieving lunar orbit, but noted it might be more difficult to obtain desired precision and exact positions required for optimum photos of lunar surface. At approximately 00:28 GMT Aug. 11 planned midcourse maneuver was successfully executed, and JPL scientists predicted spacecraft would miss original aiming point by only 50 mi. Primary objectives of NASA’s lunar orbiter i mission, first in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) obtain high-resolution photos of various types of lunar surface to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft and improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 3,000mi. strip along moon’s equator, concentrating on nine potential landing areas. Spacecraft would also attempt to photograph surveyor i landing sites; provide precision trajectory information; and monitor meteoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Release 66-195; Wilford, NYT, 8/8/66, 3; 8/11/66, 1, 12; 8/12/66, 51; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 8/11/66, Al; 8/12/66, Al; 8/13/66, Al; 8/14/66, Al, A6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/11/66, A3)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in interview with Look, rejected report that U.S.S.R. had lost men in space: "Every bit of information we have shows that they have been as careful with the lives of cosmonauts as we have been with astronauts. As far as I know, they have not lost a single man in flight. They have lost them on the ground, they have lost them in airplanes, just like we have.” {Look, 10/18/66)
Discussing the urgency of nasa’s deciding "what to do in space after the first Apollo astronauts return from the moon about 1970,” William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is hard to forget a hint, dropped ... by a leading Russian space official several years ago. The Soviet Union, this functionary suggested, might very well celebrate the 50th anniversary of its great revolution by having cosmonauts plant a flag on the lunar surface. That deadline—if it is a deadline—is now less than 20 months away. "But suppose the Soviet Union is not racing us to the moon, or for that matter suppose that she is. In the present state of planning, the U.S. with the moon in its grasp would be very much like a dog chasing an automobile—what does he do with it if he catches it?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66)
NASA had awarded a $38,000 contract to U.S. Public Health Service on best approach to control and early diagnosis of viral infection in astronauts during space flight. Dr. Walter Kemmerer, msc’s monitor on the virus control study, said in an interview: "We want to have techniques to enable us to prevent this from happening, and to detect that it is happening. Also, we want to know how to prevent one astronaut from transmitting it to another inside the spacecraft.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/66, Al)
nasa’s first manned Apollo flight might be made in 1966 instead of 1967, as originally scheduled, predicted Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, in a speech at naa’s plant in Downey, Calif., to press group touring manufacturing and test sites for Apollo spacecraft and Saturn boosters. "The Apollo program is about on schedule in time, cost and performance. We have found the performance of the hardware some better than we had expected, on the basis of tests. All testing for the first manned flight probably will be completed by the end of June. "I hope we can make the first manned flight this year, although it is not scheduled until next year. I think that the first lunar excursion module will be sent up next year. "I am sure personally that our first lunar landing will be done comfortably before the end of the decade.” C. R. Able, group vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div., outlined to the group plan for converting empty hydrogen tank from Saturn V’s 3rd stage into manned space capsule. For conversion, series of metal balloons containing liquid oxygen would be added to original orbited payload, to serve later for breathing and for combination with hydrogen to operate fuel cells for producing electricity. An Apollo or Gemini spacecraft would dock with empty 3rd stage, and astronauts would emerge to remove end cover plate in end of the tank, after purging it of any hydrogen remaining from launch. An airlock, carried aloft as part of original payload or launched later, would be attached to opening left by removal of cover plate and tank would be repressurized with oxygen from metal balloons to provide astronauts with "shirtsleeve environment.” Tank walls would have about 100 shallow threaded holes for mounting work benches, furniture, or other convenient items, presumably launched separately. Able emphasized that purpose of stage conversion—to offer astronauts relief from cramped quarters and extended weightlessness—did not duplicate function of USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Douglas Aircraft Co., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. each had $50,000 NASA contracts to study use of booster cases. (Wallin, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66; upi, Miami Her., 5/6/66)
Management organization to direct Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) project at msfc was announced by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun: Leland Belew, Program Manager; Reine Ise, Project Manager; William Keathley, Project Experiments Manager; E. B. Craig, Contracting Officer; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Project Scientist, msfc’s Astrionics Lab., headed by Dr. Walter Haeussermann, Director, and William Horton, Assistant Director, would be responsible for overall technical aspects of Atm development, (msfc Release 66-270) During November: Two experiments developed at arc and flown on Nov. 11-15 gemini xii mission were highly successful. Five runs with hand-held sextant proved it could deliver required accuracy of 10 sec. of arc (l/360th of one degree of a circle) in actual space flight. In experiment to study effects of weightlessness on living cells using newly fertilized frog eggs, astronauts arrested cell growth at programed intervals during mission. Data were being analyzed, (arc Releases 66-15, 66-16; arc Astrogram, 11/23/66, 1, 4)
During White House meeting with President Johnson, NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed current status of national space program and showed President two previously unreleased color photographs—one of southern Texas, the other of Baja California— taken from 180-mi. altitude during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Following meeting, Webb announced that Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong would leave Oct. 7 for three-week tour of 10 Latin American nations: Venezuela, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/66, A4)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, attended dinner in Rangoon, Burma, given in his honor by Burma’s Foreign Minister U Thi Han. In Burma on a good-will tour, Glenn earlier had given an illustrated lecture on U.S. space program. (AP, NYT, 2/22/66, 4)
Tass told the Soviet people that gemini viii had achieved history’s first docking in space, and added: "But its program was carried out only partly. Its main elements—more practice in linking up, a lengthy stay by an astronaut outside his ship and the maneuvering of the ship and astronaut—remained unsolved.” (upi, NYT, 3/19/66, 41)
Astronaut Bruce McCandless II, discussing role of manned space flight in science in address before Washington, D.C., Junior Academy of Sciences’ annual meeting, concluded: "Man is flexible; he is capable of responding to unforeseen situations intelligently and effectively. He has a limited and on-the-spot redesign capability built in and contributes to mission success through improved reliability. He is capable of evaluating and screening information and making decisions accordingly and independently. As long as these elements are required, man’s participation will be beneficial.” (Text)
Gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan held their first post-mission press conference. Cernan said that during his space walk he could not keep his feet from floating, was unable to use both hands while trying to don backpack containing maneuvering unit, and "had to work continually against the pressure suit. ... I was devoting 50 per cent of my work load just to maintain position.” This extra effort saturated the environmental control system and led to fogging of his faceplate so that he could not test the maneuvering unit. About the same time, he felt his back becoming "extremely hot.” It was later revealed some of the insulation had been ripped from his spacesuit. After recounting his adventures, Cernan said: "I found no new voodoo out there.... You’re at home out there ... I’m convinced we can do just about anything we want to do.” {Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; NYT, 6/18/66, A10)
Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott received Exceptional Service Medals from NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in ceremonies at msc. Armstrong received a quality step increase in his Civil Service pay, and Major Scott (usaf), promotion to lieutenant colonel by President Johnson. At a televised msc news conference, Armstrong said he and Scott developed some "anxiety” but that they never for a moment thought they could not return the spacecraft tc earth. Both Scott and msc Director Robert R. Gilruth said that if the trouble had occurred over a ground tracking station, mission might have been salvaged. Malfunction would have been localized immediately and the information relayed to the astronauts. As it was, they had had no idea what was wrong or even whether the trouble was with the gatv/gemini viii or the spacecraft alone. (Waldron, NYT, 3/27/66, 64L; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/21/66, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/27/66, Al)
Astronaut Frank Borman returned to Gary, Ind., to help the city celebrate Frank Borman Day and start a year-long observance of its 60th anniversary. He said at a news conference that "it is inevitable” that the U.S. would lose a crew in its space program and that he hoped the public was "mature enough to accept the sacrifice.” (upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/15/66; AP, NYT, 1/15/66, 22; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/66, A2) January 15: Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, U.K., announced that Soviet space tracking station in the Crimea would send signals to Jodrell Bank via Venus for an entire 225-day Venusian year. Sir Bernard said that by following Venus during one complete solar revolution, scientists hoped to gain further information on exact distances of planets from each other and the sun; nature of the hidden surface of Venus; changes in the very slow rotation of Venus; and conditions in space between earth and Venus. (NYT, 1/16/66, 24)
U.S. would land a man on the moon before 1970 and before the Russians, predicted Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., at a news conference held with Astronaut Frank Borman in Sydney, Australia. Schirra said U.S. space program had completed three basic requirements for a manned lunar landing: 14-day spaceflight, ability to rendezvous in space, and controlled reentry into earth’s atmosphere. Astronauts Schirra and Borman were visiting Australia on their eight-nation good-will tour of Asia. (Reuters, NYT, 3/14/66, 6)
Optimism about man’s ability to perform useful work in space was expressed by Dr. Charles Berry, msc Director of Flight Research and Operations, in telephone interview with Washington Post writer J. V. Reistrup. Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., had demonstrated problems involved when he had left gemini xi spacecraft Sept. 13 to perform seemingly simple tasks and had exerted enough energy to raise his heart rate to peak 180 beats a minute. Berry said there was a "tremendous amount of effort involved in getting into position for performing basic tasks”; once "positioning” was solved, jobs could be done. The problem was to set up each activity to require minimum effort. (Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/18/66, A4)
Decisions on the direction of post-Apollo activities in space would require a "two-pronged effort by the part of our economy interested in the evolution of space products,” suggested Boeing Co. vice president George H. Stoner before aiaa Forum on "After Apollo, What Next?” in Washington, D.C.: ". . . industry must assist NASA and the federal government in formulating succeeding national space goals for the research that will produce fruitful progress toward understanding our universe and toward building a store of knowledge about specialized space techniques. . . . Industry and government agencies other than NASA must explore and continue to find ways to compete successfully in the world market place and in the international technological race on the large scale development projects that characterize our modern society. . . .” Stoner offered several specific suggestions for post-Apollo activities: (1) communications satellites that would take advantage of the natural access to anywhere on earth provided by spacecraft; (2) applications of space-based activities to ballistic missile defense; (3) expansion and refinement of equipment for survey of earth affairs from space; (4) dramatic reduction of launch costs; and (5) continuing exploration of space and its technologies by NASA astronauts and scientists to learn more about our universe. (Text)
Clark Univ.’s Robert Hutchings Goddard Library announced plans to bury a time capsule containing 100 "early Space Age” artifacts, including tape recording of former Astronaut John Glenn’s communications with ground control during his Feb. 20, 1962, MA-6 flight in friendship 7. Capsule would be set to be opened in 500 yrs. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/66, A4)
Mrs. James A. McDivitt gave birth in Houston to a daughter—first child conceived by an American astronaut’s wife after her husband had returned from space. Astronaut McDivitt was command pilot on the June fane 16: usaf Titan III-C launch vehicle in preparation for multiple-satellite payload mission from Eastern Test Range. 4-7, 1965, Gemini rv mission during which Astronaut Edward H. White II made his 21-min. Eva. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/66, A2)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
Gemini x spacecraft, its heatshield forward, aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. tions and drawings” for vehicles being proposed to transport astronauts on lunar surface, (msfc Release 66-157)
Possible explanation of astronaut’s inability to see stars on earth’s daylight side was presented by physics professors Edward P. Ney and W. F. Hugh in Science: a "spacecraft corona”—cloud of particles formed by waste materials shed from spacecraft—might produce glow that would hide stars dimmer than fourth magnitude. Corona had been discovered by former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., who reported during his Feb. 20, 1962, orbital mission in friendship 7 that he was being accompanied by a cloud of "fireflies.” (Science, 1/15/66, 297-9)
Scientists were considering "capturing an asteroid” and, through nuclear propulsion, placing it in earth orbit where it could be analyzed, reported John Wilford in the New York Times. He said "experts” believed "capture of an asteroid will be possible as soon as it is possible to send manned expeditions to the surface of Mars or Jupiter.” Astronauts would take with them a separate rocket engine which they would anchor to asteroid’s surface. Rocket would have to "produce long-duration burn but because of asteroid’s low gravity would not have to be very powerful to push the asteroid toward a new orbit.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, E7)
Prototype unfolding tool box containing 16 geological tools for astronauts to examine and obtain samples of lunar rock was delivered to msc by Martin Co. Box would also provide storage area for rock samples. Tools included battery-powered drill; dust scoop; sample-weighing device; hand-held magnifier designed for use through spacesuit visor; surveying instruments and rangefinder; and retriever to pick up small specimens of rock which pressure-suited astronaut could not reach, (msc Release 66-9)
U.S.S.R. was entering second phase of space medicine research, seeking the "why” of physiological changes, V. V. Parin, a Soviet physician-scientist with a major role in selecting and training cosmonauts, told Technology Week in a Moscow interview. In phase one "we merely made objective observations of animals ... we were interested in just keeping them alive, in generating the atmosphere, maintaining thermal control, humidity, pressure, and the rest,” Parin said. "Now we want to know the intimate details of animal adaptation” to space, because lower animals could be more intensively studied in space flights than man. Parin cited four areas in which improved medical technology could aid the study of physiology: measuring calcium loss in astronauts; analyzing process of water loss in astronauts; measuring muscle tone; and devising better telemetry. Parin said he was satisfied with the interchange of space-medical data between U.S.S.R. and U.S. (Beller, Tech. Wk., 7/4/66, 12, 13)
usaf Aerospace Medical Div. chief scientist Dr. Hubertus Strughold stated in telephone interview with Washington Sunday Star’s William Hines that NASA had not given adequate attention to keeping astronaut’s vision unimpaired during Eva. He said that in normal earth gravity, man could orient himself by means of sight sense (eyes); balance sense (otoliths of inner ear); and pressure sense (Meissner corpuscles concentrated primarily in palms of hands and soles of feet). In space there was no gravity, so otoliths and Meissner corpuscles could not function. When vision was also lost or impaired, orientation was impossible. Strughold pointed out that vision impairment had been a factor in curtailment of three of four Eva missions to date. He said advances in training and in spacesuit design were urgently needed, usaf had been "working on the problem” but had not been asked by NASA for advice or assistance. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A7)
nasa’s lunar orbiter ii (Lunar Orbiter B) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in second U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Nov. 10-30]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 14-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft on 94-hr., 232,000-mi. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule lunar orbiter ii deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s star-tracker lost its fix on Canopus, delaying critical midcourse maneuver eight hours. Correction was accomplished at 44:09 get and jpl predicted spacecraft would come very close to original aiming point. Primary objectives of nasa’s lunar orbiter ii mission, second in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) to obtain high-resolution photos on various lunar surface areas to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft, and to improve our knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 13 primary target sites, located generally within northern half of the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. It would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment and refine definition of moon’s gravitational field. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of nasa’s ossa. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-286; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 11/7/66, Al, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/7/66, A3; upi, NYT, 11/9/66, 77; AP, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, A2)
President Johnson announced he would send Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman, command pilots of the Dec. 4-18 GEMINI vii/vi mission, on a three-week, eight-country tour of the Far East to demonstrate scientific, technological, and educational values of U.S. space program and to visit Far Eastern countries which had cooperated with U.S. in space programs. Astronauts would leave Feb. 21, and visit Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand. The President had sent Gemini iv Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White II, to the Paris Air Show in June 1965; gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on an African tour in September 1965; and John Glenn, first American to achieve orbit, on a European tour in October 1965. (Pres. Doc., 2/21/66, 221; NYT, 2/16/66, 54)
Astronauts had made more than 1,000 "flights” in the Rendezvous Docking Simulator and other facilities at LaRC to help develop techniques for the operation of vehicles in space. Developed by LaRC scientists to explore, under controlled laboratory conditions, man’s ability to complete a rendezvous in earth or lunar orbit during final 200 ft. of the space-docking maneuver, the simulator had been used extensively by Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott, who performed world’s first space docking March 16. (Lane Release)
gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan, resting aboard U.S.S. Wasp, received tributes from around the world. President Johnson, telephoning from his Texas ranch, said: "We are very proud of both of you. I have been watching off and on over the weekend and saw your return this morning. "You have made all of us more aware of what performance under pressure is all about and that includes courage. . . .” Tass science commentator said the Soviet people "give their due” to the courage of the astronauts and congratulate them on their safe return to earth. He praised the flight as an "achievement of American astronautics.” Jodrell Bank Experimental Station director Sir Bernard Lovell said the success of surveyor i and gemini ix-a had made the week one of the greatest for American science. "It seems that the Russians will have to stage a spectacular development in order to recapture the lead which they apparently possessed a week ago.” (Kilpatrick, Wash. Post, 6/7/66, A8; Balt. Sun, 6/7/66)
gemini rv Astronaut Edward H. White II and gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., were among the ten outstanding young men of 1965 announced by U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce in Tulsa, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/9/66)
gemini viii Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and his family were honored with a gala parade on their arrival in Armstrong’s hometown of Wapa-koneta, Ohio. Ohio’s Governor James A. Rhodes announced plans for the construction of a $200,000 airport near Wapakoneta to be named for Armstrong. Sen. Frank J. Lausche (D-Ohio) and Rep. William M. McCulloch (R-Ohio) announced a congressional resolution of tribute to Armstrong and his fellow gemini viii Astronaut David R. Scott. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/14/66; Wash. Post, 4/14/66, D16)
Soviet cosmonauts had not been troubled by perspiration, breathing difficulties, or high heartbeat rates as was Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Gemini xi mission, Soviet physician-cosmonaut Dr. Boris Yegorov said at press conference in Geneva. Probable reason was that cosmonauts worked in "completely normal” atmospheric conditions and breathed ordinary air, while astronauts used artificial air mixture containing more oxygen than normal, he said. Yegorov, one of three crew members in Oct. 12, 1964, voskhod i mission, was attending congress on space biology. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/22/66, A3)
In scheduling manned space flights, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., crew safety was the principal consideration, followed by accomplishment of program goals. He pointed out the "open-ended” aspect of Apollo mission scheduling and expressed confidence that lunar landing would be achieved before the end of the decade based on present program posture. During question and answer session, Dr. Mueller said that while NASA and its contractors had studied possible methods of rescuing astronauts in space and would continue to do so, the cost, complexities, and uncertainties made it appear to date that the money and effort would be better spent in making flights safer in the first place. He added: "We don’t exactly have instant rescue for people flying around in airliners and this is a large segment of the population.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/17/66, 16)
Astronaut Donald K. Slayton received an honorary Doctor of Engineering degree from Michigan Technological Univ. in ceremony at msc. Degree was conferred "in recognition of high attainments in engineering.” As msc Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, Slayton directed the Astronaut Office, Aircraft Operations Office, and the Flight Crew Support Div. (msc Roundup, 1/21/66, 2)
The 19 astronauts selected by NASA April 4 would be "too late to take part in the first lunar landings . . . [but they] should get into some of the follow-on Apollo flights and take some 60-day space trips,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of Medical Programs, msc, said in a press interview in Colorado Springs. (Gibney, Denver Post, 4/10/66)
Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, in Toronto to address the Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute, said at a news conference that although computers predicted that only one of the first three manned U.S. attempts to land on the moon would be successful, human judgment would perhaps prove them wrong. He said computers had predicted the loss of two of seven astronauts on the Mercury program but none was killed. (AP, Denver Post, 3/13/66)
gemini xi Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., arrived at ksc from recovery ship U.S.S. Guam to undergo physical examination and to begin debriefing. (Wilford, NYT, 9/17/66, 11)
U.S. domestic airlines flew 25 per cent more revenue passenger miles during first six months of 1966 than during comparable 1965 period, according to Air Transport Assn, report. Nearly 30.2 billion revenue passenger miles were flown during first half of 1966 by scheduled trunk, local service, and helicopter carriers compared with 24.1 billion revenue passenger miles during first half of 1965. (Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 40) During week of July 25: Patent was granted to Wolfgang G. Offik, senior staff engineer for Chrysler Corp., for escape system to rescue workers from booster-launch gantry in case of explosion or fire. Equipment included series of rescue cabins, each suspended in its own cable at a different level in front of gantry. In emergency, workers and astronauts still outside spacecraft would enter cabins and drop in them into underground shelter, protecting them from flames on gantry and on ground. (Jones, NYT, 7/30/66, 29)
Press commented on the gemini viii mission. New York Times: "The docking maneuver thus successfully pioneered is of the utmost importance. It is through combining the loads brought into space by individual rockets that the great structures can be built that will be necessary for man’s activities in the cosmos in the years ahead. Tomorrow’s stations in space will serve as laboratories for astronomers and other scientists, as terminals for transshipment of passengers and freight between short-range and long-range rockets, and unfortunately—if the future resembles the past—also as military bases reflecting in the sky the tensions and hostilities of earth. But whatever purpose they serve, these islands in space will have been made possible by repeated use of the same maneuver that Astronauts Armstrong and Scott performed for the first time last night.” Washington Post: "Space feats have become so commonplace and have been carried out with such precision that we tend to forget about the hazards. The abrupt but fortunately safe return of Gemini 8 is a timely reminder that space is still a frontier and that the exploration remains at best an inexact science. "That Astronauts Armstrong and Scott emerged unharmed from their awesome experience with their space capsule out of control is a tribute not only to their own cool judgment but also to the extraordinary competence of Space Agency officials. Americans listening to reports of the emergency must have applauded collectively when the crewmen made a successful reentry. They survived a predicament in space which, had it been on a highway, would have meant disaster.” Washington Evening Star: "In addition to its docking achievement, the mission was a success in the sense of demonstrating the care with which emergency devices were built into the space ship and the thoroughness of the planning for rescue operations in event of a forced landing. It is possible, indeed, that more can be learned from a mission that goes wrong than from one which is successful all the way. "Incidentally, there is a commentary on our times in the fact that while the suspense-filled space story was unfolding, Batman was being shown on television. The abc network interrupted the program with special news announcements, and was rewarded with more than 1,000 phone calls from complaining viewers.” (NYT, 3/17/66, 36M; Wash. Post, 3/18/66, A20; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, A16)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and Astronaut Donald K. Slayton (msc Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations) received gold medallions from Gov. Warren P. Knowles in Madison, Wis., after two-day homecoming celebration. Lovell, who had attended high school in Milwaukee, in turn presented state with Wisconsin flag he had carried for 14 days in space during Gemini vii flight Dec. 4-18, 1965. Slayton was born in Sparta, Wis. (AP, Chic. Trib., 2/25/66)
NASA, to "allow a better time and motion evaluation of the workloads and stresses” experienced by an astronaut during extravehicular activity, had canceled plans to test usaf Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu) on Gemini XII mission. NASA and dod would study plans to reschedule experiment on later manned spaceflight, (nasa Release 66-258)
Gemini X Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins flew from recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal to ksc to begin 10 days of debriefing on July 18-21 mission. (Strothman, Wash. Post, 7/23/66, A3)
Sun had blinded Gemini ix Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan for more than two minutes of the critical liftoff period June 3, preventing them from reading control gauges or dials, ksc officials disclosed. As a result, NASA was considering fitting outside of spacecraft windows with tinted coverings on launchings when sun might be a serious problem. Coverings would be sprung free of windows when spacecraft had achieved orbit. Cernan’s suggestion of sunglasses would probably be rejected, NASA said, because it would be impossible to wear them under helmets. (NYT, 7/10/66, 45)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman and their wives met with Chinese Nationalist President Chiang Kai-shek in Taipei, and gave him a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph taken in space. Chiang gave each astronaut wings of the Chinese National Air Force. Astronauts then flew to Bangkok, Thailand, to begin a three-day visit during which they would give a series of lectures and be received by the King and Queen of Thailand. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/28/66, A2; NYT, 3/1/66, 19)	...
Fifth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-5) was successfully captive-fired by Chrysler Corp. for 2k£ min.—longest duration firing—at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Stage would be shipped to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static-test checks and would be used in checking out the Apollo spacecraft, perfecting rendezvous and docking techniques, and training astronauts in preparation for manned lunar landing, (msfc Release 66-69)
Potential of manned space flight in Apollo Applications program was examined by Peter Chew in National Observer. He suggested "... earth-orbiting astronauts .. . may be able to locate and track icebergs . . . spot fish-feeding grounds . . . support oceanography . . . produce agricultural, mineral, and fresh water surveys.” Manned satellites could provide "worldwide television coverage” and serve as "relay points for deep-space communications.” (Nat,l. Obs., 1/11/66; CR, 2/8/66, A609-10)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said surgeons would have to remove a callus, formed on his left forearm after he broke it in a July 1964 motorcycle accident in Bermuda, before he could be considered for another spaceflight. Ability to rotate the arm properly was hampered. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/66, A2; AP, Chic, Trib., 1/25/66)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., met with Japanese space scientists in Tokyo and presented Japanese Premier Eisaku Sato with a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph of their gemini vii/vi rendezvous in space. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/25/66, Al; Wash. Post, 2/25/66)
Astronauts David Scott and Neil Armstrong awaiting recovery in the Pacific Ocean after their gemini vm space Bight.
Long-range HC-130H cargo aircraft equipped with Fulton Recovery System successfully snatched Capt. Gerald T. LyVere (usaf) from Rogers Dry Lake at afftc in first test of new ground-to-air recovery system for rescuing downed fliers and astronauts. At 400-ft. altitude aircraft clamped onto balloon-suspended nylon cable attached to harness dropped earlier by parachute, pulled Captain LyVere up behind aircraft, and reeled him over rear ramp. In later demonstration, Col. Allison Brooks (usaf) and A-3C Ronald Doll (usaf) were recovered simultaneously in side-by-side two-man pickup using double harness. Lockheed-built HC-130H, which would become operational June 30, could fly missions to more than 2,000 mi. from its base, loiter at sea level, and rescue up to five persons in multiple pickups from land or sea. For NASA projects, aircraft would carry complex uhf spacecraft reentry tracker equipment to locate reentering spacecraft, (afftc Release)
Immediate need for an emergency space rescue squad was underlined by the curtailed March 16 Gemini viii mission and by electrical malfunction aboard oao i successfully orbited April 8, William Hines asserted in the Washington Evening Star. "Without such capability,” Hines suggested, "large sums of money and vast amounts of scientific-technological effort are being dissipated, and it is only a matter of time before lives will be placed in jeopardy. . . . Where manned missions are concerned, a rescue capability is not merely desirable but imperative. ... In the next five years somewhere between 25 and 30 missions involving about 75 astronauts will he flown. Durations will range from three to 45 days, and mission objectives will reach as far as the moon’s surface. At the most conservative estimate there are probably a dozen chances for something to go seriously wrong on a typical mission. To put it another way, there are somewhere between 300 and 500 accidents waiting to happen in the next five years-—any one of them potentially tragic.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/66, A14)
NASA reported that smudgy spacecraft windows and exposure problems had compromised quality of most of movie film taken by Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Still pictures were all "of good quality” and showed earth’s curvature more clearly than on any other manmade photographs. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A8)
France exploded an atomic bomb, air-dropped over her test site at Mururoa Atoll in the Pacific, almost directly under flight path of Gemini x one hour before the spacecraft passed, nasa, advised of the impending test, had warned Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins to "keep your heads down” and "not to look at the earth while flying over the atoll.” (WSJ, 7/22/66, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 7/20/66, 22)
President Johnson was asked to invite a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut in a space mission in an open letter in Parade magazine written by editor Jess Gorkin. Gorkin admitted that, officially, there had been little cooperation in space science between the two countries, but said that "Russian and American scientists, guided by a tradition that scientific research belongs to all men, had been eager to cooperate. On a person-to-person basis, they had already exchanged more space data than their governments have officially sanctioned.” Gorkin envisioned joint space mission as proof that U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together for "the good of all men on earth” despite disagreement on "how they want to live.” (Parade, 1/9/66)
Soviet physicians, according to Tass, had reported that highlanders or people who had lived for a long time in mountain areas made the best astronaut candidates since they "spend the energy of their organism much more economically.” They used less oxygen when doing physical work; had approximately 30 per cent greater resistance to oxygen shortage; and possessed "heightened resistance to infrared, ultraviolet, and cosmic radiations.” (Tass, 9/29/66)
Speaking in Denver at Colorado Women’s College, Dr. Nancy G. Roman, NASA Chief of Astronomy Programs, ossa, said a primary reason for lack of women in space was that few had the scientific training. Even NASA’s 300 women professionals were few compared to their number in other agencies, she said. Young women interested in a career in space science were advised to concentrate first on the basics of their preferred area "because the fundamentals of the science used in space study are no different from those in more traditional fields. Equally important is to learn how to think, to face and solve problems and how to find the facts we need, not just remember them .... Space as a career depends on the individual who’s considering it. It is glamorous— and it’s also dirty work.” Dr. Roman said she was sure there would be women astronauts "if manned space flights continue as we expect them to.” (von Ende, Denver Post, 3/19/66)
In msc ceremony, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Gemini x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins nasa Exceptional Service Medals for "outstanding contribution to space flight and engineering,” and the astronauts reviewed their July 18-21 mission for the press. Pilot Collins revealed that maneuvering difficulties during his walk in space had forced him to approach Gatv vm three times before successfully retrieving a micrometeoroid experiment. He felt the "basic problem” in Eva was that "without some sort of handholds or restraining devices, a large percentage of the astronaut’s time is going to be devoted to torquing his body around until it is in the proper position to do some useful work.” Command Pilot Young said mission’s fuel shortage had been caused by large out-of-plane error, not human error as previously believed: "We had to use a brute force method of rendezvous [with gatv x]. That takes quite a lot of fuel.” (Transcript)
Gemini IX-A was officially cleared for launching June 1 on three-day mission that would include rendezvous, docking, and extravehicular activity. After hearing reports from the astronauts, launching pad crews, and the worldwide tracking network, William C. Schneider, mission director, declared Gemini IX-A "ready to go.” (NYT, 5/29/66, 58; upi, Wash. Post, 5/28/66, Al)
Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman told a British television audience in London that the space vehicle, not man, was limiting the length of manned space flight. "We are finding that man is very adaptable and that if you provide him with the normal comforts he expects on earth, he can function as well at zero gravity as he can on earth.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/9/66, A2)
Dirty windows which obscured astronauts’ vision moderately to severely in many of nasa’s Gemini missions had been caused by volatile vapors produced by silicones used in window seals, Gemini program director Charles W. Mathews told news briefing at msc. Problem would be corrected by curing silicone seals in a vacuum. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66, A4)
Survival of 17 chimpanzees without permanent damage after 3Vi min. in simulated space environment offered hope that an astronaut outside his spacecraft could be rescued if his spacesuit were to spring a leak. In 18 tests conducted at Holloman afb during one year, chimps placed in a decompression chamber for time periods that were gradually increased from 5 sec. to 314 min. suffered only temporary abnormalities. L/Col. C. H. Kratochvil, commander of Holloman’s aeromedical research laboratory, said close relationship between chimps and humans made it possible to assume that findings would be applicable to astronauts. (Nelson, Wash. Post, 11/2/66, A4)
France had requested that Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., photograph sodium vapor trail of Centaure sounding rocket during NASA’s Gemini XII mission scheduled for launch Nov. 9. Sounding rocket—to study winds up to 400 mph at high altitudes— would be launched from Hammaguir Range on signal from Gemini Mission Control at MSC. Experiment would be first by foreign government to be part of a U.S. manned space flight. {Wash. Post, 10/23/66, A10; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 10/23/66, A7)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), speaking at national convention of Naval Reserve Officers Assn, in Denver, described his astronaut-aquanaut occupation as a liaison between space and undersea exploration. He said there were plans to train astronauts under water to better withstand the tiring work of maneuvering outside spacecraft—a major problem of recent space flights. Models of spacecraft would be used; astronauts would wear spacesuits and would work without swim fins. Carpenter, who had volunteered in May 1964 for usn’s Project Sea Lab, said aquanauts could work in water until they became tired or hungry. (Denver Post, 10/9/66)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., gemini vi command pilot, received a tiny gold harmonica from the Italian National Union of Mouth Organists and Harmonica Musicians for being "the first mouth organist in outer space.” (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/26/66)
NASA had assigned msfc project management of Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) for Apollo Applications (Aa) missions. A combination of accurate, high-resolution, solar-oriented telescopes, Atm would be attached to spacecraft so that astronauts could manually adjust it to select and focus upon a specific area on the sun. (nasa Release 66-185)
Press briefing was held at LaRC on results of nasa’s lunar orbiter i mission, launched Aug. 10 from etr to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. The more than 200 photos transmitted by the spacecraft revealed a rugged lunar landscape covered with thousands of craters. Ridges and hills were more gently sloped near moon’s center and became progressively smoother in the west. Presence of large rocks, or "blocks,” proved that surface was firm enough to support manned spacecraft. Of the nine sites photographed, the Ocean of Storms where surveyor i was resting appeared safest for manned landing. Classified as a dark mare— flat, waterless plain with relatively few craters—it had 20 per cent fewer craters than any of the other sites. U.S. Geological Survey scientists Dr. Harold Masursky and Dr. Lawrence Rowan suggested that the photos showed evidence of volcanic activity. Citing a small cone-shaped hill on line of a geologic rift near surveyor i ana a large crater on the back of the moon, apparently filled with congealed lava, Dr. Masursky said: "The moon is not a cold, dead, lifeless planet. It looks close to being as dynamic as the earth.” Dr. Rowan noted that major faults on the lunar surface seemed to run in two general directions—northeast-southwest and southeast-northwest —and concluded that much of the volcanic activity probably occurred along these lines. LaRC scientist William Michael said nonphotographic data on the satellite’s orbit indicated moon might turn flat side toward earth, not bulgy side as generally believed. He said displacement of moon’s center of mass toward earth could explain both a flat face and moon’s slight wobble, which had been accounted for previously by the "bulge” theory. Micrometeoroid detection experiment had not recorded any "hits” during satellite’s eight weeks in lunar orbit in contrast to earth-orbiting satellites which often registered a hit every two weeks. Project Manager Clifford H. Nelson announced that Lunar Orbiter B—second of five satellites in series—would be launched between Nov. 6 and 11 to photograph area slightly north of that scanned by lunar orbiter i. (Clark, NYT, 10/7/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/66, A3; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 10/7/66, Al)
Redeye, usa’s shoulder-fired antiaircraft missile system designed for forward-area defense against low-flying aircraft, had successfully completed Arctic phase of service testing at Ft. Greely, Alaska.. (Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release) Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, told the conference that "all technologies are sufficiently developed to make flight [to Mars] in 1986 appear possible.” Five Saturn V launch vehicles would carry the components of electrically powered Mars spacecraft and of Nerva II-powered nuclear earth-escape stage into 300-mi.-altitude earth orbit. After assembly and checkout, nuclear stage would accelerate electrically powered spacecraft to escape velocity. Flight time to Mars on a direct transfer trajectory would be 145 days; 280 days would be required to return to earth. Spacecraft would enter high earth orbit outside Van Allen radiation belt and astronauts would be brought back to earth by commuter rocket. Dr. Stuhlinger said: "Of the key developments still necessary, the electrical power system undoubtedly requires the major technological and funding effort.” Coauthors contributing to the paper presented by Stuhlinger were Joseph C. King and Dr. Russell D. Shelton of msfc Research Projects Laboratory and Gordon R. Woodcock, msfc Advanced Systems Office, (msfc Release 66-67) LRC scientist J. Reece Roth described an electric rocket life-support system that would supply interplanetary crews with meals which, when metabolized, would serve as fuel for spacecraft’s engine. According to Roth’s concept, some or all of the propellant, in the form of food, water, and oxygen, would be metabolized by crew to carbon dioxide, water, and solid wastes. C02 and water could then be used as propellant for an electric engine while solid residues would be small enough to be stored or discarded. Propellant reserve could be used for food, navigational corrections, and radiation shielding—enhancing safety of the crew. Weight savings from integrated propulsion and life-support system would be so great, Roth said, that a somewhat less efficient thruster could be used with no overall loss in performance, (lrc Release 66-12) Human experience most similar to one-to-three year space flight was life on submarine, according to Dr. S. B. Sells, Director, Institute of Behavioral Research, Texas Christian Univ. Dr. Sells presented results of NASA-sponsored study designed to formulate problems of "group organization, structure, and interpersonal interaction of crew members in the environmental circumstances of a typical space mission.” Fifty-six social system characteristics of extended space flight—such as motivation, status, background, training, and command structure of crew, as well as conditions of confinement, isolation, and environmental hazards—were compared with those of 11 other social systems. (Text) nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright said: "Thousands of dedicated people have laboriously laid . .. stepping stones to Mars. This nation is ready and able to step up the exploration of Mars, Venus, and the rest of the solar system. Just when such a program will get a go ahead depends on many factors. This coming year will be a crucial one for the decision makers. "Of one thing I am absolutely certain: comprehensive exploration of the planets is inevitable. Who will be leading this exploration seems less certain; but we can if we choose.” (Text)
Gemini x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins flew from ksc to msc for reunion with families and continued debriefing. News conference had been set for Aug. 1. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/25/66, A12)
Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr. (Cdr., usnr), and Charles A. Bassett II (Maj., usaf), killed-Feb. 28 when their T-38 jet training plane crashed in St. Louis, were buried in Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors in two separate ceremonies. Fifteen astronauts attended, 12 of whom served as pallbearers. See and Bassett had been selected as prime crew for the Gemini IX mission scheduled for spring 1966. (Hoagland, Wash. Post, 3/5/66, Bl; AP, NYT, 3/5/66, 9)
Taped conversations between Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and ground controllers disclosing the drama of the emergency but revealing nothing of the difficulty that had caused emergency landing March 16 of gemini viii were released at msc press conference. There was no indication of panic aboard the spacecraft during motion. In an "almost matter-of-fact tone,” Armstrong had reported to msc: "Well, we consider the problem serious. We are toppling end-over-end. . . . We cannot turn anything off.” It was announced there would be no public discussion of their mission by Armstrong and Scott for at least nine days during which they would rest and undergo debriefing at KSC. msc Director Robert R. Gilruth announced that preparations for the
Harold B. Finger, Director, nasa Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div. and Manager, aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed nasa and aec programs to provide nuclear energy systems for space applications before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: "A major new program initiated by the aec at nasa’s request during 1965 is the development of the snap-27 isotope-thermoelectric generator to power experiments that will be left on the Moon by the Apollo astronauts. This Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (alsep) is intended to transmit data . . . for at least a year. The snap-27 isotope power supply will provide 50 watts to the experiments and will weigh about 40 pounds. It will use a single plutonium loaded fuel capsule which will be inserted into the generator on the lunar surface by the astronauts.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 541)
In summary of nasa-usaf X-15 flight operations, frc revealed that the three rocket-powered aircraft had completed 253 flight operations since first glide flight June 8, 1959: 156 were actual flights, eight were planned captive flights, and 89 were canceled because of weather or mechanical problems. The three aircraft had flown over 24 hrs. of free flight; 6 hrs. 29 min. faster than mach 3; 4 hrs. 13 min. above mach 4; 56 min. above mach 5; and 11 sec. above mach 6. On nine separate occasions, five different pilots had flown over the 50-mi. astronaut qualifying altitude: L/Col. Robert M. White, L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth, and Capt. Joseph H. Engle, all usaf; and Joseph A. Walker and John B. McKay, both nasa civilians. Four flights terminated in emergency landings, two of which seriously damaged the aircraft, but all three aircraft were still being flown. One flight had been made with modified X-15 No. 2 using external propellant tanks. Six current X-15 pilots included: L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth, Maj. William J. Knight, and Capt. Joseph H. Engle, all usaf; and William H. Dana, John B. McKay, and Milton 0. Thompson, all NASA civilians, (frc Release 2-66)
At Pentagon ceremony, Chief of Naval Operations Adm. David L. McDonald presented astronaut wings to Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan (LCdr., usn) who set a world record for length of "walk in space” during June 3-6 Gemini ix-a mission. McDonald suggested to NASA officials that "you get your own Navy” for astronaut recovery operations. usn felt smaller ships not needed in the Vietnam war could be used as effectively for this task as the aircraft carrier and dozen ships assigned to NASA. Speaking later at NASA Hq., Cernan said that what a man needed in space to do useful work was a "three-point restraint system”— three points of contact with the spacecraft for stabilization. (Norris, Wash. Post, 1/21/66, Al, A6)
Astronauts Armstrong and Scott landed safely in Honolulu after KC-135 jet aircraft carrying them from Okinawa to ksc lost oil pressure in its number two engine about 800 mi. east of Hawaii. Armstrong and Scott had earlier received an enthusiastic reception—-with brass band— when they disembarked at Okinawa from recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard F.	Mason for flight to Honolulu, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/19/66, A4; AP, NYT, 3/18/66, 21)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott arrived at ksc to begin an intensive three-day conference with Gemini project officials to attempt to reconstruct events leading to their loss of control of the gemini viii spacecraft March 16. Scott told a crowd at the airstrip that "the lift off, launching, rendezvous, and docking were really tremendous. We were really looking forward to the whole mission.” Armstrong agreed, adding: "We had a magnificent flight in the first seven hours. It was a magnificent launch—without a doubt one of the best there’s ever been.” (AP, NYT, 3/20/66, 82)
Referring to President Kennedy’s challenge five years ago "to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth,” William Hines commented in the Washington Evening Star on the progress made:"Of course, Kennedy did not 'invent’ space. Nor did he, in a single 1,100-word exhortation to Congress, create all the conditions needed to make a lunar program possible. The United States had quite a respectable space effort going for several years before Kennedy spoke, and indeed the first American astronaut had flown a brief suborbital mission three weeks earlier. "The foundations on which Kennedy could build a moon program were there. What he did—with advice and urging from many advisers including the then Vice President Johnson and the late 'grand old man of space,’ Hugh L. Dryden—was set a goal. . . . "The call to leadership in space came at a particularly troublous time in the new Kennedy administration’s development. In the month just past, April 1961, the United States had suffered two tremendous setbacks in what had been called 'the battle for men’s minds.’ On April 12 Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth—a full 10 months, as it turned out, before Astronaut John Glenn would match his feat. And on April 19 the bottom fell out of the ill-conceived Bay of Pigs adventure to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/25/66, Al, A5)
Successful mock launching of Gemini 8 spacecraft at etr in preparation for March 15 three-day rendezvous and docking mission. Astronauts Neil Armstrong and David Scott spent two and one-half hours in Gemini capsule during simulated spaceflight, (dpi, NYT, 3/10/66, 10)
usaf School of Aerospace Medicine had concluded 15-day test to evaluate effects of increased carbon dioxide on four airmen in spacecraft cabin simulator. One of a series of such experiments, the latest took the level of experience up to the 4% C02 mark, compared with normal ground level conditions of 0.033% C02. Aim was to assess problems astronauts might have to face with a partial failure of their life support system. (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 4)
Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Defense and Space Center had developed a 7M-lb. TV camera that could be carried inside Apollo spacecraft and by astronauts as they explored the lurain. Prototype had been delivered to NASA and a commitment obtained for live TV coverage. (Gibbons, WSJ, 1/21/66, 1)
Astronaut Scott Carpenter decided not to attend Second International Congress on Oceanography in Moscow after learning that the U.S. ocean research vessel U.S.S. Silas Bent had been denied permission to dock at Leningrad in connection with the conference. Carpenter, who had participated in the Sealab II experiment in living and working underwater, would have attended as an aquanaut and would have been the first astronaut to visit Moscow, nas had designated Silas Bent to respond to Soviet invitation for oceanographic ships to visit Soviet ports during Congress so delegates could visit them but Soviet Foreign Ministry had refused permission. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/24/66)
U.S. did not have women astronauts because "we have not yet been able to find an applicant sufficiently qualified in both scientific and engineering background, who also possesses the required test pilot experience,” said nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller at dedication of Cedar Crest College’s science center in Allentown, Pa. He said NASA has always had the same requirements for both men and women; "there had never been any discrimination with regard to sex or on any other basis.” (Text)
President Johnson’s waning interest in space was postponing NASA’s decision on a post-Apollo program, William Hines suggested in the Washington Evening Star, "nasa ... is more to be pitied than censured for this silence. The agency has been led down the primrose path by . . . [President Johnson] who suddenly lost interest in the now shopworn ingenue. "nasa has no plans because . . . [he] has permitted it to make none; aspirations yes, but plans no. ...” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, A23) *	nasa would negotiate $ 15-million fixed-price incentive contract with Douglas Aircraft Co. for 14 improved 2nd stages for Delta launch vehicle. GSFC would manage contract, (nasa Release 66-321) *	afsc announced awards to four aerospace companies: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $2-million initial increment to a $14-million fixed-price contract for production of Agena launch vehicles; Douglas Aircraft Co., $2.5-million initial increment to a $17.5-million fixed-price letter contract for production of Thor launch vehicles; and Aerojet-General Corp., $2.9-million initial increment to a $54.5-million contract, and TRW Inc., $2.9-million initial increment to a $50-million contract, both for r&d in an unmanned space technology program, (dod Release 1048-66; WSJ, 12/16/66, 4) *	News briefing on Project Apollo was held at msc. Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, said nasa hoped to launch three manned Apollo missions in 1967 involving "essentially every test that needs to get done in order to insure that the lunar operation is proper.” He outlined the flights: (1) AS-204—three-man, earth-orbital mission of up to 14 days to check out crew, spacecraft, and ground equipment; (2) AS-205/208—10- to 12-day flight in which Uprated Saturn I boosters would launch an Apollo spacecraft with three-man crew and an unmanned Lunar Module (Lm) on successive days for rendezvous mission; and (3) AS-503—full-duration lunar mission rehearsal in earth orbit in which single Saturn V would launch manned Apollo spacecraft and Lm. Shea warned against undue optimism about a manned lunar landing in 1968. "It is literally true that there is no planned date at the present time for the lunar operation . . . and I don’t see how there can be until we have had hardware in orbit to understand what vestigial problems still remain.” Donald Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, said that third, nonflying crew had been added to each Apollo mission for additional ground support. He also revealed that training for astronauts selected for Apollo lunar missions would be 40 weeks—14 weeks longer than Gemini training course. Comparing Mercury and Apollo training programs, AS-204 Command Pilot Virgil I. Grissom said: "When we started training for Mercury, we didn’t know what to train for. So we did everything. .. . Training for Apollo has been pretty straight forward. We know what we need to know and we know that we have to learn about the spacecraft, how to operate it and get our flight plan and our mission rules squared away. Back early in Mercury ... we were worried about whether a man could live and survive ... so we did a lot of things like spinning around in 3 axis machines that we don’t feel you really need anymore. . . .” Grissom confirmed that AS-204 mission would carry camera for live television coverage. (Text; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/7/66, A3)
NASA announced appointment of Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf), pilot in USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program, to X-15 research program, replacing Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf), who had transferred to MSC April 4 to become an astronaut. Following extensive training program, Major Adams would become 12th man to fly the rocket-powered aircraft, (frc Release 15-66)
Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, chief adviser on geology for Interior Dept.’s Geological Survey, proposed 10-yr. lunar exploration program following first Apollo astronaut landings late in this decade that "would have nothing to do with exploiting natural resources of the moon.” He explained: "We are using our mineral resources at a fantastic rate. What we really need to sustain our economic needs in the years ahead is a . . . theory about how the earth was formed. A good way to develop this theory would be by comparison with another celestial body—and the moon is just such a body.” Cost would be some $1.5 billion a year. Proposal was made during interview with William Hines, Washington Evening Star. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9121/66, A9)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., headed six-man panel of investigators that began attempt to reconstruct St. Louis crash of T-38 jet plane in which Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II died Feb. 28. msc Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney told upi that full report would not be completed for "at least six weeks.” The tragedy prompted Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R-Wash.) to urge the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to investigate flight training of astronauts, particularly the number of hours of flying time required and the justification for such requirements, (upi, NYT, 3/2/66, 22; nasa lar V/36)
gemini xii pilot Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., told msc news conference that with proper equipment, like the waist straps and foot restraints he used during Eva, a man could work outside with no fear of fatigue—if he were well trained. Following press conference, Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Aldrin together with a group of msc, ksc, nasa Hq., and industry Gemini program participants flew to lbj Ranch for visit with President Johnson, who said: "The splendid performance of man and machine in Gemini has been a product of the American system at its best. "The months ahead will not be easy as we reach toward the moon.... But with Gemini as the forerunner, I am confident that we will overcome the difficulties and achieve another success.” Group returned to MSC for formal awards ceremony. Receiving NASA Exceptional Service Medal were Gemini xii crewmen James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Col. John G. Albert (usaf), etr; Osro H. Covington, gsfc; and John D. Hodge, MSC. NASA Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. George E. Mueller, omsf; and Charles W. Mathews, MSC. Outstanding Leadership Medal: Robert F. Thompson, msc; John J. Williams, ksc; and M/G Vincent G. Houston (usaf), etr. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: James A. Chamberlin, MSC. NASA Public Service Award: John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; Bastian Hello, Martin Co.; Bernhard A. Hohmann, Aerospace Corp.; Walter D. Smith, Martin Co.; Walter F. Burke, McDonnell; Louis D. Wilson, Aerojet-General; Lawrence A. Smith, Lockheed; William B. Bergen, Martin Co.; George M. Bunker, Martin Marietta; B/G Paul T. Cooper, afsc Space Systems Div.; Daniel J. Haughton, Lockheed; Roger Lewis, General Dynamics; James S. McDonnell, McDonnell Aircraft; R. I. McKenzie, Aerojet-General; L. Eugene Root, Lockheed; David S. Lewis, McDonnell; and Jack A. Bowers, Martin Marietta. NASA Superior Achievement Award: Arthur W. Vogeley, Richard J. Allen, LeRoy E. Day, John A. Edwards, Eldon W. Hall, Vearl N. Huff, and William A. Summerfelt, NASA Hq.; and Anthony L. Liccardi. NASA Group Achievement Award: Gemini Astronaut Team, Manned Spaceflight Network Team, Gemini Spacecraft Launch Team, Gemini Program Office at MSC, Gemini Program Office at NASA Hq., and Gemini Support Team at msc. (msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 8; Sheehan, NYT, 11/24/66, 36; Pres. Doc., 11/28/66, 1718-9)
NASA Lewis Research Center, first Government laboratory devoted to flight propulsion in all its aspects, celebrated its 25th anniversary. Authorized by Congress in 1940, the naca facility was originally called the Aircraft Engine Research Lab.; it was renamed the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1948 in honor of Dr. George W. Lewis, former naca Director of Aeronautical Research (1924-47). In 1958, when naca facilities and personnel were absorbed by the newly created NASA, the facility became the Lewis Research Center. From an initial Congressional appropriation of $2 million in 1941, LRC had emerged as a major research and development laboratory valued at $200 million. Marking the anniversary, LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein said: "Man isn’t going to be held to a single conquest or success. The past decade has seen aviation and rocketry undergo phenomenal change, but we’ve just started to realize its potential. The present generation will live to fly better than 2,000 mph in commercial aircraft and to observe at close range the interplanetary exploits of U.S. astronauts. The past 25 years have witnessed truly remarkable strides in aeronautics and space activities. In 1941, man had the capability to fly 300 mph and to attain altitudes of perhaps 30,000 ft. Today, he orbits the earth at 17,500 mph and in a few years will set foot on the moon and possibly later Mars.” (lrc Release 66-1; Lewis News, 1/23/66, 1-12; upi, Miami Herald, 1/24/66)
usns Kingsport, first ocean link in U.S. research in satellite communications, was retired from nasa’s networks and returned to dod. In July 1963 Kingsport had participated in world’s first demonstration of communications by satellite in synchronous orbit when a message was sent in 45,000-mi. loop from Kingsport anchored in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, to syncom ii comsat and back. Several days later, she was part of first direct exchange of radio message via satellite, linking Lakehurst, N.J., terminal station with land circuits at Lagos. On Aug. 4, Kingsport and Lakehurst transmitted and received via syncom ii first satellite exchange of news copy and photo facsimile. Several days later, caught in a squall 40 mi. offshore, she became first terminal station to establish satellite communications from the open sea. Two months later, she participated in first trans-ocean press conference by satellite: stationed at Rota, Spain, she connected syncom ii communications between United Nations in New York City and NASA Hq. in Washington, D.C., with the International Telecommunications Union Conference in Geneva. Kingsport first demonstrated the practicality of communications by satellite during manned space missions March 16, 1966, by relaying voice reports from Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott via syncom ii to Hawaii ground station, (nasa Release 66-79)
U.S. Astronaut Alan Shepard and Soviet Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov had same positive response to Parade editor Jess Gorkin’s suggestion that an American and a Russian fly together in the same spacecraft. Shepard, contacted at Msc, said it would be of "enormous value.” Yegorov indicated that U.S.S.R. might already be preparing for joint space exploration, saying: "If the Americans are really keen on the idea of joint flights, they had better start learning Russian. All of us are studying English already.” (Anderson, Parade, 7/24/66, 4-5)
Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of nasa’s Inventions and Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to become a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College, (nasa Ann.) Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-gradient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2) Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could propel a 7,000-lb. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3) Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1) Richard Johnston, Chief of msc Crew Systems Div., said that to work effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more streamlined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device such as "stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investigation of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, overheated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks. (Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s Gemini program and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoietic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Results of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclusive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being examined as possible causes. (Tech. Wk, 10/17/66, 16) Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and G. D. Glod reported "significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R. used drugs in manned spaceflight both for "therapeutic purposes or to increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.” Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants; cardiovascular preparations; and antiradiation medications. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13) Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most important problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had developed a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver into working position, which included raising one hand over the head and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body reaction and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Av. Wk., 10/17/66, 30-31) Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of gemini v-Titan II booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a "near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage” to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IVB). (Av. Wk, 10/24/66, 32) H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13-14) Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966, in cosmos cx. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they emerged from capsule, but fihn sequence taken four months later showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neurological regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13) Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of iaf. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
A ten-year lunar exploration program emphasizing manned missions was recommended in reports released by six working groups of scientists who had attended NASA 1965 Summer Conference on Lunar Exploration and Science in Falmouth, Mass., July 19-31, 1965. Program, which would utilize capabilities already under development by NASA, would gradually include scientific experiments in geology, geochemistry, geophysics, and bioscience. One or two manned lunar missions and one manned lunar orbital mission would be conducted annually through 1979, with astronauts remaining on the moon’s surface for longer periods after 1974. Reports recommended four requirements for period through 1974: (1) assurance of overlapping operation of instruments placed on moon by astronauts; (2) sufficient frequency of missions to provide continuity in experiments; (3) scheduling of adequate time between missions to permit necessary modification of experiments; and (4) gradually increasing staytimes of astronauts on moon. Top priority for early Apollo landing missions would be return of lunar material samples; second priority, emplacing Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (Alsep); third, traversing lunar surface to describe topographic and geological features, supplemented by stereoscopic photography. Report urged immediate testing to determine amounts and effects of atmosphere escaping from Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and outgassing of astronaut suits. One Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar Orbiter mission (Aa-mlo) was recommended prior to first Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar Surface mission (Aa-mls), with minimum of three manned spacecraft missions in polar orbit to make complete lunar survey; five or six Aa-mls missions through 1974 were suggested, with larger scientific payloads and stays for the astronauts of up to 14 days. Reports listed basic types of equipment necessary for exploration program: automatic position-recording systems to relay to earth or Lem movements of astronauts and roving vehicles; roving vehicles to carry one or two astronauts and scientific payload of at least 600 lbs.; manned lunar flying vehicle able to carry 300-lb. scientific payload about 10 mi. to study features not accessible with roving vehicle; one-inch drill capable of penetrating at least 10 ft. in rubble or solid rock to assist heat-flow studies and provide samples of possible biological interest. Scientific training for astronauts in specific rather than general areas was recommended, with emphasis on geology. For post-1974 period, the scientists recommended surface travel by astronauts up to 500 mi. from landing point and fixed-site investigations lasting from two months to a year for measuring geophysical phenomena that could vary with time; studying lunar surface processes; deep-drilling studies to obtain information on early moon history and crustal composition; construction and manning of large radio and optical telescopes. Roving vehicles for the post-Apollo Applications phase should have 500-mi. range, shelter for three-man crew, two-month mission capability, and no requirement to return to starting point. (nasa Release 66-4; Conference Rpt., NASA SP-88)
Possibility that U.S. astronauts might land on moon in 1968 rather than 1969	"should serve to hasten agreement on international treaty aimed at making outer space exclusively a dimension of man’s peaceful activity,” postulated editorial in New York Times. "Hard decisions” about post-Apollo research should be made soon, especially since there were "far more possibilities for fruitful activities in space than even the United States can afford to carry on simultaneously.” (NYT., 11/16/66, 42M)
Dr. Seibert Dudley of the Univ. of California’s Visibility Lab., San Diego, said test equipment on the ground and in the gemini v spacecraft had definitely demonstrated that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., had seen what they claimed they had seen below on earth during their Aug. 21-29, 1965, mission. On a one-man Project Mercury spaceflight May 15-16, 1963 (MA-9), Cooper had drawn skepticism for reporting he could see dust clouds, roads, and other small features. (AP, Houston Post, 1/6/66)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., passed their medical examinations for the Gemini XII mission, scheduled for launch from etr Nov. 9. (Wash. Post, 11/6/66, A17)
nasa released first 140 ft. of more than 1,500 ft. of color movies taken by Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., during their Nov. 11-15 space flight. Photography was of high quality. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/17/66, A4)
Gemini Astronauts Charles A. Bassett II and Elliot M. See, Jr., were killed when their T-38 aircraft overran St. Louis Municipal Airport in rain and fog and crashed into the McDonnell Aircraft Corp. building which housed Gemini 9 and 10 spacecraft. The jet, cleared for an instrument landing, was left of center in its approach to the runway when it turned toward the McDonnell complex 1,000 ft. from instrumented landing strip. It struck the roof of Building 101, bounced into an adjacent courtyard, and exploded. Several McDonnell employees in Building 101 were treated for minor injuries. See and Bassett, enroute to McDonnell for two weeks training in space simulator, were followed later by Gemini IX backup crew Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan, who landed safely. NASA Hq. officials announced that the backup crew would fly the Gemini IX mission on schedule. (Wagner, Wash. Post, 3/1/66, Al, A4)
"Space Maintenance and Extravehicular Activities” meeting sponsored by usaf Aero Propulsion Laboratory and Martin Co. was held in Orlando. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. engineer Charles Brownell, together with three usaf space engineers, told the meeting that construction in space would cost approximately $100,000 per hour, but added: "These costs will be reduced drastically in the next few years.” Brownell said that because space labor would be so expensive, efforts were being made to automate as much repair work as possible. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A4) Man must learn how to rescue orbiting astronauts stranded in a disabled spacecraft because "it is a problem we all know will one day confront us,” Col. Emil G. Beaudry, vice commander of usaf Air Rescue Service, told the conference. He said one expert had concluded there was a 62 per cent probability of at least seven emergency situations in space involving 22 men in the next 20 yrs., and a 58 per cent probability of two or three emergencies within 10 yrs. Beaudry continued: "There is no reason today-—or certainly in the near future—why an operational rescue spacecraft could not be ready and standing by in the event of distress or tragedy during manned flights. "For example, a launch vehicle such as the Titan 3 with its great weight-lifting capability and mission versatility could easily carry a rescue crew, medical facilities, and technicians aloft to assist in any way required.. . .” (AP, New Haven Register, 3/7/66) NASA engineer David F. Thomas reported on his "jet shoes” to aid astronauts during extravehicular activity: "This device may be thought of as a pair of shoes with jets attached to the shoe soles in such a manner as to produce a thrust vector along the subject’s leg when the jets are activated.” Projecting from the front of each shoe would be hinged toe-plate which astronaut could depress or release at will to operate an electrical switch which controlled gas jets. Thomas said shoes, which would be slipped on over space boots, had been tested successfully on counterbalanced harness device at LaRC. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66, A18) Douglas Aircraft Co. engineers Thorne L. Runyan and John M. Dick reported that intensity of sunlight and blackness of shadows would cause astronauts working in space to "confuse spheres with points of light, cones with wedges, and pipes with strange shapes that appear and disappear.” To counteract these distortions, they recommended a bracket of strong lights "looking over the shoulder” of a working astronaut to fill in shadows and lessen contrast with sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, A5) Bell Aerosystems Co. test pilot Robert F. Courter reported that Bell had developed a rocket propellant "flying pogo stick” for transporting men and equipment on earth or over the surface of the moon. Pogo stick would be powered by hydrogen peroxide jets and its two rocket nozzles would be controlled directly by pilot’s hand, arm, and shoulder movements, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66) The space tool kit to be used by Astronaut David R. Scott during Gemini VIII mission was exhibited for the first time. Developed by Martin Co. and Black & Decker Tool Co. at a cost of $124,000, kit’s power tool used impact instead of torque as its motive principle because man in space, with neither friction nor gravity to give him a firm footing, would be sent spinning counterclockwise by the action of a handheld tool that rotated clockwise. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, Al) In a luncheon address, Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasc staff, warned that U.S.S.R. might soon recapture the lead in manned spaceflight: "They don’t lead now in manned spaceflight. They may again in the near future, but they don’t now.” Konecci said space experts expected Russia to launch a "major manned program in the near future,” possibly a manned laboratory, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66)
afsc had awarded Bell Aerospace Corp. a one-year study contract to develop Dual-purpose Maneuvering Unit (Dmu) that could be worn by astronaut or operated by remote radio and TV signals. Dmu would combine "best features” of Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)— which Astronaut Eugene Cernan was unable to test during Gemini ix-A flight—and Remote Maneuvering Unit (Rmu)—which had been tested in laboratory, (afsc Release 116.66)
nasa’s 31 veteran astronauts would lose over $6,000 annually from sale of their personal stories if 19 new astronauts joined them in contract with Time, Inc., and Field Enterprises Educational Corp., AP reported. Under terms of contract, Time, Inc., and Field paid $520,000 annually for equal division among "participating astronauts,” in return for exclusive rights to all unofficial personal stories and photos. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/1/66, N8)
Endorsement of suggestion in Jan. 9 open letter to President Johnson that he invite "a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut for a space ride in a two-man capsule” was reported by letter’s author, Parade editor Jess Gorkin. Newspapers throughout the world had publicized the idea and written favorable editorials. Le Figaro (Paris) had given it front page coverage. Melbourne (Australia) Herald had said the idea had "great merit.” Asahi Shimbun (Tokyo): "As long as America and Russia accelerate space development separately, there will be much money wasted. Both countries will probably suspect that the other party is engaged in space development for military purposes. ... If the United States and the Soviet Union cooperate and 'all the families of the earth’ pitch in to further space development, war on earth will gradually become absurd.” New York World Telegram: "What do we have to lose? If we succeed and the two men orbit the earth together the psychological effect will be tremendous. If Russia turns down the idea, we will be on sounder moral grounds.” (Gorkin, Parade, 3/20/66) During week of March 20: Several hundred sightings of unidentified flying objects (Ufo’s) near Ann Arbor, Mich., were reported. Rep. Weston Vivian (D-Mich.) said he would ask dod to make an investigation. (upi, NYT, 3/22/66, 19; dm, NYT, 3/23/66, 22; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, Al; upi, Wash. Post, 3/25/66, A20; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/66, Al)
First simulated exploration of the moon had shown that two astronauts could live and intelligently perform tasks for at least 18 days in cabin with 117 cu. ft. of living-working space. Test was performed in support of Apollo Applications program by two msfc engineers in Minneapolis [see Feb. 20, March 10]. (msfc Release 66-80)
nasa released its 1,000th Tech Brief, one which described development of improved titanium alloy of possible value in field of medicine. Potential industrial uses of inorganic fibers developed as reinforcements in materials for spacecraft were discussed in Non-Glassy Inorganic Fibers and Composites, issued by NASA Office of Technology Utilization. Techniques used to monitor astronauts’ blood pressure could be adapted to prolong the lives of persons with certain types of heart disease, concluded Westinghouse Research Laboratories engineers William J. Jones and Wyatt C. Simpson in monograph entitled NASA Contributions to Cardiovascular Monitoring. Study was conducted for nasa’s Office of Technology Utilization, (nasa Releases 66-238, 66-246, 66-250) During September: usaf had begun evaluation studies of Adam (Air Deflection and Modulation) II—a revolutionary type of aircraft with engines located inside the wings—at Wright-Patterson afb. A full-span, powered model of the propulsive-wing V/Stol aircraft would be designed, built, and tested by ltv Aerospace Corp. under a 15-mo., $439,000 contract jointly funded by usaf and usa. Wind-tunnel tests would be made at LaHC. Aircraft could be used in both military tactical and commercial passenger versions, (afsc Release 154.66)
gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas Stafford and Eugene Cernan were greeted by their families on their arrival in Houston after four days of debriefing at ksc. (upi, NYT, 6/11/66, 62)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., began eight-nation good-will tour of Asia with four-day visit to Japan. (NYT, 2/23/66)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received rousing welcome on arrival at Seoul, South Korea. Many flag-waving schoolchildren had to be restrained by policemen during welcoming ceremonies at City Hall. (NYT, 2/27/66, 14; N.Y. J/Amer., 2/27/66, 28)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
Gemini v spacecraft in which Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., orbited the earth Aug. 21-29, 1965, went on display at Buenos Aires (Argentina) Municipal Airport as part of a U.S.-sponsored exhibit on U.S. advances in space. (ITsia; Reuters, Wash. Post, 2/21/66, A6)	„	.	.
Prince Philip of U.K. toured msc for three hours, accompanied by department heads explaining the apparatus used in spaceflight. With assistance of Astronaut James A. McDivitt, the Prince spent 30 minutes in an astronaut training craft, twice steering it into simulated orbital rendezvous with an Agena rocket. "It was all a fascinating experience,” he said later. "When you are inside, everything seems to be out of context.” Dr. Robert Gilruth, msc Director, presented Philip a British flag which had been carried aboard Gemini vii during its Dec. 4-18 space mission with the intention of presenting it to the Prince during his tour, (msc Roundup, 3/18/66, 8; Waldron, NYT, 3/12/66, 8)
First manned Apollo mission might be launched in late 1966, predicted Astronaut Virgil Grissom during news conference held by Apollo crew and backup crew at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., facility. Mission was officially scheduled for 1967. (Transcript)
Oklahoma City welcomed home a favorite son, Gemini ix Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, and conferred honorary state citizenship on his crewmate Eugene A. Cernan. Both astronauts were inducted into the National Cowboy Hall of Fame, dedicated to the memory of Western frontiersmen. (AP, NYT, 7/9/66, 29)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in Washington, D.C., to gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman for achieving first rendezvous in space by two separately launched maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. After the ceremony, the Vice President told newsmen he was one of those "manning the ramparts” against those who failed to see any direct public benefit from space exploration. He thought the space program had resulted in a superior educational system, increased industrial competence, new products, "and if it hasn’t done anything else it has taught us to manage” vast undertakings. (Clark, NYT, 12/16/66, 21)
Investigations of seals’ habits might yield valuable information for astronauts exploring the moon, particularly with regard to enduring extremes of cold and lack of oxygen, Dr. Carleton Ray, New York Zoological Society, told the New York Times. Ray, who recently returned from Antarctica expedition sponsored by the Society with nsf aid, said that of pertinent interest would be "reasons why seals can endure tremendous cold, sleep under water without breathing, and use what appears to be a remarkable echo-sounding system for navigating in total darkness under thick ice to return to isolated breathing holes needed sporadically to help them remain submerged in a state somewhat akin to semihibernation.” (Devlin, NYT, 3/14/66, 6)
Gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and Gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman were named joint winners of the 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for achieving the first rendezvous in space by two separately launched, maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. Award, established by late pioneer aviator and balloonist Col. Clifford B. Harmon (usaf) "for exceptional feats of pilotry,” would be conferred in fall 1966. (NYT, 8/7/66, 4; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/7/66, A18)
Astronaut James Lovell and nuclear submarine U.S.S. Benjamin Franklin’s crew exchanged mementos of a joint experiment conducted during Dec. 4-18 gemini vn mission. Benjamin Franklin, with two seconds to fire a Polaris missile so it could be seen by gemini vii Astronauts Lovell and Borman as they passed over Cape Kennedy, fired perfectly, enabling the astronauts to track the missile visually. In a ceremony aboard the submarine docked in Newport News, Va., Lovell was presented gas generator plate from the Polaris missile and crew received the NASA patch from Lovell’s gemini vii spacesuit. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/6/66)
usaf’s OV3-IV research satellite was launched by NASA from Wallops Station by Scout booster. Orbital parameters: 2,933 mi. (4,720 km.); perigee, 398 mi. (640 km.); period, 142 min.; inclination, 41°. The 173-lb. satellite carried plastic spheres of simulated human tissue containing linear energy transfer spectrometers to record effects of space radiation and determine how much radiation damage an astronaut’s body could undergo in similar manned flight, how long man could stay in space at one time, and how often he could safely return to space environment. Satellite would also give measurements on Van Allen radiation belts and gauge decay of residual radiation in man-made Starfish Belt. Equipment, expected to relay data for one year, was functioning normally. (Wallops Release 66-35; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 152)
gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II and Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman received National Aviation Club’s Award for Achievement in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/66)
Astronaut David R. Scott would attempt—during about 90 min. outside earth-orbiting Gemini 8 spacecraft—to crawl about using hand holds, move through space using a maneuvering gun with nine times the capability of that used by Astronaut Edward H. White II, and unscrew bolts at small mechanic’s station on the spacecraft, NASA announced at msc news conference. Gemini VIII mission, designed to test man’s ability to maneuver in space and the first rendezvous and docking mission, would take place before the end of the first quarter of 1966. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager, said "the main significance of the mechanical work is that he [Scott] will be evaluating a tool that is specifically designed for space.” The special tool contained a motor to eliminate need for twisting motion by the astronaut that would swing his body around when he was weightless. Target for the rendezvous and docking—Gatv or Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda)—had not been chosen. (AP, NYT, 1/17/66, 12) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Office, said in an interview in Houston that the U.S. would achieve its goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth before the end of this decade: "No new inventions are needed. No breakthrough is needed. This certainly doesn’t mean that it is going to be easy. It is not going to be, but the technology needed to do the job is known now.” He stressed that the pace that had been set would have to be maintained until the goal was achieved. (Maloney, Houston Post, 1/16/66)
NASA Astronaut Michael Collins presented U.S. flag carried on July 18-21 gemini x mission to St. Albans School in Washington, D.C., as "a token of my appreciation for getting me started on this road.” Collins and three other alumni were honored by St. Albans at a banquet and reception. (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/66, Bl)
NASA might not in future be able to order aircraft carriers and large ships for recovery of astronauts, Chicago Tribune sources reported, usn felt vessels could be put to better use to support or relieve forces in Vietnam, usaf had proposed to NASA use of new long-range helicopters. (Chic. Trib., 7/1/66)
Twelve astronauts were selected for future NASA missions and two others assigned earlier were shifted to a different mission. Prime crewmen for the Apollo earth-orbital mission scheduled in the first quarter of 1967 were Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee; backup crew was James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart, NASA civilian employee. Prime crewmen for the Gemini XI mission scheduled in the last quarter of 1966 were command pilot Charles Conrad, Jr., and pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr.; backup crew was Neil A. Armstrong, command pilot, and William A. Anders, pilot. James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup crew for the Gemini XI mission, were reassigned as backup crew for Gemini IX, Original Gemini IX backups Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan became prime crewmen for that mission after the Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II. (nasa Release 66-67)
All participants in the Gemini X mission rehearsed their parts in preparation for July 18 flight. Astronauts John Young and Michael Collins went over flight plan from liftoff to splashdown and conducted review of all spacecraft systems. (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/66, 11)
gemini VIII Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott returned to their families in Houston after debriefing at ksc. (AP, NYT, 3/22/66, 18)
Of 351 astronaut applicants, 192, including all 6 female candidates, failed to meet minimum requirements, an MSC spokesman reported. The successful 15 would be announced in May. (msc Roundup, 1/21/66, 3; AP, New Haven Register, 1/7/66)
Gemini Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong were received in Bogota by Colombian President Carlos Lleras Restrepo during their three-week tour of Latin America, (upi, Wash. Post, 10/11/66, B2)
Sociological repercussions of the space age might be most important to historians, suggested Robert Toth in the Washington Post: "In just nine years since the first man-made moon went aloft, the fact that man can escape his Earth has become so accepted Americans are almost blase about new manned flights. "It is too early for anyone to guess how such developments may affect the deeper thoughts of self and one’s place in the world and in the universe. But it is not too much to say that, even before man reaches the moon, he has begun to get a new perspective of himself and his place in the universe from the space adventure.” (Toth, Wash. Post, 11/10/ 66, P6) A total of 211 medium- and high-resolution photos of 13 potential Apollo landing sites were taken during mission’s photo acquisition phase. Readout would be completed Dec. 13. Among photos transmitted, described as "consistently high in quality,” was a picture of the crater Copernicus taken from an angle inaccessible to earth cameras. Dr. Martin J. Swetnick, NASA Hq., describing the closeup as "one of the great pictures of the century,” said: "It provides new information, which certainly will lead to better understanding of the processes and structures on the moon.” (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 11/16/66, A18; Sullivan, NYT, 12/1/66, 1, 36) Docking of spacecraft with gatv was in 2.3 revolutions—4:14 get. After plans to use gatv propulsion system to place gemini xii into higher orbit had to be abandoned because of gatv malfunction, gemini xii rendezvoused with Nov. 12 total solar eclipse over South America and made motion and still pictures of eclipse through spacecraft windows. Aldrin then began first of two standup Evas: hatch opening was at 19:29:01 get with closure 2 hrs. 29 min. later. Nov. 13’s activities revolved around Aldrin’s umbilical Eva: hatch opening was at 42:46 get with closing 2 hrs. 8 min. later. While on 30-ft. umbilical, Aldrin performed measured work tasks at Agena docking adapter and at work station in spacecraft adapter section. He also attached 100-ft. tether stowed in Agena adapter to Gemini docking bar in preparation for tethered operations, gemini xii backed out of Agena docking collar about 47:37 get and gravity gradient appeared to be established by one revolution later. Tether exercise lasted 4 hrs. 17 min. After failing twice to sight sodium vapor clouds released in upper atmosphere by French sounding rocket launched from Hammaguir Range and performing experiments with a space sextant, crew began experiencing problems with maneuvering thrusters on spacecraft. In second standup Eva, Aldrin jettisoned unused equipment and conducted additional experiments and photography. Hatch-open time was 66:04 get for 51-min. duration. Total Eva time for gemini xii mission was 5 hrs. 28 min. Retrofire took place Nov. 15 at 94:00:01 get; reentry in 59th revolution after 94 hrs. 34 min. in space was normal. Splashdown in the Atlantic was at 94:34:31 get. gemini xii landed about three miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Wasp and about four miles from aiming point. Astronauts were picked up hy helicopter within 20 min. Naucmher 10-30: Two historic lunar photographs returned by NASA's lunar ohbiter if. one, the first close-up photograph of the crater Copernicus, taken Nov. 23, is an oblique view from 28-mi. altitude; the other, the first detailed view of lunar domes, taken Nov, 25, confirms the moon's long history of volcanic activity. The domes range from 2 to 10 mi. in diameter and from 1,000 to 1,500 ft. high; they are best seen to the south and west of the crater Marius (upper right). White House announced promotion of Aldrin from usaf major to lieutenant colonel. Lovell had been promoted to usn captain after cemini vn mission. A Presidential statement read by Press Secretary Bill Moyers said the flight was "the culmination of a great team effort, stretching back to 1961, and directly involving more than 25,000 people in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, and other Government agencies; in the universities and other research centers; and in American industry.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-272; Msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 2; Wilford, NYT, 11/12/66, 1, 14; 11/13/66, 1, 34; 11/14/66, 1, 2; 11/15/66, 1, 17; 11/16/66,1,30; O’Toole, {Fash. Post, 11/12/66, Al, A4; 11/13/66, Al, A4; 11/14/66, Al; 11/15/66, Al, A10; Pres. Doc., 11/21/66, 1701-2) November 12: Total solar eclipse which moved across South America at 2,000	mph for 2 hrs. 42 min. received extraordinary scientific scrutiny: 800 scientists from 12 nations utilized $90 million of equipment, nasa’s activities were conducted in cooperation with Argentine and Brazilian scientists as part of an international program. Eclipse formed 55-mi. strip of total blackout beginning in Pacific Ocean west of Peru, crossing southern Peru, Bolivia, northern Argentina, southern tip of Brazil, and extending into South Atlantic. NASA-Ames Convair 990A jet aircraft "Galileo,” a flying research laboratory carrying 26 scientists, successfully rendezvoused with four other instrument-equipped aircraft and raced the eclipse at 575 mph as it moved out over the South Atlantic. Other NASA activities included: five NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched within two hours from Cassino, Brazil, in Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to measure D and E region electron densities and temperatures, absorption profiles 1216 A and 1450 A, and collision frequencies. First rocket ejected trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud for comparison of electron density profile with wind profile; however, no photographs of vapor cloud were obtained. Third rocket carried Brazilian experiment to study extreme ultraviolet. All rockets and instrumentation, except for mass spectrometer on third flight, performed satisfactorily. Specially constructed launch and tracking site was manned and operated by personnel of Wallops Station and the Brazilian Space Commission. Photographs were taken by nimbus ii meteorological satellite and by Astronauts James Lovell, Jr., and Edwin Aldrin, Jr., orbiting in Gemini xii spacecraft. AFCRL launched three Nike-Hydac sounding rockets from a site near Rio Grande, Brazil. Instrumented payloads, which reached 71-mi. (115-km.) altitudes, measured positive-ion mass composition, solar radiation, electron density and temperature, and positive-ion density. Data were telemetered to ground receivers. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Japan, the Netherlands, U.K., New Zealand, and France participated in observations which would increase knowledge of the solar forces and their effects on earth’s atmosphere and provide data for use in space travel, radio communications, and weather prediction, (nasa Release 66-285; Wallops Release 66-55; De Onis, NYT, 11/13/66, 35; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/13/66, A16; AP, Wash. Post, 11/12/66, A16; oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8; nasa Rpt. srl)
"The American Space Outlook” for 1967 was summarized by Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., in the Baltimore Sun. ". . . 1967 should he a year of genuine accomplishments in space for men and machines. ". . . astronauts will begin to fly around the earth in the kind of spacecraft that will carry them to the moon in 1968 or 1969. . . . "New unmanned spacecraft will climb into orbit for additional views of the earth’s weather. Other craft will fly away to study the science of the sun; make further on-the-spot examinations of the moon’s surface, probe the nature of the stars and take another close look at Venus. . . the Defense Department will lay the groundwork for the 1969 launching of a manned orbiting laboratory to study possible military roles of men in space . . . the people who make airplanes will be planning the big jumbo jets and, in Europe, fashioning airliners that will go faster than the speed of sound. . . .” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/28/66)
Comparing earth to a "manned spaceship hurtling through the infinity of space,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address at San Fernando State College that exploration of space would bring home the fact that "earth is a mere speck in the universe.” He said it would seem increasingly absurd we had not better organized our living together on this planet: "Our experience in space can be a powerful stimulus to all of us, wherever we live, to move towards a world of law, a world without war. And may we find also in the space effort that 'moral equivalent of war’ for which philosophers have been searching over many centuries. Like war, it stretches our human capabilities to the utmost. It demands all that we possess of ingenuity, determination, persistence, and intelligence—and, on the part of our gallant astronauts, the highest degree of courage and resourcefulness in the face of danger. Space activities —even competition in space—can be a substitute for aggression, a bridge for mutual understanding and the identification of common interests with other nations, and a major tool of arms control and disarmament.” (Text)
NASA msc announced that Astronaut John Young would be command pilot of Gemini 10; pilot would be Astronaut Michael Collins. No date had been set for the Gemini X mission, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 1/25/66)
NASA selected Warrier Constructors, Inc., for final negotiations of a $3.5-million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to complete construction and equip a lunar receiving laboratory at msc by end of 1967. A central complex where samples of lunar surface material collected by Apollo astronauts could be received, examined, and processed, laboratory would also be equipped to quarantine spacecraft and crew after flight to moon, (nasa Release 66-200)
15-lb. pigtailed monkey, connected to intricate battery of miniaturized instruments, would be launched into earth orbit in 1967 to provide U.S. scientists with 30-day study of his health, jpl announced. Monkey—an astronaut stand-in—would be part of the Biosatellite series projected by NASA. Particularly meaningful to NASA’s space biology program would be urinalysis tests, showing changes in calcium and other primate urine constituents, which should indicate how astronaut’s metabolism might vary during prolonged space flights. ARC was in charge of the program, (jpl Release)
Circular insignia of Project Apollo astronauts was displayed for first time at ksc. Capital letter "A” was in center with its crossbar formed by part of a curving track joining earth (at right) and moon (at left) of the "A.” Centered on the crossbar were three twinkling stars— symbolic of the three-astronaut crew of each Apollo mission. Earth symbol was dominated by North American continent; moon was represented in third quarter phase with dark part dominated by a man’s profile. Moon, earth, and letter "A” were displayed against dark blue background studded with stars—representing outer space. Entire design was ringed by a circle with "Apollo” at top and "nasa” at bottom. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/16/66, Al)
Astronauts returning to earth after long space flights in sterile environment might have to take bacteria pills, suggested Dr. T. D. Luckey, Univ. of Missouri Medical School, at American Society for Microbiology convention in Los Angeles. Dr. Luckey suggested that astronauts’ sterile air, food, and water eventually could dangerously reduce the amount of bacteria in their systems, resulting in bacterial illness when they returned to earth. Pills could restore normal degree of immunity to terrestrial bacteria. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A12)
NASA selected McDonnell Aircraft Corp. for negotiation of $9-million, fixed-price contract to provide an airlock for an experiment in which astronauts would enter empty hydrogen tank of a spent Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) 2nd stage (S-IVB). Airlock would be stacked on space vehicle between Saturn and Apollo units using lunar module mounts. In orbit, command and service modules would separate and dock with airlock unit, and the crew would activate systems to pressurize spent hydrogen tank for habitation; hatch in airlock would permit astronauts to egress into space without depressurization of tank or spacecraft. First mission in MSFC-managed program would be carried out "no earlier than 1968.” (nasa Release 66-223; msfc Release 66-189)
Proposal for fleet of 25 stand-by spacecraft which could be launched within three hours of a distress signal to rescue astronauts stranded in orbit was submitted to NASA by MIT aeronautics students. Each 13,000-lb., four-man Nero (Near Earth Rescue Operation) spacecraft, designed with wing-like lift similar to M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, would be launched with Titan III-C booster to rendezvous with target; it would glide to a landing at a jet airport. Vehicles could also repair crippled satellites, resupply manned orbiting laboratories, inspect unidentified satellites, and remove orbiting debris. System could be implemented with current technology and be in operation by early 1970’s at total cost of $2 billion. (Wilford, NYT, 12/6/66, 60C)
nasa announced selection of 19 pilots, to join 31-member nasa astronaut team in early May: Vance D. Brand, civilian; Lt. John S. Bull (usn); Maj. Gerald P. Carr (usmc); Capt. Charles M. Duke, Jr. (usaf); Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf); LCdr. Ronald E. Evans (usn); Maj. Edward G. Givens, Jr. (usaf); Fred W. Haise, Jr., civilian; Maj. James B. Irwin (usaf); Dr. Don L. Lind, civilian; Capt. Jack R. Lousma (usmc); Lt. Thomas K. Mattingly (usn); Lt. Bruce McCandless II (usn); LCdr. Edgar D. Mitchell (usn) ; Maj. William R. Pogue (usaf) ; Capt. Stuart A. Roosa (usaf); John L. Swigert, Jr., civilian; LCdr. Paul J. Weitz (usn); and Capt. Alfred M. Worden (usaf). During recruitment, which began Sept. 10, 1965, nasa received 351 applications of which 159 met basic requirements, (nasa Release 66-67)
msfc awarded Emerson Electric Co. a 10-wk., $34,990 study contract to determine feasibility of recovering small metallic coupons from wings of pegasus ill meteoroid-detection satellite, orbited by NASA July 30, 1965.	Using sample wing with attached coupons, Emerson would analyze possible approaches an astronaut could make to satellite and types of equipment he would need to perform coupon-retrieving mission, (msfc Release 66-162)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was appointed chairman of the board of Royal Crown Cola International, Ltd. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/25/66, C8)
President Johnson issued statement after gemini vm carrying Neil Armstrong and David Scott had splashed down safely following difficulties encountered in flight: "They are disappointed that their mission could not continue, but Gemini 8 accomplished the first docking in space—a major step on the course we have set. The information they have acquired will help us to perfect the spacecrafts that will carry us even further. "From their skill and strength we all take heart, knowing that the personal qualities of the astronauts and their colleagues will ultimately prevail in the conquest of space. We are very proud of them.” (Pres. Doc., 3/21/66, 400)
Soviet newspaper Trud said that although Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission had set new altitude record, it otherwise only repeated "already achieved results.” Trud added that some of these results were "worse” than before, citing the lesser length of time spent in Eva by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/16/66, A2)
At msc, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented NASA Exceptional Service Medals to Gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan and to Richard E. Dineen (Col., usaf) who had helped solve problems in the Titan II booster that had launched the spacecraft. Referring to difficulties that occurred during the June 3-6 Gemini ix-a flight, Seamans said: "We know that if we had been a little sharper, if we had worked a little harder, that this would not have happened. ... We are . . . dissatisfied with ourselves when technical and procedural failures keep us from our goals.” He added he had requested review of plans for Gemini X, XI, and XII missions for "tightening up” of procedures. Summarizing Project Gemini’s results to date—"at the three quarter mark”—and forecasting its probable total impact on the space effort, Seamans said: "I am convinced that this program will be completed with far greater return to the nation in scientific information, technology, and operational experience than we had originally set out to accomplish when we began the program in 1961.” {Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; Waldron, NYT, 6/18/66, 10; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/20/66, A10)
usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) was "moving quietly but quickly toward its first test launch, now scheduled for Oct. 28 from Cape Kennedy,” Aviation Week reported. Operational Mol would consist of modified Gemini spacecraft connected to a "can-shaped” laboratory. usaf astronauts, while orbiting in space, would pass through door in spacecraft’s heatshield to reach laboratory. October test would show whether configuration would endanger astronauts in spacecraft during reentry. (Av. Wk., 7/18/66, 25)
usaf and NASA signed agreement to establish procedures for joint space program accident investigation. Ad hoc joint boards, consisting of at least three voting members appointed by usaf Director of Aerospace Safety and three by NASA Safety Director, would study particular launch vehicle accidents. Chairman would be from agency with "primary responsibility at time of accident,” determined by circumstances of each case. (Text; nasa nmi 1052.74, 4/27/66) "As it turns out, even the most fantastic thinking 30 years ago has proved to be very conservative. We have already flown planes like the SR-71 at speeds greater than mach 3 for extended periods. The experimental X-15 has flown at mach 6 and reached altitudes of over 50 miles. Our long-range ballistic missiles have ranges of from 5,000 to 9,000 miles. And our Mercury and Gemini astronauts have sped through space for extended periods at speeds better than 17,000 miles per hour. With the Apollo program we are not too many years away from landing a man on the moon.” (Text) Entertainer Bob Hope presented General Schriever the inaugural award of Arnold Air Society’s Eugene M. Zuckert Trophy "to recognize and stimulate the growth of professionalism in the United States Air Force.” General Schriever was cited for his "outstanding dedication to the task of insuring the development of vitally needed modern weaponry for national defense” and the gathering of "highly qualified technological management teams required to perform this task.” (afsc Release 74.66)
V/Adm. H. G. Rickover (usn), in speech at Athens meeting of Royal National Foundation, noted benefits to humanity in science and warned of dangers inherent in misuse of technology. He urged that technological capability be applied selectively to enhance human welfare and conserve natural resources, rather than to "submit meekly to whatever is technically feasible.” (Text, CR, 6/21/66, 13114-17) At 49 min. get Stafford executed first course correction to position gemini ix for rendezvous, firing thruster rockets to raise perigee to 134 mi. After two more orbital maneuvers, spacecraft was within 25 ft. of target. Stafford, sighting atda, confirmed suspicions that its shroud had not jettisoned, and docking would be impossible. He radioed ground control: "It looks like an angry alligator out there.” nasa later revealed that shroud had not jettisoned because technicians, following "insufficiently detailed” written instructions, had installed lanyards improperly. Complying with modified flight plan, astronauts photographed atda, executed re-rendezvous maneuver, and executed rendezvous-from-above simulating Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) abort from the moon. After this maneuver, which depleted fuel supply to 11%—only 6% more than minimum reserve—Stafford and Cernan were fatigued and recommended 24-hr. postponement of Cernan’s walk in space. At 11:02 a.m. est June 5, Cernan opened hatch of depressurized spacecraft, climbed out, and retrieved micrometeoroid impact detector attached to side. He moved to full length of 25-ft. tether to take photos. After one hour, Cernan returned to Adapter Section to don Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)—a task which required "four or five times more work than anticipated.” His faceplate visor began clouding over, presumably because environmental control system was not absorbing moisture quickly enough. Ceman’s limited visibility and discovery that Amu’s radio transmissions were garbled forced Stafford to recall him to spacecraft. He had been scheduled to disconnect from gemini ix’s oxygen supply and maneuver in Amu to 150 ft. from spacecraft. Reentry on June 6 was normal. At 10:00 a.m. est, in the 46th revolution, gemini ix impacted 345 mi. east of Cape Kennedy—less than two miles from target—in the mo3t accurate landing to date, after total mission duration of 72 hrs. 21 min. Splashdown and recovery were carried on live television via EARLY bird I comsat. Within minutes, USN pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, placed flotation collar around spacecraft. At 10:45 a.m. EST, spacecraft carrying astronauts was hoisted onboard U.S.S. Wasp. Accomplishments of gemini ix-a mission were summarized by. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at msc news conference: (1) demonstration of three new rendezvous procedures—catching target in only three revolutions, locating it without radar, and approaching it from above rather than below; (2) accurately controlled reentry; (3) longest period of extravehicular activities—over two hours; (4) new information on man’s ability to work in space necessary for manned lunar landing and for assembling stations in space; and (5) new information on manned observation of another spacecraft in orbit. Five experiments were successfully performed in accordance with modified flight plan. Concerning mission’s disappointments, he said: "We will try to do as much as we can on each of our Gemini flights. We won’t always succeed in meeting all of the objectives. But we learned a great deal about the problems that do occur during the course of one of these very difficult space missions.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-97; Wilford, NYT, 6/4/66, 1, 10; 6/5/66, 1, 80 ; 6/6/66, 1, 40 ; 6/7/66, 1, 34; 6/8/66, 1,29; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/66, Al, A2; 6/5/66, Al, A6; 6/6/66, Al, A4; 6/7/66, A3; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/4/66, Al, A8; 6/5/66, Al, A14; 6/6/66, Al, A3; 6/7/66, Al, A7, A21; 6/8/66, A3; WSJ, 6/7/66, 2; 6/8/66, 1; Tech. Wk, 6/13/66, 14-15; Av. Wk, 6/13/66, 31-34)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received Great Silver Medal of Paris from Mayor Albert Chavanac for being "one of the pioneers of space, who was able to give a human aspect to the experiment he attempted so successfully.” (AP, NYT, 5/25/66, 33) AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, in luncheon address, cited three factors which could restrain full advancement of technology: "The first of these constraints is the relative silence of our opponents. A few years ago the headlines were full of Soviet threats of orbital bombs, missiles that could 'hit a fly in the sky,’ and similar weapons. Today, by contrast, the Soviets are not boasting about their new weapon developments. . . . The second constraint is the argument made in some quarters that U.S. military research and development could be 'provocative’ to our opponents. This argument overlooks the fact that our very existence as a free society is 'provocative’ to our opponents, because it contradicts their theory of history. . . . The third constraint is the immediate need for large funds to support our forces in Vietnam. . . .” To overcome these constraints, General Schriever said, "we must harness our management experience and technological knowledge to serve the national purpose,” in an effort involving every "segment of our national life. . . .” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed implications of 1968 space budget decisions. He said U.S. today was "not ahead in this deadly serious competition,” and "strong and increasing effort” would be required "to prevent the Soviets from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space.” (Text) Nike X system had been improved so that it could not only destroy hostile satellites but also provide defensive cover for the entire Nation, reported Dr. Oswald H. Lange, chief scientist for the Nike X project office at Redstone Arsenal, Ala. He described the Nike X system as employing two interceptors—the long-range Zeus and short-range, high acceleration Sprint. (NYT, 5/26/66, 4) R. I. Mitchell, vice-president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s JetStar program, said that Lockheed would produce advanced version of four-engine JetStar business aircraft capable of taking off on shorter runways and carrying more cargo and passengers than previous models. New Dash 8 JetStar, powered by Pratt & Whitney JT12A-8 engine, would reduce runway requirements from 6,425 ft. to 5,550 ft. and would have 1,000 fpm faster rate of climb. (Lockheed Release) Two space rescue systems being tested for possible use by usaf were discussed by Harold L. Bloom of General Electric Co.’s Re-Entry Systems Dept.: (1) "Emergency cocoon”—an inflatable shelter to maintain astronaut in a "livable environment” while awaiting rescue— would use thin silicone rubber membrane in dacron and Mylar skin to provide C02 and water vapor control; (2) one-man reentry vehicle for self-rescue—"Manned Orbital Operations Safety Equipment (moose)” —would consist of foldable heat shield bonded to Mylar bag. Astronaut would zip himself into moose bag, leave spacecraft, and initiate polyurethane foaming process; foam would insulate and support him during reentry oriented with small rocket in an attitude/de-orbit package. Form-fitting couch, designed to be traveling at less than 30 feet per second at the time of impact, would also double as a life raft. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 5/8/66, 66)
Gemini VIII rendezvous and docking mission—world’s first space docking—began at etr with launch of 7,000-lb. Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv) by Adas booster at 10:00 a.m. est, followed 100 min. later by launch of Gemini viii by two-stage Titan II booster with Astronauts Neil A.	Armstrong, command pilot, and David R. Scott, pilot. Primary objectives of the mission—sixth manned flight in the Gemini series—were rendezvous and docking of gemini viii spacecraft with gatv and performance of extravehicular activity (Eva) for one orbit. gatv was injected into near-circular orbit with 186-mi. (299.5-km.) apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee; gemini viii entered initial orbit with 128.8-mi. (206.4-km.) apogee and 74.9-mi. (119.5-km.) perigee. Near third apogee, Armstrong fired aft thrusters, circularizing spacecraft’s orbit at 168-mi. (270-km.) altitude. Trailing gatv by 139 mi., Armstrong received intermittent lock-on between gemini viii radar and gatv’s companion transponder. After sighting gatv at 66-mi. range at 04:12 get, Armstrong fired thrusters and Scott read out computer data until 05:15 get, when they switched from catch-up to rendezvous mode. At 150 ft. from gatv, Armstrong reported he had matched velocity for brief station-keeping exercise. Conditions at that point were so favorable that Armstrong passed under gatv and came up 80 ft. in front of it, where he was able to read some data on gatv’s status display. Successful docking was confirmed at 6:33 get. Plan had been to remain docked with gatv through 7M-hr. sleep period until beginning Eva, but at approximately 7:00 get spacecraft-GATV combination began to roll and yaw violently. Unable to stabilize joined spacecraft, Armstrong fired gemini vm’s thrusters to undock and maneuvered away from the gatv. Once freed, however, gemini viii began to roll even more rapidly; roll, pitch, and yaw rates increased, approaching one revolution per min. For three minutes, the astronauts fought to control gemini viii; finally, with oams turned off, Armstrong fired his Reentry Control System (Res) rockets in final attempt to counteract violent roll. This maneuver was successful and eight minutes later, at 7:25:30 get, the spacecraft was stabilized. Within a matter of minutes, the problem was isolated to the spacecraft’s No. 8 thruster, which had fired intermittently while gemini viii was docked with gatv and stuck open until Armstrong managed to turn off oams. It was later determined that a short circuit was probable cause of thruster’s malfunction. Premature use of reentry rockets forced Gemini flight director John D. Hodge to order an emergency landing, with recovery planned in the western Pacific during seventh revolution. (Safety rules of the Gemini program required immediate landing of any spacecraft once its Res squibs were blown; if the flight were allowed to continue, danger of Res fuel depletion would jeopardize firing of Res rockets, vital to safe return of spacecraft and crew.) Spacecraft landed 500 mi. west of Okinawa in regular emergency recovery area at approximately 10:23 p.m. est—10 hrs. 42 min. after launch. Landing was only three miles from intended impact point. Within minutes usaf frogmen parachuted from usaf C-54 rescue aircraft and placed flotation collar around capsule. At 1:30 a.m. est capsule and astronauts were hoisted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard Despite early termination, gemini viii mission accomplished one of two primary objectives—rendezvous and docking. Original flight plan had specified four gemini viii-gatv dockings and two hrs. 15 min. of extravehicular activity by Astronaut Scott. Five scientific, four technological, and one medical experiment were to have been conducted. Flight had been scheduled to last 44 revolutions—approximately 73 hrs. (NASAProj. Off,; nasa Release 66-52 ;Wilford, NYT, 3/17/66,1;Waldron, NYT, 3/17/66, 20; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/17/66, 1; Av. Wk., 3/31/66, 30-32)
Gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space, told AP that the most important word of advice he had given Astronaut David Scott, scheduled for extravehicular activity during the March 15 Gemini VIII mission, was: "Don’t get in a hurry. "Take things slow and try not to hurry and rush, because you can’t do things in a real rapid manner up tliere. It’s better to go on the slow, deliberate approach.” (AP, Chic.Trib., 3/11/66)
Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman and his family were welcomed by a parade in their hometown of Tucson, Ariz. Borman, who was given the keys to the city and told that a $300,000 planetarium would be built in his honor, was also praised in a special resolution passed unanimously by the Arizona legislature. He told a press conference he had joined the space program to go to the moon and "that’s what I want to do.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 1/9/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/11/66)
Delays at major U.S. airports totaling 20 million minutes cost aircraft operators $63.6 million in 1965, faa reported in a staff study. One third of total delays was caused by air traffic controls, and the remainder by airport limitations such as weather conditions, ground congestion, and construction, (faa Release 66-68) Maneuvers were executed as planned, with docking of gemini x and gatv x occurring at 5:58 get. Only about 380 lbs. maneuvering fuel of 940 lbs. at liftoff were left, whereas a 680-lb. remainder had been expected. An out-of-plane error had necessitated a major correction, with excessive fuel consumption. Mated spacecraft, using gatv x’s primary propulsion system, attained 476-mi. (766-km.) record altitude for manned flight. Burn of gatv x’s secondary propulsion system at 22:38 get brought docked configuration into same orbit as gatv viii—launched March 16 for gemini viii mission—preparatory to later rendezvous. Standup Eva began at 23:27 get with Collins photographing stellar ultraviolet radiation through open hatch. Young orderea termination of Eva when both he and Collins experienced severe watering and irritation of eyes from an unidentified source. Separation of Gemini x-gatv x— which had remained docked 38 min. 42 sec.—occurred at 44:40 get. Series of maneuvers brought gemini x within 50 ft. of gatv viii. Umbilical Eva began at 48:08 get: Collins removed fairing from gatv viii and retrieved micrometeoroid detection experiment—completing first productive work ever accomplished on Eva mission. Collins lost Eva camera; photographic coverage was limited to pictures taken by Young from spacecraft. Eva was terminated after 28 min. to conserve maneuvering fuel; 50 lbs. had been used, as against 35 lbs. estimated consumption for planned 55 min. Third hatch opening of mission occurred when astronauts, cramped by unstowed equipment, jettisoned 12 items. Reentry July 21 after 70 hrs. 47 min. in space and 43 revolutions was normal. At 5:07 p.m. edt, gemini x splashed down in Atlantic Ocean 544 mi. east of Cape Kennedy—less than three miles off target and five miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Within minutes, usn pararescue team dropped from helicopters had attached flotation collar to spacecraft, and Young and Collins were transported by helicopter to recovery ship. gemini x had accomplished (1) two rendezvous, one involving longest docking yet achieved, the other a close approach to a passive satellite from which an object was retrieved; (2) two Eva exercises; (3) successful maneuvering by astronaut from one spacecraft to another and back; and (4) use of powered, fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary propulsion for docked spacecraft. (NASA Release 66-179; NASA Proj. Off.; Wilford, NYT, 7/19/66, 1; Hines, Wdfch. Eve. Star, 7/19/66, Al, A3; 7/20/66, Al, A6; Wilford, NYT, 7/20/66, 1; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 7/22/66, Al, A4; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 26-30)	_
NASA awarded Philco Corp. $3.5-million contract for four tri-axis magnetometers and supporting equipment to be left on moon by Apollo astronauts. One of seven geophysical instruments to be carried in Alsep (Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package), 14.5-lb. magnetometer would determine presence or absence of lunar magnetic field, measure magnetic penetrability of moon, study interplanetary magnetic field and its diffusion to moon, and detect electrical currents in solar wind above lunar surface, (arc Release 66-9)
Gemini IX Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan passed their final major physical examinations at ksc. Mission review board confirmed May 17 launch date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/15/66, Al)
"Moonwalker”—device developed by Space General Corp. for astronauts to travel on the moon—had been adapted for crippled children. Built under fiew grant, 90-lb. machine, which walked on eight mechanical legs, could negotiate sand or mud, climb and descend stairs, step up a normal street curb, and climb grades of 15° or more. (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/13/66, Al; Brevard Sentinel, 5/13/66)
A 40-ft. strip of 16-mm. film "of excellent quality” shot by Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., during Sept. 12-15 gemini xi mission was released at msc. One sequence showed Gordon straddling Agena to tie tether from gatv to gemini xi. Movie revealed Conrad had described scene accurately when he had radioed to earth: "He’s riding it like a cowboy.” In Washington, D.C., White House announced Gordon would be promoted from usn lieutenant commander to full commander. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/17/66, FI; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/17/66, A5; upi, NYT, 9/18/66, 1, 82)
Use of personal radar units by astronauts to counteract optical illusions which they might encounter while assembling a space station or exploring the moon was recommended by Cambridge Univ. Prof. Richard L. Gregory, author of Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing, in a New York press interview. Gregory believed astronauts might experience spatial distortion when seeing spacecraft’s structural elements gleaming luminously in sunlight or sharply etched against a jet black background. In addition, he thought they might experience reversed depth perception which would cause distorted images. Gregory recommended aiding astronauts with tones, heard through earphones, of a variable pitch which would be determined by a beam from radar unit each man would wear. Variations in pitch would indicate distance to different objects and astronaut’s rate of approach or retreat from them. Gregory was conducting his research at New York Univ. on a senior foreign scientist fellowship financed in part by NASA. (Osmundsen, NYT,	31; Houston Chron., 2/16/66)
New York Times praised Senate ratification of the space law treaty April 25 and called for increased international cooperation in space: “Ideally, the probing of space and the planets would be the province of a World Space Organization affiliated with the United Nations, financed by the contributions of all nations desiring to participate, and drawing upon the technical manpower and knowledge of all nations. This international organization could be the owner of the moon and other solar bodies, arranging for the exploitation of resources found there, and using any extraterrestrial profits for the benefit of all men. “It will take much time before such an ideal can be reached. But even now the more sober spirit evident in Moscow and Washington opens the door to greater bilateral cooperation. Both nations have technical knowledge in this field that they could exchange to their mutual advantage. Their space tracking and rescue facilities could be coordinated into a single world system; they could agree on a division of labor that would eliminate such duplication as is represented by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter. The result could easily be major savings in money and increased safety for all astronauts, regardless of nationality.” (NYT, 4/26/67)
Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee would conduct a “full review” of the Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed three Apollo astronauts, Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex) announced. {NYT, 1/29/67,47; WPost, 1/29/67, A18)
To astronauts, Maj. Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr. (usaf), and Capt. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), had won the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy, the Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced in New York. Trophies also would go to Miss Sheila Scott of Britain, who had established speed records during a 28,633-mi solo flight around the world in a single-engine plane, and to Alvin S. White. White, now manager of supersonic flight research and development for Trans World Airlines, was named the outstanding airplane pilot for test flights of the XB-70 at mach 3 as chief test pilot for North American Aviation Company. The awards are made annually for exceptional feats of individual piloting skill. (NYT, 9/10/67)
NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III (Lunar Orbiter C) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in mission to photograph possible lunar landing sites for Apollo astronauts (see Feb. 8-28). Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb spacecraft into 100-mi (161km) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 15-min coast period, injecting spacecraft on 92-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule Lunar Orbiter III deployed its four solar panels and two antennas, locked its five solar sensors on the sun, and fixed its star-tracker on Canopus. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III mission, third in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; (2) to obtain high-resolution pictures of previously photographed lunar surface areas to confirm their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft; and (3) to improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 12 primary target sites located within the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. Spacecraft would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in the lunar environment, refine definition of moon’s gravitational field, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of JPL-oper-ated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—12; AP, W Post, 2/5/67, A6; AP, W Star, 2/5/67, A8; AP, NYT, 2/6/67, 12)
Most probable cause of Jan. 27 flash fire in which Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee died was a sparking short circuit in worn, defective, or poorly insulated wire, Apollo 204 Review Board concluded in its final report. Copies of report were distributed simultaneously to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, congressional committees, and the press. Board was unable to pinpoint exact ignition source, but identified conditions which led to the disaster: (1) a sealed cabin, pressurized with an oxygen atmosphere; (2) an extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin; (3) vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power; (4) inadequate provisions for the crew to escape; and (5) inadequate provisions for rescue or medical assistance. Having identified these conditions, the Board addressed itself to the question of “how these conditions came to exist. Careful consideration of this question . . . leads ... to the conclusion that in its devotion to the many difficult problems of space travel, the Apollo team failed to give adequate attention to certain mundane but equally vital questions of crew safety. “The board’s investigation revealed many deficiencies in design and engineering, manufacture and quality control. When these deficiencies are corrected the over-all reliability of the Apollo program will be increased greatly.” Board offered a total of 21 recommendations, including: (1) an “indepth” review of the entire Apollo life-support system; (2) an investigation of effective ways to control and extinguish spacecraft fires; (3) severe restriction and control of amount and location of combustible materials inside spacecraft; (4) reduction of time required for crew to egress and simplification of escape operations; (5) continuous monitoring of safety of all test operations to assure adequacy of emergency protections; (6) improved ground communications system; (7) continued studies of two-gas cabin atmosphere; and (8) full-scale mockup tests to establish fire safety of reconfigured command module. Board emphasized that its report was not intended as a criticism of NASA’s entire manned program: “The board is very concerned that its description of the defects in the Apollo program . . .will be interpreted as an indictment of the entire manned space flight program and a castigation of the many people associated with the program. Nothing is further from the board’s mind.” (Text; NYT, 4/10/67, 1, 28-9; W Star, 4/ 10/67, Al, A6-7; W Post, 4/10/67, Al, A8) .
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
Astronaut Frank Borman objected to making anyone a scapegoat for Jan. 27 Apollo flash fire and said everyone connected with the program must be blamed. Interviewed on ABC television network with Chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Subcommittee on NASA Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Borman said he had “never . . . seen safety sacrificed for anything” in U.S. space program. Both men suggested that the greatest safety problem was tendency toward complacency about dangers inherent in tests. (W Star, 4/17/67, A2)
A minimum of four manned space flights would precede the first U.S. attempt to land men on the moon, Astronauts Joe H. Engle and Alfred M. Worden, recently returned from a geology survey in Iceland, told NASA Hq. press conference. Three of the four missions would involve rendezvous with another spacecraft in earth orbit. Astronauts also said that they and their colleagues had even more confidence in the Apollo program now than they had before the Jan. 27 fire. (B Sun, 7/19/67; W Post, 7/19/67)
Astronaut-Aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) was detached from NASA at usn’s request for assignment in Navy’s Deep Submergence Systems Project (dssp) . One of the Nation’s seven original astronauts, Carpenter became the second American to orbit the earth when he piloted Aurora 7 spacecraft on three-orbit mission May 24, 1962. Active in USN’s Man-in-the-Sea program since 1965, he set a world record in underwater work during Aug. 28-Oct. 10, 1965, Sealab II experiment when he lived 205 ft down in the Pacific for 30 consecutive days. Under dssp he was tentatively assigned as an aquanaut in Sealab III, a 60-day experiment 600 ft down in the Pacific scheduled to take place in 1968. As usn’s senior aquanaut, Carpenter’s duties would include responsibility for Sealab III ocean floor operations, experiments, and equipment and for coordination of aquanaut team training. NASA Administrator James E. Webb commented on Carpenter’s departure. “. . . we are grateful to him and the United States Navy for his services over the past eight years. During the past two years, he has demonstrated that many of the technologies, techniques, and psychophysiological factors related to space flight have direct applications to the Man-in-the-Sea program. Thus, Cdr. Carpenter becomes the first astronaut to return to his parent service in order to apply the skills, knowledge, and experience acquired during his assignment to NASA. ...” (nasa Release 67—208)
President Johnson presented Harmon International Aviation Trophies for 1967 to Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (Capt., usn), and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (l/c, usaf), and Alvin S. White, former naa test pilot. Lovell and Aldrin were cited for successful Gemini XII mission
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Thomas P. Stafford, and Frank Borman were interviewed on nbc-tv’s “Meet the Press.” Borman said he had “nothing but admiration for the way NASA had conducted its investigation of the Jan. 27 Apollo accident and that, far from losing confidence in the agency, he had gained confidence in it. Asked if he believed that some other group should also investigate the fire, he replied: “Absolutely not. I don’t understand the desire for another investigation.” Schirra, asked if he believed it were necessary to send men to the moon when unmanned spacecraft were obtaining valuable information, responded: “It is only natural that man must go out there and see for himself.” The computer in unmanned flights is only a product of man’s mind, and, “if something different occurs, man is best equipped to make the move.” (AP, Newsday, 5/22/67)
Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr. (usaf), first Negro selected for a mission in the Nation’s space program, was killed during routine training flight when his F—104 aircraft crashed on landing at Edwards afb. Copilot Maj. Harvey J. Royer (usaf), chief of operations at usaf’s Aerospace Research Pilot School, was injured. USAF appointed a board of officers to investigate the crash. Selected June 30, to train for DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program, Major Lawrence was ninth astronaut—first in dod astronaut program—to be killed in an accident and fifth to die in an air crash; three others had died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire and one in an automobile accident. Memorial services were conducted at Edwards afb and in Chicago. ( W Post, 12/9/67, Al; AP, NYT, 12/10/67, 44; B Sun, 12/11/67, A15)
NASA announced that primary mission objectives of Biosatellite II (launched Sept. 7) had been accomplished. Biological experiments had been conducted to investigate synergistic and antagonistic effects of weightlessness and controlled gamma radiation aboard attitude-controlled spacecraft. Spacecraft recovery—essential to success—had been completed as planned. Environmental control of capsule and experiment packages had kept organisms alive while radiation source was exposed for flight duration. Dr. Rudolph H. T. M^ttoni, principal investigator for bacteria experiment, said bacteria had increased 20 to 30% faster in weightless condition. He concluded “cellular turnover may be higher in man” during weightlessness and could be harmful to astronauts during long-duration space flights. He suggested that if further research proved growth of human cells to be faster in weightless state, future spacecraft might have to be equipped with some form of artificial gravity or astronauts might have to carry drugs to prevent too-rapid turnover of their body cells. Since the 45-hr experiment with bacteria equaled many years of human life, this would not be significant on flights of a few weeks or even a few months. The pepper plant experiment showed abnormal growth, indicating that plant leaves also depend on gravity. Other experiments did not show significant change and were still being analyzed, (nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 10/15/67,46)
First regular data reports of activity on sun’s “invisible hemisphere”— side visible from earth only once every 13.5 days—were being made to essa’s Solar Disturbance Forecast Center in Boulder, Colo., by nasa’s Pioneer VI and VII satellites, in orbit around sun. Satellites’ observations on physical characteristics of solar storms would allow continuous scientific study of solar surface and provide Apollo astronauts with additional warning time to avoid solar radiation hazards. (nasa Release 67-174)
Illustrations of the predictive ability of the contemporary engineer were made by arc’s Simulation Sciences Div. chief, George A. Rathert, Jr., at Moffett Field Scholarship Night Banquet for Bay Area Joint Engineers Council: “. . . faa pilots were experiencing certain characteristics of the supersonic transport on simulators at the Ames Research Center 15 months before the FAA asked for bids on the design studies. You will recall Astronaut Gordon Cooper having to manually control the attitude of his space ship during a reentry retrofiring to successfully complete his mission. Engineering test pilots at Ames were studying problems of coping with manual control of a simulated spacecraft reentering with , partly failed control systems more than nine years ago.” (Text)
msfc used aedc facilities to investigate preparation of spent rocket stage for human occupancy in space by dumping. 840 gal of super-cold liquid nitroeen through “dead” or inactive J-2 rocket engine. Simulating 100,000-ft altitude, dumping experiment would pave way for astronauts to move inside orbiting stage and use tanks as living quarters for space station, (msfc Release 67-203)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, speaking at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., criticized the press for uninformed discussion of the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy: “I deplore comment in the press recently regarding the accident. The press has a responsibility not to comment in areas about which it is not informed.” Speaking on the fifth anniversary of his space flight in Friendship 7, Glenn noted that the deaths of three Apollo astronauts were part of the price man must pay in his quest for knowledge: “Man tries something and sometimes he succeeds and sometimes he fails. It is very regrettable. We hate to lose good friends, but we think they went in a good cause.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/21/67,8; AP, WPost, 2/21/67; NYT, 2/22/67,50) During week of Feb. 20: Princeton Univ. announced development of accelerator capable of raising electrically neutral atoms and molecules to energy levels never before obtained in controlled experiments. Utilizing supersonic jets of mixed gases in high-vacuum container, accelerator could generate molecular beams of neutral particles with kinetic energies of 10 or more electron volts. Particles at this energy level were necessary to many common gas-phase chemical reactions. Dr. John B. Fenn, professor who directed NSF-sponsored project, said accelerator would aid studies in meteorology and aerospace technology. (NYT, 2/26/67, 59)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter would never be able to fly in space again because of an arm injury suffered in 1964 motorcycle accident, the Washington Evening Star reported. Surgery performed six months ago had failed to restore full mobility of the arm. (AP, W Star, 4/17/67, A6)
Memorial service for Astronaut Roger B. Chaffee was held in Houston. Among those attending were Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc; and Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. (Bloom, W Post, 1/30/67)
usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory Systems Program Office, Los Angeles, Calif., issued a $3.5-million initial increment to an $8.7-million fixed-price contract to Hamilton Standard, Windsor Locks, Conn., for development, procurement, and support of astronaut pressure suit systems for the MOL program, usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization issued a $4-million increment to an $8.1-million definitive contract for engineering services in support of the Agena space vehicle program, (dod Release 912-67)
International space events were highlighted by ratification on Oct. 10, 1967, of space law treaty, approved by U.N. on Dec. 19,1966, and endorsement on Dec. 19, 1967, of a new treaty providing for rescue of astronauts. Draft of space rescue treaty, negotiated by the Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, would become effective following ratification by five nations, including U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. NASA’s international program included orbiting of U.K.’s Ariel III and ESRo’s Esro II and assistance with orbiting of Italy’s San Marco II—first satellite to be launched from a platform at sea. Some 124 scientists from 26 countries participated in research at NASA centers; scientific sounding rockets were launched from six sites in cooperation with Argentina, Brazil, West Germany, India, Japan, and Norway; and by the end of 1967, 84 countries had cooperated with U.S. in space research activities. Kenya, Korea, Peru, and Tanzania joined the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat), bringing total membership to 60. Australia successfully launched her first satellite, Wresat 1. (nasa Re' lease 67—301; EH; ComSatCorp pio; NASA International Programs)
Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra, Australia— newest member of NASA’s 16-station network to support manned Apollo missions—was dedicated in ceremonies attended by Australian Prime Minister Henry E. Holt, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey cabled congratulations to Prime Minister Holt: “The establishment of this tracking station is another link in the long chain of cooperative efforts in space between . . . Australia and the United States. “In its support of the Apollo program, this new station will play a vital role in communications with our astronauts in preparation for their landing on the Moon and return to Earth. . . .” (nasa Release 67-65)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CLXXXVIII entered orbit with 276-km (171-mi) apogee, 200-km (124-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. At 4:20 am, edt, spacecraft was automatically docked with Cosmos CLXXXVI (launched Oct. 27). Tass later announced: “. . . both satellites, equipped with special approach and docking units, carried out a number of complicated maneuvers in space, automatically finding each other, drawing closer, berthing and docking rigidly.” It was history’s first automatic docking in space and was filmed by TV cameras onboard both satellites. U.S. had successfully accomplished first manned docking March 16, 1966, with Gemini VII and Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (gatv) ; in this docking experiment, astronauts controlled the maneuver. After automatic docking, the two satellites continued in orbit with altitude ranging from 124-171 mi. At 7:50 am, edt, after completing 2% orbits, spacecraft were undocked on command from the ground, and placed into different orbits by restarting rocket engines. Cosmos CLXXXVI, larger of the two spacecraft, softlanded Oct. 31 after 65 orbits. Cosmos CLXXXVIII reentered Nov. 2. Cosmos CLXXXIX was launched into orbit with 600-km (373-mi) apogee, 535-km (332-mi) perigee, 95.7-min period, and 74° inclination. (Shub, W Post, 10/31/67, 1; Kamm, NYT, 10/31/67, 1; AP, W Star, 10/31/67, A3; Winters, B Sun, 11/1/67; gsfc SSR, 11/15/67)
President Johnson appointed Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., Special Consultant to the President for Physical Fitness, to replace Stan Musial who resigned in January. Lovell would assume the new position in addition to his regular duties as an astronaut. (PD, 6/12/67, 833—4*)
Plumbing leaks in the first model of LEM had delayed flight testing at Cape Kennedy. Portions of the plumbing system had been sent back to the plant of the main contractor, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., Bethpage, N.Y. The plumbing leaks had virtually eliminated any chance of launching this year the first model of the craft that would land American astronauts on the moon. (AP, W Post, 9/26/67, A9)
Initial reaction by the press to Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died: Business Week: “After 16 space flights, in which 19 astronauts returned from their missions safely, many had forgotten the inescapable peril of exploration. No previous frontier has ever been crossed without the loss of life; it was not to be expected that space—the most perilous frontier of them all—could be conquered without sacrifice. None of this lessens the grief that every man in NASA feels for fallen comrades. But it is the nature of test pilots ... to accept disaster not as defeat but as a call for intensified effort and dedication.” (Bus Wk, 2/4/67) Washington Evening Star: “Now that the initial shock ... is beginning to wear off, the second guessers are . . . wondering whether we should be going to the moon at all. . . . From any rational point of view, the only thing to do is to carry on. The Apollo program necessarily will mark time until the true cause of the spacecraft disaster is located and corrected. It is conceivable that the delay could cause the Dec. 31, 1969, deadline to be missed. It is entirely possible that the Russians may get to the moon ahead of us. But so what? The world will not end nor the United States vanish, if the Russians beat us to the moon. ... It would be senseless to stop now. Fortunately, it probably would also be impossible.” (Hines, WStar, 2/2/67) Editor & Publisher:	“The recent disaster at Cape Kennedy indicates we are no less reluctant to face up to disaster than anyone else. Not only were our reporters not prepared for it-—none of them were there for the simulated flight test—but neither were our space officials . . . [because] the full import of the tragedy was fed out piecemeal. . . . The lessons for NASA officials and for newsmen are obvious. Space travel is fraught with dangers in every test, every maneuver, every piece of equipment, but we became complacent about them because of our successes. NASA’s record of dealing with the press up to now has been pretty good and if it hasn’t already developed a ‘disaster plan’ for such accidents it soon will. News media have learned that nothing in the space program should be considered ‘routine’ and that front row seat should never be left unoccupied at any time.” (Editor & Publisher, 2/11/67) Some press reaction to the accident later became increasingly critical of NASA: Washington Evening Star: “The implication of the NASA story was that no fire extinguishing apparatus or quick escape mechanism— neither of which was present on the Apollo 1—could have saved the men. The implication of the truth is that if the spacecraft had been equipped with a means of blowing open the hatch, Grissom, White and Chaffee might have had a chance. NASA’s motive in attempting to distort the truth may have been to protect the families of the astronauts from undue mental anguish. But it also served the function of protecting NASA by heading off criticism of the agency ... by deliberately misleading the press, Congress and the public.” (W Star, 2/9/67) New York Times: “The most basic issue ... is not, as NASA has tended to emphasize, the source of the spark that started the fire. It is rather the question of why so much was permitted to hinge on the assumption that there would be no fire. . . . “The answer is only secondarily, as a NASA official has suggested, that ‘alertness . . . had become dulled’ by previous successes. . . . More fundamental was the willingness to gamble for the sake of winning the race to the moon.” (NYT, 2/28/67,34)
In its final 1967 session U.N. General Assembly unanimously endorsed new space rescue treaty, and urged signature by all countries. Primary provisions: (1) immediate notification when astronauts landed in other countries; (2) assistance to these astronauts, including rescue efforts on the high seas; (3) safe and prompt return of the astronauts; and (4)	notification and return of objects launched into outer space. Treaty would be open to all nations and would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. President Johnson, praising the agreement, said: “I hope that this agreement will help to ensure that nations will assist astronauts in the event of accidents or emergency. The agreement would carry forward the purpose of this administration to promote international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.” (Teltsch, NYT, 12/17/67, 1; Esta-brook, W Post, 12/20/67, A20; upi, NYT, 12/21/67, 29; SBD, 12/21/67,263; PD, 1/1/68,1763)
Selection of NASA’s sixth astronaut class [see Aug. 4] indicated that astronaut “glamour” grew with each new peril, Neal Stanford reported in Christian Science Monitor. “Scientists . . . compete more intensively for the few scientist-astronaut jobs open than do jet pilots in the military services for the pilot j obs available. “The glamour has not entirely gone out of space flying. What has happened is that its perils have become more apparent, its scientific opportunities more exciting, and its financial rewards less considerable. “There have been 6 selections of astronauts, 4 of flier astronauts, and 2 of science astronauts. In this sixth and latest selection 939 [sic] scientists applied for the 11 positions open. In the previous selection of pilot astronauts only 403 applied for 19 positions open. . . .” (Stanford, CSM, 8/15/67)
Congressional actions in response to Jan. 27 flash fire at KSC in which three Apollo astronauts died: Sen. Harrison A. Williams, Jr. (D-N.J.), urged Senate to ratify space law treaty [see Dec. 8,1966] as a worthy tribute to the astronauts. (CR, 2/3/67, S1449-50; nasa lar VI/16) Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) and Rep. Edward J. Gumey (R-Fla.) introduced joint resolution (S.J. Res. 30) to establish a Commission “to formulate plans for a memorial to astronauts who lose their lives in the line of duty in the U.S. space program.” Astronauts Memorial commission would be composed of five Presidential appointees—one NASA representative, one dod representative, and three civilians. (CR, 2/7/67, S1657; nasa lar VI/17) Sen. Vance Hartke (D-Ind.) praised efforts of Mitchell, Ind., residents to erect a memorial to Apollo Astronaut Gus Grissom. “The memorial will preserve the memory of that record for future generations who might otherwise lose sight of the spectacular achievements of the few individuals who made the first forays into space.” (CR, 2/16/67, S2071)
Most Soviet reporting of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died was factual. A few members of Soviet and Italian press, however, charged that “haste” had contributed to the accident. Radio Moscow: “We in the Soviet Union are deeply grieved at the news of the tragedy at Cape Kennedy. “The courage of Virgil Grissom, Edward White, and Roger Chaffee had won our esteem and we join in paying homage to their memories. . . .” Trud (Moscow): “The astronauts became the victims of the space race created by the leaders of the United States space program. Recently, the hurry, the haste in space Sights has continued to grow. There were a number of Saws in the ApoHo system.” La Stampa (Turin, Italy): “Technical revisions must be brought about so that the tragedy will not repeat itself . . . perhaps the rigorous time schedule . . . ought to give way to slower and more secure rhythm.” II Popolo (Rome) : The accident offered “questions for reSection, above all an invitation to weigh in proper measure the margin of risk that accompanies all the conquest of man. ... It is ironic that this happened, just when any danger seemed to be less proximate, during a normal exercise on earth.” (AP, NYT, 1/30/67, 2, 3; AP, B Sun, 1/30/67; Trud, 1/29/67, 3, uss-t Trans.)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial on Dec. 8 death of Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr., (usaf) : “[His death] deprives the Nation of another highly trained scientist who had been selected for future service in space. . . . “With the toll of astronauts now at nine victims, it is significant that not one has been lost in space itself. ... Our astronauts are not only men who have extensive educational qualifications but who have equally extensive experience as test pilots and similar extremely hazardous activities. . - “They may put their lives on the line willingly, but the Nation should strive to safeguard them as much in their non-space activities as ... in space.” (PInq, 12/11/67,10)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb issued statement based on third interim report by Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., on work of Apollo 204 Review Board. Webb observed: (1) “The risk of fire that could not be controlled or from which escape could not be made was considerably greater than was recognized when the procedures for the conduct of the test were established. Our experience with pure oxygen atmosphere included not only the successful Mercury and Gemini flights but a number of instances where a clearly positive source of ignition did not result in a fire. . . .” (2) Apollo spacecraft had been equipped with such items as Velcro adhesive pads to hold frequently used equipment and nylon netting to catch dropped objects. “While most of these [items] were constructed of low-combustion-potential material, they were not arranged as to provide barriers to the spread of a fire. Tests conducted . . . since the accident have shown that an oxygen fire in the capsule will spread along the surface of Velcro and along the edges of nylon netting much faster than through the material itself. (3) Soldered joints in piping carrying both oxygen and fluids were melted away, with resultant leakage contributing to the spread of the fire. . . .” (4) Capsule burst in such a way that flames traveled over and around astronauts’ couches toward rupture. “Under these conditions, and with just a few seconds of time available, the astronauts could not reach the hatch and open it. (5) This fire indicates that a number of items related to the design and performance of the environmental control unit will require the most careful examination and may require redesign. . . .” Webb announced that Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences would hold open hearing on Review Board’s preliminary findings Feb. 27 and that House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight would conduct full investigation of accident after completion of Board’s inquiry, expected by late March. Dr. Seamans said in his report that an “electrical malfunction” was regarded as “most likely source of ignition” of the fire but the “possibility exists that no single source will ever be pinpointed.” Board was still considering chemical reactions in onboard materials, spontaneous combustion of certain materials, and possible electrical phenomena. Evidence indicated fire had had three distinct phases: originating in left side of spacecraft, it had burned several seconds unnoticed, then spread becoming more intense and causing cabin pressure to rise rapidly as atmosphere became heated. Fifteen seconds after crew first reported fire, cabin ruptured. During second phase, gases and flames flowed past astronauts’ couches and through hole moving from left to right. With cabin’s oxygen quickly reduced by rush of flames and gas outside, fire continued as localized flame, smoking heavily, in third phase. Dr. Seamans said Board noted: “The experience in flight and in tests prior to the accident had suggested that the probability of a spacecraft fire was low. Continued alertness to the possibility of fire had become dulled by previous ground experience and six years of successful manned missions. . . . Potential ignition sources inside the spacecraft had been treated so as to be considered safe; neither the crews nor the test and development personnel felt the risk of spacecraft fire to be high. . . .” Dr. Seamans emphasized that Board did not recommend changing pure oxygen system or planned cabin pressure for space flight, but did urge that “trade-offs between one- and two-gas atmospheres be re-evaluated . . . [and] pressurized oxygen no longer be used in prelaunch operations.” It also recommended: (1) combustible materials be replaced where possible with nonflammable materials; (2) nonmetallic materials be arranged to maintain fire breaks; (3) systems for oxygen and liquid combustibles be made fire resistant; (4) full flammabmty tests be conducted with mockup of new configuration; (5) more rapidly and easily operated hatch be installed; and (6) on-the-pad emergency procedures be revised to recognize possibility of cabin fire. (NASA Release
USNS Mercury, third Apollo insertion-injection tracking ship, left General Dynamics Corp.’s Quincy, Mass., shipyard after successfully completing final contractor instrumentation systems tests. Ship docked in Hoboken, N.J., where it would undergo inspection and instrumentation adjustments before range testing and final preparations in Florida for Apollo 503 mission. Mercury, her two sister ships Vanguard and Redstone, and reentry ships Huntsville and Watertown were part of National Range Instrumentation Ship pool. They would be equipped with special antennas for communications between Apollo astronauts and mission control via Atlantic and Pacific satellites. For Apollo missions they would be operated as part of GSFC-operated msfn, which supported Apollo with tracking, command, and voice and telemetry communications via land lines, microwave, submarine cables, and comsats. Operation of Apollo ships was assigned to wtr; crew was provided by Military Sea Transport Service, and technical instrumentation crew by usaf, (nasa Release 67-305)
Under reduced gravity conditions on moon, most natural and comfortable gait for an astronaut would be “a lope at about ten feet per second,” advised Amos A. Spady, Jr., LaRC scientist. He and fellow scientist, Donald Hewes, had tested subjects on specially constructed device— simulating effects of astronauts moving in moon’s lower gravity. Simulated lunar gravity had not guaranteed that all motion would be higher, faster, or farther. Scientists had discovered that, at most speeds, lunar stride would be longer—sometimes twice as long—but number of steps per minute would be reduced by as much as half. (Weil, W Post, 10/2/67, B4)
238,154 airmen certificates—a new annual record and a 32% increase over 1965 total—were issued by faa in 1966. (faa Release 67-18) nuclear rocket—it could be used for continued exploration of the moon after first Apollo landings. “Using a non-nuclear Saturn 5, astronauts are restricted to landing areas in a narrow strip along the moon’s equator. A nuclear upper stage would permit a manned spacecraft to land anywhere on the surface of the moon.” Other possible uses included manned flyby missions to Mars and Venus; unmanned flights of large payloads to Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury, or within a few million miles of sun; and manned orbital flights to Mars and Venus. (Hines, W Star, 3/6/67,1; 3/7/67)
Flash fire swept through oxygen-filled pressure chamber at Brooks APB, Tex., killing Airman 2/C William F. Bartley, Jr., and Airman 3/C Richard G. Harmon in accident similar to the one Jan. 27 which killed three Apollo astronauts at ksc. Fire struck at 9:45 a.m. Est, about 12 min. after airmen had entered the chamber to take blood samples from rabbits under observation to determine effects of pure oxygen on the blood. Cabin pressure was brought down to ground level within 13 sec after fire had ignited, but both men died from burns within several hours. Col. James B. Nuttall, commander of USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, said there were no plans to change research methods because of accident. “As you have seen, it is not safe,” but he said one-gas systems were less complicated and more reliable than two-gas systems. (AP, W Star, 2/1/67, A3; O’Toole, W Post, 2/1/67, 1)
Separate memorial services were held in Houston for Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H. White II. Among those attending were Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Astronaut Alan Shepard; and former Astronaut John Glenn. (Hines, W Star, 1/30/67, 1)
Edward H. White II, one of the three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc, was named to receive AlAA’s 1967 Haley Astronautics Award. Selection had been made in early January. AIAA cited White for his historic walk in space and other contributions, undertaken “at great personal risk in the advancement of space flight” during June 3—7, 1965, Gemini IV mission. Award would be presented to his widow. (AP, W Post, 2/8/67, A6; upi, NYT, 2/9/67,9)
NASA announced selection of 11 civilian scientist-astronauts: Dr. Joseph P. Allen, 30, a physicist research associate at the Univ. of Washington; Dr. Philip K. Chapman, 32, a naturalized citizen horn in Australia and staff physicist at mit’s Experimental Astronomy Laboratory; Dr. Anthony W. England, 25, a graduate fellow in geophysics at MIT and the youngest man ever to be named an astronaut; Dr. Karl G. Henize, 40, an astronomy professor at Northwestern Univ. and experimenter in the Gemini program; Dr. Donald L. Holmquest, 28, who would report for duty in one year after completing his medical internship at Baylor College of Medicine; Dr. William B. Lenoir, 28, an assistant professor of electrical engineering at mit; Dr. John A. Llewellyn, 34, a naturalized citizen born in Wales and associate professor in chemistry at Florida State Univ.; Dr. Franklin S. Musgrave, 31, a post-doctoral fellow at Univ. of Kentucky with a doctorate in medicine from Columbia Univ., a Ph. D. in physiology from Univ. of Kentucky, and four other college degrees; Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, 27, who held a Ph. D. in astronomy and was in the NASA trainee program at Univ. of California Dept, of Astronomy’s Space Sciences Laboratory; Dr. Robert A. Parker, 30, assistant professor of astronomy at Univ. of Wisconsin; and Dr. William E. Thornton, 38, who recently completed two-year tour of duty with Brooks AFB Aerospace Medical Div. The new astronauts, except Dr. Holmquest, would report for duty at MCS Sept. 18. After two weeks orientation, they would begin “ground school” training, which would include orbital mechanics, astronomy, computers, spacecraft orientation, general mathematics and physics refresher courses, and field trips for contractor facility orientation. In March they would start Air Force flight training to become qualified jet pilots. The new group, which increased number of NASA astronauts to 56, was sixth class to be selected and second to be chosen specifically for scientific education. They were selected from a group of 69 nominees submitted to NASA in March by nas after evaluating 923 applications. (NASA Release 67—211; msc Roundup, 8/18/67,1-3)
usaf would not use pure oxygen atmosphere on its manned space flights, partly because of the fire hazard, announced L/Col. John W. Ord, Director of Crew Test Evaluation at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine. Ord said Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program would use mixture of oxygen and helium because it was lightweight and conducted heat away from the spacecraft. (Lockett, W Post, 2/7/67) Dr. Hubertus Strughold, chief scientist at sam, recommended that astronauts preparing for long-duration interplanetary space flights undergo “prophylactic surgery” to prevent appendicitis or gall bladder attacks and prophylactic dental work to guard against abscessed teeth. Dr. Alfred C. Koestler, head of Holloman afb’s Altered Atmosphere Pressure Laboratory, reported that 18 chimpanzees had survived rapid decompression to the near vacuum of 150,000 ft for 3l/> min without any noticeable residual effects following four-hour recovery period. Tests offered hope that an astronaut outside his spacecraft could be rescued if his spacesuit were to spring a leak. Bends, the painful decompression sickness that cripples deep-sea divers, would imperil astronauts leaving a spacecraft with “mixed-gas” atmosphere to work in space, L/Col. Robert C. Mclver suggested. His conclusion was based on series of experiments in which 74 healthy men 324-801 0—69---4 underwent a total of 388 exposures to decompression; one fourth developed symptoms of bends, (usaf Proj Off; afsc Release 274.66; W Star, 2/8/67, A8; W Post, 2/10/67, A4; WSJ. 2/15/67, 1; upi, NYT, 2/24/67, 53)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. announced that it would not exercise its option to extend its rights for book and newspaper distribution of the personal stories of NASA astronauts and their families. Present four-year agreement, which paid the astronauts $320,000 annually for exclusive publishing rights and provided each astronaut with $50,000 life insurance policy, would expire Aug. 31. Field Enterprises president Bailey K. Howard said large number of astronauts now, compared with number four years ago, made continuation of the project impractical. (AP, NYT, 5/3/67,13; US News, 5/15/67)
Astronauts Donald K. Slayton, Alan B. Shepard, Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Frank Borman, and James A. McDivitt, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, expressed confidence in NASA’s management of U.S. space program. They noted that there had been only one mishap in the program, compared with 16 successful manned flights under the same management. Since fire had been foreseen as a significant danger in orbit but not on the launch pad before fueling of the launch vehicle, everyone had been “lulled into a sense of false security . . . [and] grossly underestimated the fire potential of the spacecraft,” they said. Schirra explained confidence astronauts felt prior to the fire Jan. 27: “The back-up crew [of which Schirra was commander] had left the Cape with the feeling that we had a good spacecraft behind us. ... I was not at all prepared for the news I received when I arrived at Houston.” (Hines, W Star, 4/18/67, 1)
Apollo 204 Review Board, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Key Board members summarized the Board’s findings and recommendations. Astronaut Frank Borman, asked if he believed U.S. decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been influenced by a desire to achieve first manned lunar landing, replied: “. . . never since I have been associated with NASA have I ever experienced any decision where a known detriment to crew safety was sacrificed to any operational requirement. And although I am willing to accept risk ... I am not willing personally to accept undue risk and I would not participate in any decision which I thought was expediting a program in an unsafe manner. And in the final analysis the crew is the Review Board because if we do not like the way the spacecraft is configured, we don’t have to get in.” Borman said if on Jan. 27 he had had the information accumulated by the Board, he would not have entered the Apollo spacecraft because: (1) the test had not been classified as hazardous; (2) the spacecraft contained too many combustibles; (3) the wire that provided the ignition source was vulnerable. Borman said he would be “willing and eager” to enter a 100% oxygen Apollo spacecraft which incorporated Board’s recommended improvements. (Testimony; Transcript, 181, 209—10, 258)
Gerald J. Mossinghoff, Director of the Office of Legislative Planning at U.S. Patent Office, was named director of Congressional Liaison Div. in NASA’s Office of Legislative Affairs, (nasa Release 67—297) Dr. Hilliard V. Paige, General Electric Co. Vice President and general manager of Missile and Space Div., compared role of the space program in stimulating technological development to that of World Wars I and II. World War I, he said, marked real beginning of American'aviation activities. World War II led to current U.S. leadership in production of jet aircraft. Space program was current counterpart of this stimulus, he noted, but program was declining because of crippling budget and program cuts. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) described his experiences living in Sealab II [see Aug. 28, 1965] and plans for a larger Sealab III in 1968. In addition to Sealab experiment, series of special vehicles would be tested, he said: Deep Submergence Rescue Vehicle (DSRV—1) to rescue men from disabled submarines resting on ocean floor; Deep Submergence Search Vehicles (dssv) to conduct research on ocean floor, collecting and surfacing small objects; Nuclear Powered Deep Submergence Research and Ocean Engineering Vehicle (NR—1) which would run along ocean floor on wheels; and Large Object Salvage System (loss) to develop a variety of tools, from surface craft with strong lifting ability to equipment enabling swimmers to operate effectively in deep water. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/6/67, 35; 12/24/67, E3; NY Academy of Sciences pio)
Despite the high cost and dangers in exploring space, tragically dramatized by the deaths of three U.S. astronauts and a Russian cosmonaut in recent months, Americans overwhelmingly approve of the U.S. effort to land men on the moon,” the National Observer reported. Survey in 12 metropolitan areas showed that 77% of people questioned supported the lunar landing program; 17% opposed it; and 6% were undecided. There was less enthusiasm, however, for manned planetary exploration programs: 57% favored manned planetary expeditions; 31% opposed them; and 12% were undecided. (Nad Obs, 5/8/67)
Brian Todd O’Leary, one of NASA’s 12 new scientist-astronauts, was appointed assistant professor of Astronomy Dept., Univ. of Texas. Although flight training portion of astronaut’s program would continue for next two years, 30% of O’Leary’s time would be available for scientific activities. (AP, B Sun, 10/6/67)
Ashes of Soviet Cosmonaut Col. Vladimir M. Komarov were buried in the Kremlin wall in a military funeral attended by Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin, President Nikolay V. Podgorny, and other high Government leaders and scientists. Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin, in a brief speech, pledged that Soviet cosmonauts would “continue the cause” for which Komarov gave his life. A nasa spokesman said plans to send U.S. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Frank Borman to funeral had been abandoned because U.S.S.R. denied permission, saying it was an internal Soviet affair. (AP, W Star, 4/26/67, A24; NYT, 4/27/67, 3; upi, W Pos*, 4/27/67, A4)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel of the Harvard College Observatory said in a letter to Time that he planned to propose naming features of moon’s far side for the three American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut who lost their lives in accidents connected with space research. Features were to be named at 1970 meeting of International Astronomical Union. (Time, 9/29/67,11)
nasa Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., tested space simulator at Martin Co.’s plant near Littleton, Colo. Unit, which provided 6° of freedom, was linked to computer that determined exertion forces on astronaut as he performed simple tasks in simulated weightless environment. {Denver Post, 1/19/67)
The Nation mourned the deaths of NASA Apollo Astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee. President Johnson: “Three valiant young men have given their lives in the nation’s service. We mourn this great loss and our hearts go out to their families.” Vice President Humphrey: “The deaths of these three brilliant young men ... is a profound and personal loss to me. . . . The United States will push ever forward in space and the memory of the contributions of these men will be an inspiration to all future space-farers.” nasa Administrator James Webb: “We’ve always known that something like this would happen sooner or later, but it’s not going to be permitted to stop the program. . . . Although everyone realized that some day space pilots would die, who would have thought the first tragedy would be on the ground?” Former President Eisenhower: “The accident that took the lives of three of our highly trained, skilled and courageous American astronauts is a tragic loss to our entire nation. . . .” (upi, W Star, 1/28/67,1; AP, NYT, 1/29/67)
Average U.S. taxpayer would not help finance any space program beyond manned lunar landing unless he could understand it and identify with its purpose, m/g John B. Medaris (usa, Ret.) told aas Symposium in Huntsville. “Putting a man on the moon was a good objective. People can see the moon. They can understand communication and weather information and possible defense benefits from a moon landing. “But after the astronaut puts an American flag on the moon’s surface and satisfies the public, what will happen to our program then? We have to have a steady commitment of great resources to keep this program going. We have got to convince the public that there is a link between them and our next objectives . . . [and] give them some sort of objective they can identify with their own welfare.” Noting that “people recoil in fear from the concept of the endlessness of interstellar space,” General Medaris suggested that public would approve of an objective such as establishment of a lunar colony. “We better forget the spectacular and use a public relations approach like the soap companies do and figure out what the public will pay for.” (Houtz, B News, 6/14/67)
NASA had presented monetary awards totaling $4,200 to six inventors, all employed by industrial contractors, for advancements in space technology: Charles R. Peek and Lewis E. Boodley, RCA—$1,000 for new type of interconnector for satellite solar cells; G. Richard Blair, Hughes Aircraft Co.—$1,000 for passive heat protective coating used on Surveyor spacecraft; Kenneth A. Ruddock and Robert G. Rempel, Spectra-Physics, Inc.—$1,000 for magnetometer to measure earth’s magnetic field more precisely; and Paul A. Jensen, Hughes—$1,200 for low-noise antenna feed system used in all NASA Deep Space Network stations. (NASA Release 67-^2) During February: Space flights lasting one month or more should pose no new respiratory problems for astronauts, but additional research was necessary to ensure against respiratory problems that could arise from prolonged weightlessness and an artificial environment, nrc Space Science Board study concluded. Only serious effects of weightlessness on respiratory system anticipated were possibility that astronauts might inhale dust and other solid particles floating in the spacecraft and that muscles controlling the lungs might weaken because work was easier in weightless environment. Areas recommended for further study included: toleration limits for carbon dioxide in case spacecraft’s absorption system malfunctioned; problems of infection during long missions; possibility of intentionally filling astronauts’ lungs with a liquid to prevent collapse of blood vessels and tissues during acceleration greater than 15 g; and basic medical training and use of drugs for self-medication by crew during weightlessness. Committee also recommended efforts to improve methods to detect and extinguish spacecraft fires, and suggested that a two-gas system with nitrogen or helium be used until effective methods of fire control in 100% oxygen were developed. Report, to be released shortly by NAS, was the product of a June 26-July 9,1966, conference held at Woods Hole, Mass., at oart request. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 2/67)
Seven members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight continued hearings on Jan. 27 Apollo accident at ksc by touring AS-204 launch pad and questioning eyewitnesses. Donald Nichols, assistant test manager at ksc, told the Subcommittee that the decision to keep the hatch closed during Jan. 27 Apollo rehearsal might have cost die lives of the crew. On Oct. 31, 1966, he said, decision was made to change plans that would have kept the hatch open until the crew had been better trained on emergency procedures. Officials decided that hatch could be locked and emergency escape practice conducted after the test, he said. If test procedures had not been changed, the hatch would have been open or the astronauts not present in the spacecraft. Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., quality control inspector, said that Apollo 1 astronauts smelled smoke in their spacecraft 12 min before they died and tried for five minutes to escape. This information, he said, had been supplied by naa electrical technician Mervin Holmberg. Holmberg later made a surprise appearance before the Subcommittee and denied Baron’s allegation: “I listened to his [Baron’s] speculation, but I didn’t make any comment” on what caused the fire. “I wasn’t even near the accident when it happened.” Baron, who had submitted a report to NASA [see During March] prior to Jan. 27 accident charging laxity, poor morale, and bad management on the part of naa, was sharply criticized by subcommittee members, and his statement was disclaimed. (Abramson, W Post, 4/22/67, A4)
Funeral services were held for Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc. All three men were buried with full military honors: Virgil I. Grissom (L/Col., usaf) and Roger Chaffee (LCdr., usn) at Arlington National Cemetery, and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) at West Point. President Johnson and hundreds of dignitaries attended services at Arlington; Mrs. Johnson and Vice President Humphrey were among the attendees at West Point. (Hines, W Star, 1/31/67 Al, A6; Secrest, W Post, 2/1/67, Bl; Casey, W Post, 2/1/67, Al, A4)
NASA’s previous approach to preventing spacecraft fires by “preventing their ignition” had been inadequate, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified at open hearing held by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. Also present were NASA Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations. NASA’s future approach would seek to: (1) minimize possibility of ignition, recognizing “that this possibility will always exist”; (2) limit chance of fire’s propagating once it has started; and (3) minimize consequences of fire to crew. Dr. Mueller outlined an extensive program of testing, redesign, and procedural changes, which included escape hatch for Apollo spacecraft that could be opened in two seconds; search for new, less flammable materials for cabin interior and spacesuits; and revised emergency procedures. All improvements and changes would be incorporated into an advanced version—Block II—of Apollo spacecraft. No more Block I spacecraft like Apollo 204 would be used for manned space flights. Dr. Mueller said no estimate of fire’s eventual cost in time or money would be made until completion of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, but he indicated that it would be at least 8 to 10 months before next manned Apollo flight. Dr. Mueller testified that launch rehearsal during which fire had occurred had not been classified as “hazardous” because seven years of experience with Mercury and Gemini programs had never indicated such tests were particularly dangerous. Even if the test had been categorized as hazardous., he said, it would have still taken 90 sec for crew to open the double hatch and complete their egress. Crew died within 20 sec after detection of fire. Webb added that the handle for equalizing pressure, necessary precondition to opening hatch, had not been actuated. Dr. Berry said carbon monoxide had asphyxiated astronauts. He confirmed that bodies had had “some thermal bums of second and third degree” but “not of sufficient magnitude to cause death.” Dr. Berry warned that “we are never going to be able to completely eliminate the risk of fire as long as oxygen is available.” Dr. Mueller said “an atmosphere which will support life will also support combustion. Therefore the first answer . . . must be fire prevention in terms of strict control of both potential ignition sources and combustible materials.” During the questioning session, Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) inquired about a 1965 report by Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel Phillips (usaf). Dr. Mueller said that he did “not recall such a report,” and when asked to supply a copy, Webb said NASA would try and identify the specific report and would make it available to the Comptroller General “under any request that the Committee . .. would make to him.” (Testimony; Transcript, 3-4, 24, 41-2, 61, 70, Apollo Accident, Part 2, 65-66, 75, 86, 97, 108, 115, 125 ff., and 130 ff.)
Soviet Vostok spacecraft were equipped with quick-opening explosive hatches and jet-propelled ejection seats—equipment might have saved U.S. Apollo astronauts Jan. 27, Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolayeva-Tereshkova said in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. (upi, NYT, 3/23/67)
U.S. astronauts were honored with a special award at American Personnel and Guidance Assn, convention in Dallas. Accepted by Charles Duke on behalf of his fellow astronauts, the award cited the “exemplary model astronauts display to American youth in intellectual achievement, selfdiscipline, personal dedication and physical fitness.” (upi, W Star, 3/24/67, A6)
msfc awarded Bendix Corp. $7.4 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for development and production of Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) pointing control system (pcs) . Bendix was scheduled to produce three units by August. ATM system would permit Apollo astronauts to point a telescope to selected regions of the sun during period of maximum solar flare activities beginning in late 1968. msfc had awarded American Optical Co. $740,460 contract to build a dynamic simulator for use in developing the pcs. (msfc Releases 67-54, 67-58; nasa Release 67-66)
Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva reached provisional agreements on aiding and returning astronauts who landed in foreign countries and on payment of damages caused by space launches. Agreements would be submitted to full U.N. Committee for approval and then placed before U.N. General Assembly for final action, (dpi, P EB, 7/18/67; upi, W Post, 7/18/67, A3) Program Plans, OMSF Plans and Analysis Directorate, had been appointed Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Administration effective July 17; (2) R/Adm. Roderick 0. Middleton (usn), former Deputy Director of omsf Missions Operations Directorate, had been appointed Apollo Program Manager at ksc, replacing m/g John G. Shinkle (usa, Ret.), who resigned May 18; (3) Stanley de Jongh Osborne, a general partner of Lazard Freres & Co. investment banking firm in New York, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on Government-industry relations and on the impact of space technology on the national economy; and (4) Erskine E.	Harton, Jr., former Assistant Safety Director, had been appointed Acting Safety Director, replacing George D. McCauley who recently retired from Government service, (nasa Ann, 7/20/67; NASA Releases 67-189, 67-190)
First flight test of Apollo Lunar Module (lm), designated Apollo 5, was scheduled no earlier than Jan. 17, 1968, NASA announced. The 31,700-lb lm, one of three modules comprising the Apollo spacecraft, was designed to carry two astronauts from lunar orbital flight to a landing on the moon, then back to the Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit. It would be launched on the 6-hr 30-min test flight by 1.6-million-lb-thrust Uprated Saturn I (AS-204) originally scheduled for first manned Apollo mission in February 1967, and would not be recovered. Primary objective of the unmanned Apollo 5 flight would be verification of lm’s flight readiness for manned operations in space. Test would flight qualify lm descent stage propulsion engine, including restart; ascent stage propulsion engine; systems; structures; and staging. (NASA Release 67-313; upi, NYT, 12/27/67, 15; AP, W Post, 12/27/67, A4)
nas had received 923 applications for 20-30 positions in NASA’s astronaut training program. Academy was expected to forward NASA a list of 60-75 recommended candidates in March for final selection. (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/26/67)
msfc had awarded Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. a $334,031 contract to study methods of increasing the number of astronauts that could be delivered to the moon with the Saturn V booster and to determine the most promising concepts for efficient delivery of logistic payloads. For the purposes of the study, Lockheed would consider: (1) a hypothetical 1975 mission involving two “product improved” Saturn V boosters— one to launch a modified Apollo spacecraft and one to launch a cargo payload; and (2) a hypothetical 1980-82 mission in which two Uprated Saturn V boosters would launch a six-man spacecraft direcdy to the moon, (msfc Release 67-123)
Twenty-one U.S. astronauts began a week of training at usaf’s Tropical Survival School in Panama. Their first meeil was iguana thermidor and baked armadillo. (W News, 6/13/67; AP, C Trib, 6/14/67)
U.S.S.R.’s next manned space flight would use a Soyuz spacecraft similar to the one which crashed April 24, according to Astronauts Michael Collins and David Scott who had discussed future space plans with Soviet cosmonauts at the Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 26-31]. In upi interview Collins and Scott said they were “amazed by the similarities between the two [U.S. and U.S.S.R. space] programs.” Collins said that Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Konstantin Feoktistov indicated “that there would be several earth orbital flights and then ... a circumlunar flight” (upi, W Post, 6/4/67, A9)
Eight Apollo astronauts flew from New York to Iceland for eight-day expedition to gather geological data from an area believed to be similar to the lunar surface. Fifteen more astronauts were expected to join the expedition June 30. (NYT, 6/30/67,13)
White House had received a letter from an unnamed scientist suggesting that it conduct its own investigation into Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed three Apollo astronauts, Karl Abraham reported in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. Scientist, who was not identified, felt nasa had not sufficiently heeded warnings of fire hazards presented by use of pure oxygen atmosphere. (Abraham, P EB, 2/8/67)
Dr. Heinz von Diringshofen, a German pioneer in flight and space medicine, died in Frankfurt, Germany, at age 67. Among the first to study the effects of weightlessness in vertical flight, Dr. Diringshofen recorded reactions of humans in weightless periods of up to eight seconds. He also developed systems currently used in the training of U.S. astronauts, including a centrifuge that produced 17 g’s pressure. (NYT, 5/9/67, 43)
msc awarded SI million in six-month study contracts to General Dynamics, Boeing Co., and McDonnell Co. for space station facilities that could be assembled in orbit early in the 1970s. General Dynamics would study engine room module, a separately launched unit to furnish electrical power and life-support equipment for space station. Boeing would study space station design to include a 38-in optical telescope that would be launched with the space station by a Saturn V booster. McDonnell would study logistics/ferry spacecraft to provide ground landing capability for astronauts. (Tech Wk, 3/27/67, 23-4)
Secretary of State Dean Rusk signs the space law treaty at White House ceremonies while (seated, left to right) Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, British Ambassador Sir Patrick Dean, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Arthur J, Goldberg, and President Lyndon B. Johnson look on. photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. (NASA Release 67—14)
Trained monkeys completed a two-month simulated space flight which indicated that astronauts could return their spacecraft to earth even after a near-fatal dose of solar radiation. Sixteen rhesus monkeys, trained to operate an instrument panel, were used in a test at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Some of the animals were exposed over a 10-day period to from 500 to 1,000 roentgens of gamma radiation. Three of the monkeys in the high-dose group died but the others survived. This evidence of monkey vitality was of great importance to man because the U.S. target date for moon landings would come at a peak of the sun’s 11-year-cycle for emitting deadly radiation. (C Trib, 9/5/67)
NASA’s selection of two foreign-born astronauts [see Aug. 4] was praised by Erwin D. Canham in the Christian Science Monitor: “The Australian, Dr. Philip K. Chapman . . . and the Welshman, Dr. John A. Llewellyn, . . . are both naturalized Americans. They are, one may assume, part of the brain drain which has brought so many able persons to the United States in the last quarter of a century. Nothing like this flow of talent has been seen on such a scale in history before. “The outreach of science also has become profoundly international. It is a deeper bond than we have yet recognized it to be. Someday, perhaps, it will transcend politics. That is the challenge: to bring political institutions into line with the basic unities which are evidenced in men’s constantly changing relationship to the physical universe. . . (Canham, CSM, 8/5/67) Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, told news conference at jpl that several of the pictures indicated there might be frozen liquid on the floor of perpetually shaded craters near the lunar poles. The nature of the “fluidal materials” was open to speculation, he said, but “meandering rills appeared to have been caused by some form of material flowing from a vdlcanic eruption—similar to terrestrial streams found in desert areas on earth.” (nasa Proj Off; AP, W Post, 8/9/67, A3; upi, C Trib, 8/15/67; NYT, 8/15/67, 1)
Astronauts on long-duration space flights might have to accept greater radiation exposure than the amount considered safe for industrial workers and, in some cases, this additional exposure could heighten the risk of cancer and shorten life expectancy, nrc’s Space Science Board concluded in report entitled Radiobiological Factors in Manned Space Flight. Board recommended that criteria different from those used in industry be set up to gauge radiation risks in space flight and to decide what was acceptable. “Manned space flights are high risk endeavors. They take place in a hostile environment that cannot be permitted to encroach beyond the limits of human endurance if the missions are to succeed.” Report noted, however, that radiation was “only one of many recognized and accepted potential risks” to space flight and shielding against it added weight to the spacecraft. Consequently, protection against radiation had to be balanced against other needs vital to the success of the mission, (nrc Release; Schmeck, NYT, 7/18/67, 38M; Reistrup, W Post, 7/18/67, A3; AP, WStar, 7/18/67, A3)
Jonathan Spivak in Wall Street Journal commented on congressional cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Plans to launch unmanned satellites to Mars or Venus in 1971 and 1973 and conduct extended exploration of the moon by astronauts face probable abandonment because of a lack of funds. There will also be sharp curtailment of proposals for long-duration manned flights in orbit about the earth to enhance the nation’s space technology and exploit practical and scientific applications of space. Thus, say space officials, the present outlook is that only a limited national space program will continue in the 1970s after the lunar landing.” (Spivak, WSJ, 10/11/67, 24)
110 scientists from U.S. and six other countries were selected by NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell—upon recommendation of Space Science Steering Committee—to conduct experiments with first lunar samples returned by U.S. Apollo astronauts. Principal U.S. investigators represented 21 universities, two industrial firms, three private institutions, and 10 Government laboratories. Nine scientific institutions were represented in U.K.; three in West Germany; and one each in Canada, Japan, Finland, and Switzerland. Most investigations would be conducted in scientists’ own laboratories, but time-critical experiments would be carried out in msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory during quarantine period—anticipated to last 30 days. Plans called for a total of 122 experiments on approximately 50 lbs of lunar material to study composition of lunar surface and search for evidence of its origin. Four major investigative areas were: (1) mineralogy and petrology; (2) chemical and isotope analysis; (3) physical properties; and (4) biochemical and organic analysis, (nasa Release 67-55)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, told AP he did not think “we will ever know what caused that fire” in which three Apollo astronauts died. Thousands of NASA and industry technicians responsible for Apollo I spacecraft would always wonder whether they contributed to the accident, Teague suggested. Asked if he believed NASA officials had taken unnecessary risks to land a man on the moon by 1970, Teague said: “Maybe we were a little bit careless.” He said some of the safety checks probably should have been more thorough, but did not elaborate. (AP, W Star, 3/30/67)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee had died of “asphyxiation due to smoke inhalation” but cause of Jan. 27 flash fire was still unknown, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., reported in memorandum to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr. Seamans had met Feb. 2 with Apollo 204 Review Board at Ksc. “. . . clear identification of the source of ignition or of its possible source will depend upon detailed step-by-step examination of the entire spacecraft and its relative test support equipment.” Dr. Seamans said duplicate Apollo spacecraft had been flown to ksc from North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant to permit a “parallel step-by-step disassembly process.” In addition, Board was “defining a series of investigative tasks . . . and assigning these to teams for execution. . . .” Report confirmed that spacecraft had been operating on external power when fire occurred, but there was no evidence “up to this time that the source of power whether simulated internal or external was related to the accident.” Dr. Seamans emphasized that his statement was preliminary. nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller announced that nasa would proceed with launching of three unmanned Apollo flights scheduled for 1967: AS-206, AS-501, and AS-502. Manned Apollo missions were postponed indefinitely pending the outcome of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, (nasa Releases 67-21,67-22)
Small fire in KSC building housing an astronaut training simulator damaged $1,200 worth of equipment, AP reported. Fire occurred in a rack of gear which provided electricity to the equipment, but which was not connected to the spacecraft simulator. NASA officials said no astronauts were inside simulator when fire broke out but even if they had been there would have been no damage. NASA issued no official announcement on the fire. (AP, NYT, 5/13/67,15)
Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin received first honorary membership awarded by International Assn, of Machinists and Aerospace Workers at iam Aerospace Conference in Houston. Aldrin, considered by the Union to be the first space mechanic, was cited for his work with tools outside Gemini XII spacecraft Nov. 13, 1966. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received an Award of Merit for being first American in space. (Houston Chron, 6/2/67)
Texas’ role in U.S. space program was summarized by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller for the Texas State Society. “Many thousands of Texans working for dozens of Texas firms are creating through their . . . [r&d] effort the new technology required for space exploration. One measure of Texas contributions may be made in terms of the $771,000,000 of work that . . . [its] firms have performed on NASA’s programs. In addition, Texas colleges and universities are not only conducting high level research for NASA, but are training future space scientists and engineers under nasa grants.” He noted also that Texas was birthplace of seven astronauts and five astronaut wives and “home town” of all 56 astronauts, based at msc. (Text)
Prime and. backup crews for NASA’s first manned Apollo mission [see May 9] told a news conference at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant that they were “very impressed” with the design changes being made in the Apollo spacecraft as a result of the Jan. 27 flash fire. Major changes included: (1) a new hinged hatch that could be opened outward in about two seconds by activating a springed lever; (2) replacement of many highly flammable materials such as nylon netting; (3) sheathing of open wiring with hard panels; and (4) flame-resistant spacesuits. In addition, spacecraft would be pressurized with nitrogen rather than oxygen on launching, and in orbit—where oxygen is indispensable—pressure would be reduced one third to 5 psi. Questioned about his attitudes toward the program since the Jan. 27 Apollo accident, Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra replied:	. . we went through a very agonizing self-appraisal; we suffered through three months of recrimination; we’ve culminated these three months with some very firm ideas.” These ideas, Schirra said, were being phased into an orderly program that “will continue—with orderly haste . . . [and] we are not going to run rampant on schedules.” The crews anticipated that Apollo 101 spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in December and that first manned mission would be flown in first quarter of 1968. Primary mission objective would be to “exercise the vehicle in earth orbit,” Schirra said. Asked if the April 24 death of Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov had had any adverse effects on plans for earth landings in the Apollo program, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford replied: “The earth landing system that consists of the three main parachutes and the two drogue chutes- had been qualified completely. . . . We still have some earth landing drops to be made. But right now as far as the crew is concerned, either the parachutes in this vehicle are qualified or we don’t fly.” (Transcript; Newsweek, 5/22/67, 94; Hill, NYT, 5/11/67,27)
Rep. Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) introduced legislation to House authorizing the President to “designate a day in January of each year as a day of remembrance” for Apollo Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee, who died in Jan. 27 fire at ksc. (CR, 3/9/67, H2460)
NASA had been concerned about oxygen fire danger prior to Jan. 27 flash fire and had taken steps to curb the danger, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. NASA felt it “had control of the sources of ignition . . . [but] underestimated badly .. . the course such a fire would take. If more thorough testing of flammable materials used in the cockpit had been conducted, the accident might not have happened.” He denied emphatically April 11 suggestion by naa Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy that Astronaut Gus Grissom could have triggered the fire by kicking loose a wire, and said he generally agreed with the Apollo 204 Review Board’s criticisms of deficiencies in project operations, conceding: “We were wrong in the standards we applied to the selection of materials for the spacecraft.” Efforts were currently being directed toward eliminating flammable cockpit materials such as nylon and replacing them with glass fiber cloth and Teflon plastic. Although a study was also under way to assess the relative merits of pure oxygen and two-gas life-support systems, Dr. Mueller doubted that present system would be abandoned. In answer to specific questions concerning escape and rescue, Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, testified that the astronauts had died from asphyxia before the spacecraft hatch was opened and that their bums alone would not have caused death. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips told the Committee that his concern “about the load of work on naa” had prompted an inspection by a NASA team of naa’s Downey, Calif., plant. He had reported to naa President J. Leland Atwood Dec. 19,1965, “some of things that if done differently would contribute to the progress of the program,” and on April 22, 1966, noted that progress was satisfactory: naa was “completely responsive to the programs we described ... and a very aggressive effort___was applied to these problems.” He declined to discuss specifics as requested by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) but indicated that NASA would consider releasing his report to the subcommittee [see April 18]. (Wilford, NYT, 4/13/67, 52; Reistrup, W Post, 4/13/67, A2)
Memorial services in Houston for Astronaut Edward G. Givens, Jr., were attended by many of his fellow astronauts and their families. Givens would be buried June 9 in Quanah, Tex. (msc Roundup, 6/9/67,1; AP, W Post, 6/9/67, B8)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 3 to 3,818 mph (mach 5.18) and 277,000-ft altitude, becoming fourth usaf X-15 pilot to meet 264,000-ft-minimum-altitude requirement for usaf astronaut rating. Purposes of flight: (1) arc boost guidance system evaluation; (2) solar spectrum measurement; (3) micrometeoroid collection; and (4) ultravoilet plume and tip-pod camera evaluation. (X-15 Proj Off; frc X-Press, 10/20/67,1)
Apollo spacecraft would carry two fire extinguishers, designed and built for NASA by Southwest Research Institute, the New York Times reported. Foam from new extinguishers would provide fire protection for astronauts. Extinguishers would weigh about eight pounds, measure nine inches long with five-inch diameter, and would have removable safety pin and pistol-type grip with thumb button for release of foam. (NYT, 10/15/67,29)
Astronaut Frank Borman told Cleveland Engineering Society that he and other astronauts hoped U.S. would immediately revitalize the Apollo program: “We’d like to see the crews regrouped and the program under way as soon as possible.” (AP, W Post, 4/6/67, G2)
Astronaut Donn F. Eisele, in Columbus, Ohio, to receive a “Governor’s Award” for increasing the prestige of the state, told AP he was opposed to “an unrealistic, arbitrary” chronological date for reaching the moon. He favored a “technical” date, which he explained to mean “as soon as we’re ready, when we have performed sufficient missions to be ready, when the spacecraft is ready.” (AP, NYT, 2/12/61, 31)
Adm. David L. McDonald, Chief of Naval Operations, and Gen. John P. McConnell, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, presented Distinguished Flying Crosses to the military astronauts who had made space flights in special Pentagon ceremony. Included were posthumous awards to L/Col. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and L/CoL Edward H. White II (usaf), who died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Capt. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., speaking on behalf of his fellow astronauts, said they were “proud members of the military, but also . . . representatives of a great and significant national effort,” who had grown “to enjoy the [space program’s] successes and live with its failures.” (dod Release 642-67; AP, B Sun, 7/14/67, 6; SBD, 7/17/67,_ 68)
Two-to-six percent weight loss in astronauts returning from space flights might reflect natural readjustment of body water content, not simple dehydration, Paul Webb of Webb Associates reported in Science. He based his theory on similar losses which had occurred during experiments in simulated weightlessness; blood normally pooled in the extremities returned to circulation, increasing central blood volume and causing excretion of water not replaced during space flights. Webb said it was not yet clear whether reduced water content during weightlessness has harmful effects. (Webb, Science, 2/3/67,558-9)
The press praised Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire. Technology Week: “The harsh, scathing report of the Apollo 204 Review Board has effectively laid to rest charges that the board was assembled to conduct a whitewash of the January 27 fire, which took the lives of three astronauts. The board should be commended for the vigor with which it undertook to establish the cause of the fire, the energy with which it attacked what it regards as dangerous practices and procedures and the directness with which it distributes the blame. . . . Perhaps the question that will linger longest about the January tragedy is the part played by the pressure of the lunar landing deadlines. We personally believe that such target dates play a large and important factor in motivating the space program and keeping it moving at a healthy pace. But they should not be so sacred as to invoke carelessness. . . . Without waiting for another accident, it might be well to undertake the same sort of review of practices and procedures throughout the major elements of Apollo that has just taken place in regard to the spacecraft. . . . The Apollo 204 Review Board has set a good example of what can be accomplished.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 4/17/67, 50) Aviation Week: “Its report is technically incisive and sharply critical of NASA and the private contractors manufacturing Apollo hardware. It is as thorough and technically solid as any other investigation of aerospace disaster in the past three decades. It disproves earlier charges that NASA is incapable of investigating its own technical faults. In fact, it would have been impossible to assemble another group sufficiently knowledgeable about the Apollo system from any other source to complete a useful investigation within this time span. “. . . there are none of the pat answers, so often demanded by legislators and harping critics, to the dangerous and complex problems of probing the unknown. Apollo is man’s most daring foray in his history on this planet. If all the problems involved in a lunar voyage were so obvious and the solutions so simple as many critics seem to think, we could all buy tickets for a lunar excursion tomorrow.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 4/17/67, 21)
msc Director of Flight Operations Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that new technological developments might enable NASA to make up some of the time lost when three astronauts died in Apollo capsule. In commencement address at St. Louis Univ.’s Parks College of Aeronautical Technology, Cahokia, Mo., he said, “If things go very right for us, we may still put a man on the moon by 1970.” He predicted space exploration would contribute solutions to problems posed by world’s growing population, specifically in communications, transportation, food production, and weather forecasting. {St. Louis P—D, 7/29/67)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.) introduced to the House H.R. 10674, a bill to rename the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore in honor of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom who died in Jan. 27 Apollo accident, (nasa lar VI/65)
MSC had awarded Bell Aerosystems Co. a nine-month, $5.9-million fixedprice contract to provide three Lunar Landing Training Vehicles (lltv) for astronauts to practice simulated lunar landings. Capable of simulating % gravity environment of the moon, lltv would be towed to about 4,000-ft altitude and released; pilot could damp out % of gravity force on vehicle using jet engines; remaining % gravity would be supported by rocket motors simulating lunar landing conditions, (nasa Release 67-58)
nas forwarded to NASA a list of 69 recommended candidates for 20-30 positions in nasa’s astronaut training program. A total of 923 applications had been evaluated. NASA was expected to make final selections before Aug. 15. (nas-nrc—nae News Report, 3/67, 3)
“We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation,” President Johnson pledges during tour of Michoud Assembly Facility. On the platform in front row from left are Astronaut Walter Cunningham, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., the President, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Mrs. Webb, Gov. John J. McKeithen, and NASA Associate Administrator for Administration Harold B. Finger. In the back row, behind and to the right of Webb, are Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Industrial Operations, msfc; Dr. George N. Constan, manager of Michoud; H. D. Lowrey, president of Chrysler Corp. Space Division; and J. K. Swearingen, project manager for Ling-Temco-Vougbt Range Systems Division. “In the 9 years since I first introduced in the . . , Senate the Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, we have seen the power of our rocket engines increase 50 times—from 150,000 to 7,500,000 pounds of thrust in the engines that you build here. “Not long ago-we had to stand by and watch other countries accomplish what we could not accomplish. I will never forget the days of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2, and the real concern. . . . “We were the most scientifically advanced nation on the face of the earth but we did not launch man’s first earth satellite. “We were backward because we did not choose to adventure. We did not choose to have vision. We did not choose to look forward. Now let us remember that our future achievements—or our future failures— will depend on how far ahead we choose to look and how far ahead we choose to think. “If we think second, and if we look third, then we are going to wind up not being first. . . we will advance in space to the extent that our people and their representatives are prepared for us to advance and are prepared to pay the cost of that advance. We may not always proceed at the pace we desire. I regret . . . that there have been reductions and there will be more. There have been interruptions, and I hope that we have had all we can take. But I do have faith and confidence in the American people. “We will not surrender our station. We will not abandon our dream. We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation.” (SBD, 12/13/67,218; PD, 12/18/67,1696-7)
Washington Evening Star commented on Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ open hearing Feb. 27 on the Apollo fire: “The nation’s space officials evidently have managed to keep their heads in the midst of the emotional chaos that followed the tragic accident at Cape Kennedy. They have resisted pressures from semi-informed sources condemning the pure oxygen environment that supported all Mercury and Gemini astronauts in space. And there is mounting evidence that the arbitrary 1970 goal for a manned lunar landing is no longer a maj or consideration in the space program . . . [and] that the space planners are determined that they will no longer be prompted to act because of any arbitrary timetable or out of a competitive desire to beat the Soviets to the moon, “This is as it should be. This nation should move outward into space with all deliberate speed. And right now, the emphasis should be heavy on that qualifying word.” (W Star, 3/6/67, All)
U.S. leaders expressed sorrow at the death of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. President Johnson: “The death of Vladimir Komarov is a tragedy in which all nations share. Like three American astronauts who lost their lives recently, this distinguished space pioneer died in the cause of science and in the eternal spirit of human adventure.” ~ Vice President Humphrey: “It is with great sorrow that we learn of the tragedy involving Vladimir Komarov. The loss of a dedicated life is indeed a heavy price. Yet progress and space development is necessary.” NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “All of us who have faced the difficulties of understanding and putting to use the forces of nature at the outer edge of Man’s knowledge of what is possible in this decade deeply regret the loss of life represented by the death of Cosmonaut Komarov, and extend our sincere sympathy to his family and associates. We feel certain that man will achieve great things in space. Some of these will determine what the men will be able to do on earth. “We also feel that at this dawn of the space age, man has the duty to seek cooperation between nations, such as the USSR and the United States on a realistic basis. “We at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration want to make every realistic effort. Could the lives already lost have been saved if we had known each other’s hopes, aspirations and plans? Or could they have been saved if full cooperation had been the order of the day?” U.S. astronauts: “We are very saddened by the loss of Colonel Komarov. We feel comradeship for this test pilot because we have met several of his fellow cosmonauts and we are involved in a pioneering flight effort which is not without hazards.” (Text; PD, 5/1/67, 660; AP, NYT, 4/25/67, 21)
NASA published Earth Photographs from Gemini III, IV, and V, an atlas containing reproductions of 244 high-quality earth photos taken by Gemini astronauts. Pictures, which were taken with hand-held cameras from 100- to 215-mi altitudes as scientific, meteorological, and terrain experiments, showed major • natural features and some manmade ones in 50 countries around the world, (nasa SP-129; nasa Release 67—153)
Greatest damage to Apollo I spacecraft in which three astronauts died in Jan. 27 flash lire seemed to have occurred near point where electrical cables from launch pad entered cabin, reported Aviation Week writer George Alexander, who represented news media when NASA authorized one person to visit ksc’s Launch Complex 34. Alexander said the spacecraft “looked like the inside of a furnace . . . the interior . . . is a darkened, dingy compartment. Its walls are covered with a slate-gray deposit of smoke and soot; its floor and couch frame are covered with ashes and debris—most of it indeterminate. . . .” (upi, NYT, 1/30/67; W Post, 1/30/67, Al, A2; W Star, 1/30/67, Al, A3)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham toured McDonnell Douglas Test Facility near Sacramento to inspect 3rd stage of the Saturn V booster which would be used to launch them on first manned Apollo mission in 1968. Schirra told newsmen that NASA would not be “pressed by the press” into flying the mission on a specific date. Asked if he believed pressure from the press was in any way responsible for the Jan. 27 fire, Schirra replied: “. . . I found that whenever we . . . get together with the members of the press that you’re right away asking us, ‘Well, now when are yon going to fly?’ That’s almost the first question, and it’s not a very unique question. ... It seems you want that answer that may be hard news, but when we give you that answer then if we don’t make that date, for some reason or another it appears that we’re failing our goal. While the goal is to have a successful flight at a reasonable time rather than an early failure. . . .” (Transcript)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
Robert Walker, writing in the New York Times, reviewed new applications for industrial use of gold. In telephone industry, gold was used for coating electromechanical switchgear and for transmitter domes; in computers, for coating metal tapes and electroplating printed circuits; and in automotive industry, for connecting alternator-regulator systems. To aerospace industry, one of gold’s most important characteristics was that it reflected heat and light. Gold was used to coat the “umbilical cord” which connected Astronaut Edward H. White II to Gemini IV spacecraft (June 3, 1965); to cover shrouds that contracted very hot jet aircraft engine parts; and to coat satellites so that they reflected more than 90% of sun’s heat. By adding oxides to gold coatings space scientists used the gold to absorb infrared energy which could be converted to electrical energy. (Walker, Ayr, 12/24/67, IF)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had signed contract to appear in at least eight Wolper Productions’ TV documentaries on great explorations in history, the New York Times reported. Series, beginning in January 1968, would include Henry M. Stanley’s African search for David Livingstone, Captain James Cook’s exploration of the South Pacific, and Roald Amundsen’s expedition to the South Pole. (Gent, NYT, 4/14/67, 67)
Soviet Union announced a new series of rocket tests believed designed to perfect a sea-landing system for Russian astronauts in preparation for a resumption of manned space flights. Soviet news agency, Tass, said the test of “carrier rockets” would begin Sept. 3. It warned all ships and planes to stay clear of two 80-mile-wide “bulls’ eyes” in the Pacific Ocean, one about 900 miles northeast and one 300 miles northeast of Midway Island, from noon until midnight every day through Oct. 30. (Reuters, W Post, 9/S/61, A16)
U.S. astronauts would one day encounter “other living things” in outer space, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of ksc, told Rollins College audience. “This prospect cannot be dismissed as metaphysical speculation. ... It is much more a mathematical certainty than were the early theories expounded by scientists and philosophers whose observations and discoveries made possible many of our activities today.” (upi, NYT, 2/27/67,12)
Time magazine considered the question “Why Should Man Go To The Moon?” and concluded: “The moon itself may not be a particularly valuable piece of real estate. But neither is a flight to the moon an end in itself; the moon is no more than a way station on a route that scientists have only begun to map. And there is no doubt that man is going to make the trip some day. . . . “The moon is a challenge that the U.S. has already taken, a milestone that U.S. astronauts are already looking beyond. . . . The real object is for the U.S. to develop the capability of voyaging confidently to the limits of man’s imagination and ingenuity. The value of such voyages will always be unpredictable. But the history of the human race, said famed . Norwegian Explorer Fridtjof Nansen, ‘is a continual struggle from darkness toward light. It is therefore to no purpose to discuss the uses of knowledge; man wants to know, and when he ceases to do so, he is no longer man.’ ” {Time, 2/10/67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Washington, D.C., women’s club that Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would report to icsc Feb. 2 to meet with Apollo 204 Review Board investigating Jan. 27 accident which killed three Apollo astronauts. Dr. Seamans would report Board’s preliminary findings to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said NASA’s decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been made after “a long series of tests and evaluations. Any change would be made only after a most careful examination of all alternatives.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., BSun, 2/2/67; W Post, 2/2/67)
Apollo Command Mod ole at Launch Complex 34, Kennedy Space Center, is a silent, grim reminder of the dash fire that took the lives of the three-man crew when it swept through the spacecraft during launch rehearsal. 204) died, apparently instantly, when flash fire swept through their Apollo I spacecraft mated to an Uprated Saturn I booster 218 ft above the ground. Crew was Virgil I. Grissom, one of seven original Mercury astronauts; Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space; and Roger B. Chaffee, preparing for his first space flight. Accident, worst in the history of the U.S. space program, occurred at 6:31 p.m. est at ksc’s Launch Complex 34 during first major rehearsal for scheduled Feb. 21 . mission. Immediately after tragedy, msc Director Dr. Robert Gilruth, Chairman of the Board of North American Aviation, Inc., Lee Atwood, and NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips flew to Ksc from Washington, D.C. General Phillips described the accident at a press conference Jan. 28: “The facts briefly are: at 6:31 p.m. (est) the observers heard a report which originated from one of the crewmen that there was a fire aboard the spacecraft . . .” At T-10 and holding in the countdown, observers saw a “flash fire” break out inside the spacecraft, penetrate its shell, and surround its exterior with smoke. Rescue workers rushed to the pad area but could not open the hatch for five minutes. Phillips said astronauts’ only hope of escape would have to open hatch manually with a crank tool. He refused to speculate on how long accident would delay the Apollo program or on source of the fire but admitted that “if there is an ignition source ... in pure oxygen this, of course, has flash-fire potential.” His statement that spacecraft was operating on internal power when fire broke out was corrected Feb. 3 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans: “The fuel cells in the service module were not in use, and the so-called internal power was being supplied by batteries having the same characteristics as the fuel cells but located external to the spacecraft.” NASA immediately appointed a board of inquiry (see Jan. 28) and announced that all data had been impounded pending its formal investigation. Unmanned Apollo flights would proceed on schedule, but manned flights were postponed until board’s inquiry was completed. Apollo I backup crew—Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham—were expected to be named prime crew for rescheduled mission, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-16; NYT, 1/28/67, 1, 18; 1/29/67, 1, 48, El; W Post, 1/28/67, Al, A7; 1/29/67, Al, A18; WStar, 1/28/67, A1,A4; 1/29/67, Al, A6)
37-yr-old Astronaut Edward G. Givens, Jr. (Maj., usaf), was killed near Houston when the car he was driving missed a curve and crashed into an embankment. Two other usaf officers with him were injured, one critically. Givens was the first U.S. astronaut to die while off duty. Six others had died in connection with the space program: three in air crashes and three in the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. He was selected to join the NASA astronaut team April 4, 1966. (msc Roundup, 6/9/67, 1; upi, NYT, 6/7/67, 30; upi, W Post, 6/1/61, A7)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., told the press at MSC that he did not foresee any problems in combining his new assignment as President’s Consultant on Physical Fitness [see June 6] with his duties as an astronaut. He said he would devote about one fourth of his time to the fitness program and the rest to keeping “in a state of readiness” for future space flights. “The fact that I am not spending all of my efforts on my new assignment does not mean I consider it any less important than my role in space. In fact, I can’t think of any mission more important than that of persuading the American people to keep themselves healthy and fit. These qualities are basic to everything we do. Whether we are trying to reach the moon, or merely running to catch a bus, it helps to be in good physical condition. ... A healthy population is the backbone of a strong nation.” (Text)
MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun was presented the Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Medal by Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Dr. von Braun was cited in “recognition of his creative vision of the practical application of rocket power to space flight leading to the first U.S. satellite, and of his technical leadership in development of the Saturn class of large launch vehicles upon which the Apollo moon flight is based.” He was the 13th recipient of the award, which was established in 1908 to commemorate the aeronautical achievements of Samuel Pierpont Langley, third Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. Other recipients included Orville and Wilbur Wright, Charles A. Lindbergh, Robert H. Goddard (posthumously), Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. In making the presentation, Dr. Whipple said U.S. could have launched the world’s first satellite if it had endorsed the proposal which he and Dr. von Braun developed in 1954 to launch small spacecraft from the equator using existing rockets. Government decision to fund, instead, usn’s Vanguard project, allowed U.S.S.R. to win “the first space race.” (Text; Smithsonian Release; Marshall Star, 6/7/67, 1; AP, NYT, 6/6/67. 3)
Purdue Univ. had approved memorials for alumni Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee, who died in Jan. 27 Apollo spacecraft fire. Memorials included naming two campus buildings for astronauts, providing full four-year scholarships for the two children of each man, and establishing astronauts’ scholarship fund for worthy students. (AP, NYT, 3/3/67)	_
m/g Holger Nelson Toftoy (usa, Ret.), a leading Army ordnance expert who recommended that former German V-2 development team under the leadership of Dr. Wemher von Braun be brought to U.S. at end of World War II, died at Walter Reed Army Medical Center after a long illness. General Toftoy became commander of White Sands Proving Grounds immediately following World War II. In 1952 he became Director of the Ordnance Missiles Laboratory at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., and in 1958, when Redstone was reorganized as the Army Ordnance Missile Command, he was named Deputy Commander under m/g John B. Medaris. General Toftoy subsequently became commander of Aberdeen (Md.) Proving Ground until his retirement in 1960. {vpi, NYT, 4/20/67) Landing sequence began when Surveyor III shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar (later ejected), main retromotor burned and slowed spacecraft to about 250 mph. Vernier engines, which were to have slowed spacecraft to about 3 mph, failed to cut off at 14 ft above lunar surface as planned, and the 620-lb spacecraft made three separate landings—covering distance of 33 ft—before engines shut off 37 sec after initial touchdown. First pictures transmitted were unclear because of sun’s brightness, but later photos were excellent. They revealed that spacecraft was resting in a depression or small crater with 5° slope—which was expected to hinder photography of lunar horizon—and showed impressions made by footpads during multiple landing. Shortly after touchdown a telemetry malfunction falsely indicated major drain on power system, but photos confirmed that spacecraft’s batteries were intact and undamaged. In addition to photographic equipment, including two additional mirrors to expand camera’s field of view, spacecraft also carried a shovel-like surface sampler which would scoop soil, move debris, and strike lunar rock with an expandable arm operated by radio signals from earth. On April 21—22 sampler began bearing strength tests and excavation of trenches up to six inches deep. On April 23-24, cooled by two-hour lunar eclipse, Surveyor III took 118 excellent color photos of Venus, a star duster, and earth as it passed between the moon and the sun. On basis of preliminary digging operations and photos, project scientists concluded that lunar soil had consistency similar to wet sand and a bearing strength of about six pounds per square inch—firm enough to support Apollo spacecraft. Cal Tech professor and advisor to JPL on soil mechanics Dr. Ronald F. Scott explained: “The surface is like ordinary soil... a lot like fine grained sod or damp beach sand, and it behaves in perhaps a disappointingly ordinary way. The area presents no hazardous conditions and looks good for a landing site. An astronaut walking across the surface would not need snowshoes.” On May 3 communications with spacecraft were halted temporarily to conserve battery strength throughout two-week lunar night. Performance of Surveyor III, with equipment identical to Surveyor I	and Surveyor II except for soil sampler and two additional mirrors, was near flawless, and expected lifetime was indefinite. Surveyor I was launched May 30, 1966, successfully softlanded on moon June 2, 1966, in Ocean of Storms, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor II	was successfully launched Sept. 20, 1966, but failed to softland because of an ignition failure, (nasa Proj. Off; NASA Release 67-85; upi, W Star, 4/23/67, A10; O’Toole, W Post, 4/22/67, A4; 4/23/67, Al)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., submitted second interim report to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on Apollo 204 Review Board investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo I astronauts died. Board had established 21 panels to conduct inquiry, and Dr. Seamans said he was satisfied that the procedures they were following were “well worked out. When this work is completed, it will give us as clear a view as can be obtained from the evidence.” Source of ignition had not yet been determined, but physical evidence thus far examined indicated fire had had considerable variation and density and might have had more than one phase. “One hypothesis, supported by the cabin pressure history, assumes a small, low-grade fire whose heat was at first largely absorbed by the spacecraft structure and that was burning at the time of the first crew report; that fire may have continued for as long as ten seconds. A more intense fire may have then developed, causing the rapid increase in cabin pressure. This fire was probably then extinguished by the depletion of oxygen.” Additional information on accident had been identified and was being analyzed. It was now clear that all three spacesuits had been burned through, Astronaut Grissom’s receiving the most exposure and Astronaut Chaffee’s, the least. Dr. Seamans said disassembly of spacecraft was proceeding with great care, and spacecraft was expected to be removed to industrial area at ksc by Feb. 17. He concluded: “It is important to note that no single spacecraft element is touched or removed for analysis without full Board approval and evaluation of its possible effect on any of the other on-going studies or analyses.” (nasa Release 67-28)
Astronaut Clifton C. Williams, Jr. (Maj., usmc) , was killed during routine flight when his T-38 jet aircraft crashed and disintegrated near Tallahassee, Fla., apparently after he had blacked out from an oxygen deficiency. A Lunar Module specialist and Gemini X backup pilot, Williams was eighth astronaut to be killed in an accident and third to die in a T-38 crash: one other astronaut had died in an air crash; three in Jan. 27 Apollo fire; and one in an automobile accident. He would be buried in Arlington National Cemetery Oct. 9 with full military honors. (W Post, 10/6/67, Al; 10/10/67, B3)
Rep. Dante B. Fascell (D-Fla.) introduced in the House a bill (H.R. 7798) to strike commemorative medals in honor of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee who died in the Jan. 27 Apollo flash fire. (CR, 3/23/67, H3301)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, repeated his request that Congress reopen its investigation of NASA [see June 12]: “The Apollo hearings should be reconvened—not for the purpose of continuing further a technical discussion of possible technical causes for the Apollo fire—but to undertake a serious and far-ranging management review of the sort that would force NASA to take stock and develop sound management practices for the protection of the public’s investment in the space program. This is not to mention the safety of our astronauts. . . .” (CR, 7/17/67, H8750)
Alumni Assn, of Western High School, Washington, D.C., would honor alumnus Edward H. White II, one of three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 accident, with a memorial, which would include furnishings, decorations, and possibly a space exhibit for school’s guidance library and counseling rooms. (W Star, 5/7/67, Bl)
usaf’s $3.3-million solar vacuum telescope, designed to predict more accurately solar proton showers which endanger astronauts and spacecraft, was meeting its timetable for construction at Sacramento Peak Observatory near Sunspot, N. Mex., Office of Aerospace Research announced. Telescope—of which 193 ft would be underground and 135 ft above ground—would be largest solar vacuum telescope in the world when completed in 1968. In addition to predicting “safe periods” for space flight, it would study solar phenomena and solar-terrestrial relationships. (oar Release)
President Lyndon B. Johnson presents the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy to two NASA astronauts and a veteran test pilot in the White House Rose Garden. From the left are. North .American Aviation XB^70 test pilot Alvin S. White, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and the President. {Nov, 11—15, 1966) during which Aldrin spent 5 hrs 28 min outside spacecraft. White was cited for mach 3 XB-70 flights, British aviatrix Sheila Scott, scheduled to receive award for her record-setting solo flight around the world in a single engine aircraft, was unable to attend ceremony. {PD, 10/16/67, 1436-7; AP, NYT, 10/14/67, 7) *	Nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 37-mi (59-km) altitude, fourth in nots series to measure incident polar UV irradiance in direct support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Three Apollo astronauts died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc because “some engineer, technician, or inspector had gotten careless,” former Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations, told employees at General Motors AC Electronics Div., Milwaukee, where Apollo guidance and navigation equipment was manufactured. Slayton urged workers: “Take a good sharp look at your job. Are you giving everything you’ve got? Now you know somebody’s life depends on it.” An msc official later reported that Slayton’s speech had not been intended for publication. Slayton emphasized that he was not trying to affix blame for the Apollo accident, but was just trying to make workers ultraconscious of the importance of their jobs, (upi, W Star, 2/10/67; UPI, WIT, 2/11/67)
Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) challenged President Johnson’s budget priorities and attacked Administration plans to develop a nuclear rocket system for interplanetary space exploration. He told newsmen that it would be a much greater tragedy to limit school aid than to have a Russian cosmonaut welcome U.S. astronauts to Mars. “. . . We can’t be like the Roman Empire. They gave their people circuses when they needed bread. And that empire disappeared.” (upi, W Post, 3/4/67, A2)
NASA’s Apollo 4 (AS-501), which would be launched by Saturn V in three days, had the power to place astronauts on moon, or telescopes in orbit beyond earth’s atmosphere; American capability for major strides toward the unknown had arrived when interest in these endeavors had reached a new and understandable low, Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., reported in Baltimore Sun. Along with the new era of less than major interest in space had come the high-priority problems of the Southeast Asia war and the urban riots. Aviation Week for Aug. 7 had said “An era ended for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration last week when Congress voted a $234,000,000 cut in the agency’s budget authorization for fiscal 1968.” Many people during recent months had looked toward the achievement of social as well as scientific goals, reappraisement of both being called for by Congress. Because AS-501 would be one of the highest achievements in space, the question was no longer whether man could reach into space, but “. . . . with what urgency it should be done in the light of all the needs on earth.” (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/7/67, 6)
msc engineer Caldwell C. Johnson was granted patent for a cocoonlike escape device for orbiting astronauts. Device, which would be stored in an external compartment on the spacecraft, consisted of an insulated zippered nylon bag with a retrorocket. Astronaut would don his pressure suit with oxygen supply, seal himself in the bag, and fire retrorocket to thrust toward a landmark on earth. He would then inflate a bladder to shape the bag into a sphere for stability during reentry. Sphere would deflate during reentry, notifying astronaut when it was time to deploy parachute for safe landing. (U.S. Patent Off; msc Roundup, 7/7/67, 8; Jones, NYT, 7/15/67, 29)
Spacecraft for first manned Apollo mission would use 60% oxygen and 40% nitrogen cabin atmosphere while on launch pad and pure oxygen in orbit, NASA announced. Astronauts would continue to breathe pure oxygen in their spacesuits before and during launch phase, at higher pressure than that of cabin to avoid leakage into suits. Spacecraft environmental control system in orbit would gradually replace mixed cabin atmosphere with pure oxygen. Since October 1967, more than 140 flammability tests on full-scale simulated spacecraft at MSC had shown that spacecraft modifications and installation of fire extinguisher and new quick-opening hatch for crew egress had drastically reduced fire hazards. Detailed physiological review of new mixed gas atmosphere had included considerations of operational characteristics of spacecraft and life support equipment. Astronauts would be adequately protected physiologically during all phases of atmosphere change. Crew procedures during period when diluted oxygen atmosphere would be in cabin were only slightly affected, (nasa Release 68—47; O’Toole, W Post, 3/6/68, 1; upi, NYT, 3/15/68, 41)
At Washington, D.C., ceremony, Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations, usn, presented Distinguished Service Medal to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Capt. usn), for space deeds “exceeded by no one afloat or airborne.” (AP, W Star, 12/18/68, B2; W Post, 12/18/68, A3)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart successfully completed checkout of Apollo spacecraft cabin flight equipment provisions under simulated mission conditions at North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., facility, (nar Skywriter, 7/26/68,1)
Holder of world manned aircraft speed record, X—15 pilot Maj. William J. Knight (usaf), received senior astronaut wings and Distinguished Flying Cross from m/g Hugh B. Manson, Commander of afftc. Maj. Knight set 4,534-mph speed record Oct. 3, 1967, in special ablative-coated X—15; two weeks later he reached 277,000-ft altitude to qualify as an astronaut. On June 29, 1967, after experiencing complete engine and power failure, he had piloted X—15 to safe landing to earn DFC. (afftc Release 68-1-9)
Apollo 7 editorial comment: Washington Post: “. . . as the men in the space program go over the data on Apollo 7 and consider the alternatives of manned or unmanned flight on Apollo 8, they must not allow anyone’s desire to heat the Russians, or to get around the moon by the end of 1968, or to fan public interest in the future of space exploration to enter into their calculations. Only if they are convinced that our knowledge is sufficient, our spacecraft is totally adequate, and our men are ready should they give the go to Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders for a Christmas trip into space.”(IF Post, 10/23/68, A24) Washington Evening Star: “To those who have made a close study of the space program, [Walter M.] Schirra is the astronaut’s astronaut; the man whose ability stands out in that company of the superable. To those in the know, Schirra is the mischievous perfectionist, the naval officer who lives by the book w'hen he isn’t too busy carrying out an elaborate practical joke. But Schirra will surely be remembered by the public as the astronaut who caught cold, who growled when the alarm clock rang, and who blew up when he was pushed too far. And it may be that Schirra’s greatest contribution to the space program is that he, the most superlative of the supermen, forcefully demonstrated to the world that his is completely and refreshingly human.” (W Star, 10/23/68, A20) Baltimore Sun: “The toting up and analysis of all the information brought home this time must be left to the teams of experts. So must the decisions as to what comes next, and the planning such decisions call for. The public is content to know that three men in a spaceship have added another brave and brilliant chapter to a history of which all of us are unreservedly proud.” (B Sun, 10/23/68, A6)
The Economist: “What did they think, those three men of Apollo 8 who risked their lives and their sanity to fly to the moon only to report that it looked like grey plaster of paris? What should we earthbound ones think? In New York City, there are at least 2,000 people who would rather have watched a football game and were sufficiently incensed to telephone the television networks and tell them so. The blame is not the astronauts’. A whole series of photographs, some taken from instruments actually on the moon’s surface, some in black-and-white, some in colour, had already warned them what to expect. The buck lies on the desks of the men who for the past 13 years have directed the United States’ $32 billion space programme, and spent 70% of it on getting men into space without planning anything constructive for them to do when they got there. . . . The cost of a manned moonshot is put at around $1 billion, and for that sum you could get a whole programme of unmanned moon launches. . . . “But man does not live by science alone. . . . the greatest achievements of men in space have so far been in the realm of the human spirit. . . . Apollo 8 is part of the unceasing restlessness, invention and ambition of our kind. Have we really any reason to believe that man’s evolution has come to a stop after a bare half million years on earth? It requires arrogance, a closed mind and absolutely no sense of history ... to say that sending men into space is an utter waste of time.” [The Economist, 12/28/68, 112)
While Soviet scientists believed in use of some drugs to help man adapt to long space flights, U.S. medical experts wanted to avoid use of medication in orbit because of unpredictable side effects they sometimes produced, Associated Press reported. U.S. astronauts had carried only nonbromide, antimotion sickness pills and these had been used only once, by Gemini VIII pilots Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott when stuck thruster caused spacecraft to roll and forced emergency landing. Soviet representatives at Vienna U.N. Conference on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space had indicated most U.S.S.R. cosmonauts had used depressants for sleeping in orbit and stimulants to counteract fatigue. To avoid need for drugs, NASA selected only highly qualified astronaut candidates and trained them to cope with situations they might find in space. (B Sun, 9/16/68, 8)
In New York Times John N. Wilford said some NASA Hq. officials were “hesitant to approve a lunar orbit mission out of fear of being criticized for taking undue risks by skipping preliminary test flights. They are worried about the spacecraft’s electrical system, which developed some minor ‘bugs’ during Apollo 7, and the propulsion system, even though the on-board rocket apparently performed well in eight firings during Apollo 7.” If lunar mission was decided on, it would probably be launched Dec. 21 when moon’s position to earth would require minimum midcourse rocket firing maneuvers for landing and light conditions would give good view of potential lunar landing site. First astronauts on moon were expected to stay less than 24 hr, to demonstrate it could be done. In time astronauts would make many return trips and would roam moon’s surface in “moon buggies.” Day might come when people would establish lunar colonies. (NYT, 10/28/68, 12E)
usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was conducting research with 5-million-w arc heater to determine temperature and pressure limitations of ablative materials used to prevent military reentry vehicles from burning up on encountering earth’s atmosphere. Military reentry vehicles had to withstand conditions similar to high-speed reentry of interplanetary vehicles on return to earth, far more severe than those to be met by lunar astronauts. Data had been produced for civilian and military agencies, (afsc Release 117.68)
New observations from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station indicated distance estimates to pulsars had been 30 times too short. Observations from Australia’s Molonglo Radio Observatory had identified pulsar PSR 1749—28, believed to be three times more distant than 10 others observed to date. Despite great distance, its pulses were more powerful than those of all but one other. From these observations, Jodrell’s Dr. Graham Smith believed pulsars lay in distant halo, not in Milky Way. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/13/68, 74) Dr. Welsh said: “I would place high on the list of benefits those which flow from increased international cooperation in the field of space. . . . stimulated by the universal desire for knowledge [it] has brought somewhat closer together the peoples of the world. ... as the practical applications of space become more evident in the form of weather predictions, communications, and increased knowledge of the world’s limited natural resources, additional strength is added to the foundation for peace.” (Text) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of $1,000, made annually by International Academy of Astronautics in recognition of outstanding contribution to progress of space research and exploration over five-year period, was presented Oct. 18 at iaf Congress banquet to Dr. Zdenek Svestaka of Astronomical Institute of Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. He was Chairman of Commission on Solar Activity of the International Astronomical Union, (iaf iaa Release 34; aiaa Release 10/13/68)	, Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid I. Sedov in news conference said U.S.S.R. was not in race to moon with U.S. “The question of sending astronauts to the moon at this time is not an item on our agenda. The exploration of the moon is possible, but it is not a priority.” Prof. Sedov said Soviet timetable for manned expeditions would depend on next series of flight tests using Zond rocket. Zond V was successful, he said, “because the capsule returned safely, which was the purpose of the flight.” Regarding U.S.—U.S.S.R. scientific cooperation, “its successful implementation is very much dependent on international relations.” At present, he said, close relations did not exist. (NYT, 10/15/68, 48) Informal meeting of international space scientists, organized by Northwestern Univ. ufo expert, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, in conjunction with iaf Congress, discussed advisability of world cooperation on UFOs. Several speakers urged international cooperation such as uniform ufo report forms, but it was agreed that no action should be taken until after appearance of Univ. of Colorado report expected later in year. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/16/68,12)	_ Dr. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey astrogeologist, reported to iaf analysis of data from spacecraft that had orbited and crashed into or landed intact on moon had shown side facing earth was largely a basin similar to that of Pacific Ocean. It seemed more like earth than had been previously believed. Lunar interior had been molten. Deep cracks in its crust were lined with craters where molten material had erupted from below. Study of remains of giant crater in western Texas had shown features analogous to lunar craters with mountain in center. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/19/68,19)
Unexpected solar flares could cause serious radiation damage to sst passengers and lead to aircraft navigation errors, according to Dr. Adolph Razdow, President of Yardney Electric Corp., Razdow Laboratories Div. Global solar watch, he said, could provide 10-min warning of strong solar flares, enabling pilot to descend to safer altitude. NASA’s Solar Particle Alert Network (span) could give 20-min flare warning to unprotected astronauts on moon, who could then take shelter or take antiradiation drugs. Peak year in solar flare cycle would be 1969. (upi, NYT, 5/25/68, 59)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, at dedication of Grissom and Chaffee Halls at Purdue Univ. said, “The pressing sociological problems besetting this nation will require a high order of technological skill to solve.” Space program was contributing to “fundamental solution” of problems of poverty and human welfare by bringing “advancement in economic and technological growth.” Space flight would help public understand ability of industry, science, and government to-work together to mobilize .resources. Honoring late astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee, Dr. Mueller predicted space program would “help to shape our future” and U.S. would continue “to rely upon the vision and dedication” of such men. Conquest of space would be “our most enduring memorial to these men.” (Text)
Five ellipse-shaped, three- by five-mile lunar landing areas were selected for astronaut safety considerations by nasa Apollo Site Selection Board. First two sites were in Sea of Tranquility, third was in Central Bay, and fourth and fifth were in Ocean of Storms. Sites contained features of scientific, interest, including small craters, raw material ejected from craters, ridges, and faults. Criteria for selection were area smoothness, approach path, propellant conservation, countdown recycling time, free-retum trajectory, optimum lighting, and slope. Board had studied Lunar Orbiter high-resolution photos and Surveyor close-up photos and surface data. (NASA Release 68-25; AP, NYT, 2/5/68, 13) .
Ten years ago NASA officially came into being. In photo, President Dwight D. Eisenhower hands commissions to heads of new agency after Sept. 8, 1958, swearing in ceremonies. At President’s left Is Dr. T. Keith Glenrtan, first NASA A d m in is! tutor. Accepting commission is first Deputy Administrator, the late Hugh L. Dry den. stone of this rewarding effort, we renew our dedication to the guiding principle we expressed 10 years ago at nasa’s launching: that our further mastery of space may continue to be ‘for the benefit of all mankind.’ ” {PD, 10/7/68,1435-1436) During its first 10 yr NASA had completed 234 major U.S. and international launches plus thousands of sounding rocket launches. Of 234 major launches, 189 were launch-vehicle successes and 174 were spacecraft or mission successes, with two missions still under evaluation. For these launches NASA had developed rockets ranging from 88,000-lb thrust to Saturn V with 7.5-million-lb thrust capable of sending nearly 100,000-lb payload to moon. First phase of manned flight program, Project Mercury, had begun seven days after NASA was established. Six manned Mercury flights had proved man could go into space and function as pilot-engineer-experimenter for up to 34 hr weightless flight before returning to earth. Gemini program announced in 1961 had demonstrated work could be performed in orbit outside spacecraft in more than 12 hr extravehicular activity. Gemini included 52 experiments, among them 17 scientific—in astronomy, biology, geology, meteorology, and physics. Seven rendezvous techniques and nine dockings had been accomplished during Gemini. More than 2,000 hr manned spaceflight experience gained through Mercury and Gemini had contributed heavily to Apollo, including 16 flights of unmanned Saturn launch vehicle which had confirmed Apollo engineering concepts and qualified all systems for manned missions. Although Apollo fire on Jan. 27, 1967, had delayed manned missions, it had resulted in safer spacecraft and improved suits for astronauts. Ahead were two manned missions for 1968 and possibly five for 1969, culminating in landing of U.S. astronauts on moon. Facilities at NASA installations in U.S. were worth more than $2.5 billion and peak 35,000 staff included some of Nation’s top scientists. Industrial work force had peaked at 400,000 and was dropping to 200,000. NASA had established global tracking network capable of communicating with vehicles as far away as far side of sun. Its aeronautics program conducted R&D on noise abatement, flight safety, supersonic and hypersonic aircraft, lifting-body vehicles, and v/stol aircraft, nasa’s technological advances included development of new electronic parts, alloys, adhesives, lubricants, valves, and pumps, as well as progress in miniaturization. More than 2,500 technical innovations applicable in industry, medicine, and other nonaerospace activities had resulted from 10 yr of nasa progress. In Christian Science Monitor, Neal Stanford said, “It is . . . science satellites and the new technology developed that are counted on to return to the tax-paying public the dividends that some say will make space the best investment man ever made.” (Marshall Star, 9/25/68, 5; Wilford, NYT, 10/1/68; CSM, 10/5/68) In Washington Sunday Star special report, “A Decade in Space,” John Lannan commented on NASA’s 10th anniversary: “. . . the space agency’s real promise for improving the general welfare of mankind as set forth in the Space Act which brought it into being has apparently been too slow in being fulfilled. The fact that the space investment is only now starting to pay off, and at an increasingly rapid pace, is going unnoticed in the glare of present problems, past mishaps and the imminence of the Apollo venture. Where NASA’s real goals lie are in the future—the near future and the near earth. Spin-off, the serendipity of technology, has long been used as a justification for the vast sums poured into space, but little beyond Teflon-coated frying pans have impinged on the tax-payer’s mind.” (W Star, 9/29/68, Al) NASA Assistant Administrator for dod and Interagency Affairs Jacob E. Smart wrote in Space Digest: “The tenth anniversary . . . marks the end of a decade of concerted effort across a broad front to advance the nation’s capabilities in aeronautics and space. It has been a decade of accomplishment that has few peers in this country’s history. . . . the good working relationships . . . between NASA and DOD have been of immeasurable benefit to them both, and the nation’s space effort is the stronger for it. . . . with the prospect of tighter budgets likely, the maintenance of such relationships—and their improvement—assumes an increasing importance. The need to stretch the appropriations dollars to the maximum may be partly met by fresh efforts to find common ground where cooperation will produce economies as well as mutual benefits.” (Space Digest, 10/68, 68—70) In Space Digest Gen. James Ferguson, Commander of afsc, described “A Decade of Cooperation—The Military-NASA Interface.” afsc’s FY 1969 NASA support expenditures “amounted to millions of dollars and thousands of man-years in effort. The sums of money, and, more important, the human technological resources we are currently expending on the nation’s space programs are of great consequence since they are the foundations of our future benefits. ... we are acutely aware that the fate of future generations lies in space. ... It is a sad commentary to state that technology has provided us with the means to conduct wars. But it is heartening to realize that one day technology will provide us with the means to prevent wars. {Space Digest, 10/68, 71-3)	_
Cal Tech said Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar observatories were keeping close watch for developing sunspots that might threaten Apollo 8 astronauts with dangerous x-ray radiation. (Reuters, W Post, 12/5/68, H9) December 4: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 454-mi (730.6-km) apogee, 94-mi (151.3-km) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 106.2° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 12. (Pres Rpt 68)
Dr. R. G. Mclver, head of aeromedical research at Holloman afb, N. Mex., said tests on chimpanzees had shown astronaut experiencing sudden decompression outside spacecraft might live at least three minutes in total vacuum, giving his companions time to get him inside pressurized cabin. Survival of astronauts in ruptured space cabin would depend on presence of one man wearing space suit and thus able to place other crewmen in suits after they lost consciousness. Earlier, scientists had predicted sudden death for astronauts experiencing space vacuum decompression. Revised estimates of life expectancy were based on simulated space capsule experiments with 150 chimpanzees. (AP, B Sun, 11/16/68, A4)
Representatives of 43 nations signed space rescue treaty at separate ceremonies in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow. At State Dept, ceremony in Washington, D.C., President Johnson said he hoped treaty would end wasteful competitive spacemanship between U.S. and U.S.S.R. and that next decade in space would increasingly become a partnership. Treaty, which provided for assistance to astronauts in emergency and safe return of astronauts and space hardware, had heen unanimously approved by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19, 1967. Secretary of State Dean Rusk signed for U.S. It would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. (Ward, B Sun, 4/23/68,1; PD, 4/29/68,1108)
NASA announced Astronaut John A. Lewellyn had withdrawn from astronaut training program because of inability to progress sufficiently with jet flight training at Reese afb, Tex. After discussions with NASA and usaf officials, he had withdrawn to consider several opportunities within NASA and elsewhere. His departure reduced total number of NASA astronauts to 52. Nine of eleven scientist-astronauts selected in 1967 were in flight training. Dr. Brian T. O’Leary had withdrawn April 23 because he disliked flying, (msc Release 68-63; AP, NYT, 8/24/68, 12) .
At press showing in Dover, Del., NASA introduced fireproof Apollo spacesuits developed after Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire to protect astronauts against extreme heat, cold, and flash fires. Beta cloth of glass fiber was nonflammable, with 1,200° F melting point. Former spacesuit fabric would melt at 700° F and would burn if ignited. New 54-lb suits were ,22 lb heavier but more flexible, consisting of inner layer of cotton underwear and cover layer of Beta cloth, nylon, and aluminized Kapton to protect against micrometeoroids and temperatures between 310° F and —250° F. Intermediate garment contained ventilation unit which, for astronauts participating in extravehicular activity, would be cooled with continuous flow of water while wearer was outside capsule and with pure oxygen inside capsule. Suits and cloth helmet to be worn after removal of plastic headwear were manufactured by icl Industries, Inc., and cost $175,000—$200,000 each, nasa had ordered 100. (Lyons, NYT, 8/3/68, 3; Lannan, W Star, 8/3/68, A2)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, addressing National Capital Area Chapter of American Society for Public Administration, praised U.S. space program for “unequaled competence and unlimited opportunity.” After 10 yr in space, he noted, U.S. had launched 514 spacecraft into earth orbit and 28 to moon and other planets. “The moon has been completely mapped, the composition and texture of its soil analyzed, and sites . . . selected for manned lunar landings. Our scientific knowledge of Mars and Venus . . . has been advanced tremendously by . . . unmanned, instrumented probes. . . . American astronauts, who have a total of almost 2,000 hours in space to their credit in the Mercury and Gemini Projects, will begin the third phase of manned space flight this year with the first manned launches in Project Apollo. These achievements in space, fruits of the advanced science and technology of our times, mark the first decade of the Space Age as one of the finest periods in American history. And they are forerunners of even greater discoveries and widespread applications to come during our second decade in space.” Dr. von Braun credited nasa Administrator James Webb’s direction with adaptation of systems approach to space research without which “we would never be able to go to the moon.” Approach, Dr. von Braun believed, could also be tested on river pollution and satellite communications. (Text; W Post, 3/21/68, H14)
John A. Manke, NASA research pilot at prc, stands before wingless HL—10 lifting-body vehicle which he flew in first powered flight, after air launch from. B-52 aircraft. Manke reached 610 mph in NASA—usaf program to evaluate possible forerunners of reusable spacecraft. Eventual 1,000-mph speed was expected. Donn F. Eisele, and Edgar D. Mitchell. Flight crew support team wa3 Astronauts Joseph H. Engle, James B. Irwin, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Mission probabilities ranged from earth orbital operations to lunar orbital flight, with separation and docking of command and service module and lunar module. (NASA Release 68-201; AP, W Star, 11/14/68, A7; W Post, 11/14/68, A12; AP, NYT, 11/14/68, 21; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/14/68, 1)
Canadian Black Brandt IV sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Barreria. do Inferno Range near Natal, Brazil. It carried msc Space Physics Div. 80-lb South Atlantic Anomaly Probe (saap) experiment package containing speedometer, magnetometers, ion chambers, and heavy ion detector to 502-mi (806-km) altitude to provide fast response capability for measuring radiation dose and dose rate at orbital altitude over South Atlantic. Project, cooperative effort of NASA and Brazilian Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) in support of Apollo program, would use data to study dynamics of inner Van Allen belt and possible radiation hazard to astronauts on low-altitude missions, (nasa Releases 68—94, 68—97K; nasa Rpt SRL; SBD, 6/13/68, 213)
usaf denied decision had been made to cut back or cancel FB—111 production [see Nov. 15], Wall Street Journal said, but reports persisted that fewer than 253 would be purchased because of their high cost and indifferent performance. Aerospace Daily said its sources reported recommended cutback of more than 50% was “essentially accurate” and put figure at “about 100” to give usaf Unit Equipment force of 90 aircraft. (WSJ, 11/18/68,12; Aero Daily, 11/18/68) Air Transport Assn, of America reported that 15- to 19-mo use at three major airports had convinced airlines that runway surface grooving was “an effective aid in overcoming hydroplaning” during wet landings. Airline operation evaluation had “dispelled earlier fears that grooving might damage runways or aircraft.” (Text; NYT, 11/24/68, 84) Dr. Walton W. Jones, nasa Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, told conference U.S. could keep astronauts in earth orbit a year within 10 yr if U.S. would allocate sufficient resources to project. arc experiments had shown rats subjected to gravitational pull 4.7 times above normal had increased life expectancy. He said after meeting that NASA planned experiments with rats at zero gravitation to determine if aging process was suspended while mem was free from gravitational pull. Dr. J. F. Kubis of Fordham Univ. emphasized importance of psychological factors in selecting space crews. On long flight, “lack of privacy, crowding, and continuous exposure to interaction will become sources of aggravating stress.” He recommended no more than one in crew with dominant personality. Soviet scientist Dr. N. N. Gurovsky said condition of two dogs after 22-day orbital flight (in Cosmos CX Feb. 22—March 16, 1966) had aroused forebodings on effect of year-long flights on astronauts. Loss of calcium in bones would make them prone to breaking. Both dogs had .developed liver and intestinal ailments including edemas. Human beings could expect same effects. Earlier reports had noted dogs suffered muscular reduction, dehydration, and confusion in adjusting to walking. Cal Tech Prof. Fritz Zwicky said some apparently unexplained deaths on earth each year could he due to blows from meteors or heavy nucleons in cosmic rays. (Hamilton, NYT, 11/20/68, 31; 11/21/68, 18; AP, B Sun, 11/22/68,1)
President Johnson proclaimed Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts, and the Return of Space Objects in effect with deposit in three capitals of instruments of ratification by U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. Ireland and Nepal had previously ratified treaty, which had been signed by 75 countries. Proclamation noted new agreement was essentially humanitarian. Its provisions “carry forward the goals qf international cooperation to which the United States has been dedicated since enactment of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and to which the United States renewed its commitment in the outer space treaty of 1967.” {PD, 12/9/68, 1658; AP, NYT, 12/5/68, 13; nasa Off of General Council)
U.S. patent No. 3,396,921 was issued to Francis M. Rogallo, head of low-speed vehicle branch at LaRC, for control devices to regulate pitch and roll of paraglider planned for Apollo Applications flights. Rogallo and his wife Gertrude had developed paraglider—called Rogallo wing —under NASA contract. It was free-flight vehicle with flexible wings which could be extended upon reentry to carry astronauts to a landing. (Pat Off pio; NYT, 8/17/68, 37)
Orbital workshop engineering mockup was readied for five-day crew station review Feb. 12—16 at msfc. It was second of three design reviews. First had been conducted Dec. 11—14, 1967. In mockup, recently returned to msfc from McDonnell Douglas Corp., astronauts would carry out tasks on ground that would later be done in orbit under zero gravity conditions, including experiment installation and operation, msfc announced that third and final critical review in July would precede production of flight model of orbital workshop. (msfc Release 68-18)
Washington Post said of Apollo 8: “Above all, perhaps, this Christmas Eve at the moon and Christmas Day on the way home have told us more about our earth than about the moon. One of the astronauts had wondered on his way to the moon whether, if he were a traveller from another planet, he would think that intelligent life existed on Earth. The answer, from Captain Lovell at least, is that our planet is ‘a grand oasis in the great vastness of space.’ That is an awing insight and it reminds us that man has far to go here at home to fulfill the Christmas promise of Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men.” (W Post, 12/26/68, A20)
NASA announced it had assigned Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan as prime crew for Apollo 10 mission, scheduled for second quarter of 1969 as second manned flight of lunar module. Backup crew would be Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper,
NASA announced that Astronaut Brian T. O’Leary had withdrawn from astronaut training program because he disliked piloting aircraft. Dr. O’Leary, who had completed 15 hr flying time in training program at Williams afb, Ariz., hoped to remain with space program as researcher in planetary astronomy. Astronaut F. Curtis Michel had received special permission to spend 80% of his time teaching and studying at Rice Univ. and 20% in astronaut training for one year, (msc Release 68—32; AP, W Star, 4/24/68, A2; W Post, 4/24/68, 4)
On nationwide “Meet the Press” TV interview, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., commented on NASA budget cuts: “We’ve built up a fantastic technology [but] talented people are starting to leave. ... We should let it be known that we are in this for the future, not just one flight.” Cost of manned missions was justified in quest for knowledge not only outward, but earthward, too. Astronauts were “looking at portions of the earth that had never been documented before. A crew can see something and respond to it, on earth or the moon.” Fellow Apollo 7 crewman R. Walter Cunningham said never had Soviet crewmen “functioned in the same operational conditions as we.” U.S.S.R. was putting fewer higher trained persons in orbit, “mainly as biological specimens.” (AP, W Post, 11/11/68, A2; AP, B Sun, 11/11/68, A5)
msc officials announced resignation of Astronaut John S. Bull (L/Cdr., usn), third astronaut to leave space program because of medical problem. Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Chief of Medical Programs, told news conference Astronaut Bull had rare respiratory disease for which there was no known cure and no medical name. It was characterized by chronic sinus difficulties, lung obstruction, and sensitivity to aspirin. (upi, W Post, 7/17/68, All)
MSFC announced it had requested proposals from 11 aerospace companies for six-month design and definition study for dual mode lunar roving vehicle (lrv) capable of transporting astronauts on lunar surface and of performing automated, long-range scientific traverses across moon under remote control from earth. Vehicle was to permit manned sorties of up to 6 mi from landed spacecraft, with total round trip of more than 18 mi. After astronauts left moon, lrv would be placed in remote control mode for automated long-range (600 or more mi) geological and geophysical trips for one year. It would collect up to 200 lb of lunar samples and measure terrain, then rendezvous with manned spacecraft for return of samples to earth, (msfc Release 68—274; SBDf 12/3/68, 134; Marshall Star, 12/4/68, 1)
nasa announced award to Bendix Corp. of $1,567,550 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for development, test, and delivery of one prototype and five flight-model atm star trackers in 15-mo period, atm, part of Apollo Applications program, would be launched into earth orbit and docked with Saturn I Workshop being developed by msfc for 28- to 56-day astronaut stays in space. Astronauts would use atm to study sun from above earth’s atmosphere, (msfc Release 68—196) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, asserted U.S. could afford multibillion dollar space program; “at least as much as President Johnson proposed this year—nearly $7,000,000,000—and perhaps an appreciable amount more.” (Figure included all Government spending, not just NASA funds.) Persons advocating big cuts in space program were “doing this country a disservice.” Much of high U.S. gross national product was result of prior investment in r&d. “This Nation invests more per capita in research than any other nation in the world and that is a major reason why we have a higher standard of living. The space program is the most active, economical, and productive stimulus to research and development in history. We cannot afford to slow it down . . . unless we think we can afford less investment in the elimination of poverty, less expenditure for health improvement, less income for an expanding population, and less readiness in the realm of national security.” Space program cost, though large, was “not really so expensive when we figure that we are spending less than 1% of our Gross National Product for a technological capability that increases the rate at which this Nation becomes wealthier and more powerful by many times 1%.” (Text; B Sun, 8/29/68, A5; AP, LA Times, 8/29/68) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Library of Congress Research Specialist, said U.S.S.R. was launching more military espionage satellites than any other spacecraft and therefore had softened complaints about U.S. espionage satellite activity. Tracing political and social implications of Soviet space program, Dr. Sheldon said U.S.S.R. accepted “importance of basic research on the cosmic scale” and vigorous exploitation of space applications for civil purposes was definite goal. In long-term outlook, U.S.S.R. talked of “future automated, cybernetics-aided industrial state ... in which space applications, space travel, and use of extraterrestrial resources play a vital part.” He also credited NASA program of international cooperation with some influence on recent Soviet shift toward increased cooperation within and without Soviet bloc, though joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. program for space exploration would probably prove inoperable even if it could be established. (AIAA Paper 68-900; AP, NYT, 8/30/68, 7) m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf) , director of faa sst development, said cost of designing and developing two prototype commercial SSTs would amount to $1,587 billion. Government share in total spending from 1963 through 1972 would be $1,239 billion, or 78%. Contractors, Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., would pay $287.8 million, or 18%, and customer airlines would contribute $59.5 million, or 4%. Principal problem in financing, he said, was protection of manufacturers against catastrophic failure. This would require “some limitation of recourse of creditors ... in event of program failure.” In addition, Gen. Maxwell forecast $2.5-billion to $5-billion market risk for period starting in 1972 and $15 billion commercial risk for period between start of sales and end of century. (AIAA Paper 68—916; AP, NYT, 9/1/68,22)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
Finnish professor Arrno Niini said photos of earth brought back by Apollo 8 astronauts might show tiny ring of small dust particles 200 to 350 mi above earth. It would be discernible only in pictures taken with sun behind camera and with sufficiently sensitive film, (upi, NYT, 12/30/68, 2)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was announced winner of Kitty Hawk Memorial Trophy for distinguished achievement in aeronautics. Trophy would be presented at annual Wright Brothers memorial banquet in Beverly Hills, Calif., Dec. 6. (upi, W Star, 11/19/68, A2)
Recorded aircraft highjackings had totaled 14 in past year, with 13 U.S. airliners over southern U.S. forced to land in Cuba, Andrew Wilson of London Observer reported. (IP Post, 8/14/68, A3) August 14^-27: At U.N. Conference on Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space held in Vienna and attended by 500 delegates from 74 nations, Soviet Premier Alexey N. Kosygin announced U.S.S.R. and “other Socialist countries” would establish comsat network “Intersputnik” to compete with Intelsat. Draft agreement had been submitted in New York to U.N. Secretary-General U Thant by U.S.S.R., Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Mongolia, and Cuba. Vladimir Minashin, head of comsat div. of Soviet Ministry of Communications, said Intersputnik satellite would have same synchronous orbit used by the four U.S.-provided Intelsat satellites. U.S. Dept, spokesman said U.S. had no need to join U.S.S.R.-sponsored system; Intelsat, with 62 member nations, was already operating successfully, handling 95% of total international telecommunications traffic. U.S. was not opposed to Soviet proposal for political reasons, but on grounds there would be economic problems in creation of two worldwide comsat systems. (W Post, 8/14/68, 12; O’Toole, W Post, 8/15/68, A21; Hamilton, NYT, 8/15/68, 18; 8/20/68, 18; WSJ, 8/15/68, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/15/68, 1) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at Vienna conference discussed three results of U.S. manned space flight program to illustrate contributions to space exploration. Program had proved man could live in space and man could do useful work in space and it had created technology to make these possible. In first category, nasa, nas—nrc Space Science Board, nsf, arpa, dod groups, universities, and others had conquered problems of weightlessness in space, heavy acceleration and deceleration forces, air supply and pressure required for breathing in space, psychological problems presented by isolation, and problem of radiation. Successful termination of Mercury and Gemini programs had proved man capable of existing in space. His capability to do useful work in space had been proved by successful rendezvous and docking of spacecraft, by space photography, and by extravehicular activity. Pervasiveness of space technology had been demonstrated by range and variety of thousands of products, including Saturn V launch vehicle, world’s largest flight vehicle, and integrated circuit, one of world’s smallest manufactured items. Dr. Mueller said: “Our civilization has been built upon our accumulated knowledge of the natural laws of our environment. All of our inventions have been the result of the application of these natural laws. Advances in our civilization have always followed after discovery of some one of the missing links in our chain of knowledge. ... We know that many of the missing links . . . will he supplied ... as we move man with his accumulation of experience and his sophisticated equipment for exploration, into a new laboratory . . . the laboratory of the moon and outward to our solar system. ... If all of us, from all nations, are sufficiently creative, abundantly inventive, and freely adaptive, we have it within our power to improve the lives of every man, woman, and child.” (Text) U.S.S.R. Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov at Vienna conference proposed Aug. 15 that Ocean of Storms, prominent feature of lunar landscape, be renamed Ocean of Gagarin in honor of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gargarin, who made first manned earth orbit April 12, 1961. Leonov, who took man’s first walk in space in 1965, read Gagarin paper which emphasized similarity between experience of Soviet astronauts and that of crews of deep-sea exploratory craft. He said all actions taken in Soviet space vehicles were tried first in underwater craft. Large Soviet exhibit at conference showed full-scale model of original Soviet spacecraft and listed Soviet space firsts. U.S. exhibit, small because of cut in nasa funds, depicted benefits space exploration would produce for developing countries. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/16/68) J. L. Blondstein of British National Industrial Space Committee told group meeting at conference Aug. 20 that production of U.S. military satellites capable of direct TV broadcasts to military units was “imminent.” He said U.S. had spent between $80 million and $100 million on development but denied information was being withheld for military security reasons. DOD spokesman in Washington had said he knew of no plans for direct TV broadcasts by military satellites. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/21/68, 3) W. T. Pecora, Director, U.S. Geological Survey, said Aug. 23 that worldwide volcano and earthquake monitoring network might be provided within a few years by space satellites carrying cameras and sensing devices to give up to one hour advance notice of strong earth shocks. (AP, C Trib, 8/23/68)
Solar Wind Composition Experiment, developed by Swiss scientific team headed by Univ. of Berne’s Dr. Johannes Geiss, was first foreign experiment accepted for NASA’s Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) . Swiss experiment would require astronaut to deploy on lunar surface aluminum foil sheet oriented toward sun to entrap solar wind ions; foil sheet would be packaged for return to earth by astronauts, providing in this one-pound experiment first opportunity to capture ions for earth analysis. Swiss National Committee for Space Research had already built prototype. NASA would provide qualification tests for prototype and construction and acceptance tests for flight hardware. (NASA Release 68—55; Marshall Star, 3/27/68,10)
nasa was stopping work on Saturn IB vehicles 215 and 216 “to the extent possible without involving uneconomical terminations.” Contractors had been instructed to terminate work on long-lead-time items being procured for Saturn V vehicles 516 and 517; halt would cause time gap should decision be reached later to resume production. Boosters August 2; NASA introduced new fireproof Apollo spacesuits at press showing in Doner, Del. In earlier photo, test subject Ronald C. Woods wears integrated thermal micrometeorite garment (tmg) to be worn by astronauts during extravehicular activities, ilc Industries suit has back-pack life-support system developed by United Aircraft Corp. had been requested in NASA FY 1969 budget for follow-on utilization of Apollo capacity beyond manned lunar landing. Steps were taken after Congressional cuts in budget, in anticipation of final decisions on future production, (nasa Release 68—139; W Post, 8/3/68, A2)
Washington Post editorial praised “magnificent achievement” of U.S.S.R.’s Zond V: “In its own way, Zond-5 should serve to shake this Nation’s complacency once again. Our national goals in space exploration are fuzzy, our hopes have been out of line with our commitments. From President Kennedy’s glowing picture of Americans in space we have slipped into a program put together in fits and starts—fits brought about by a realization of how much it would cost to do it right and starts caused by a basic desire never to be second to anybody. Because of this, there is no use in seizing upon Zond-5 as a reason to go all-out to beat the Russians in a race for men on the moon. Our program . . . ought to move at its own pace. If that pace is sufficiently rapid to bring American astronauts to the moon first, fine. If it is not, so be it. The Russians will deserve the honor and praise they will win if their men make the first landing. In space exploration, it is more important to do things right than to do them first.” (W Post, 9/24/68, A16)
Engineering mockup of Saturn l orbital workshop readied for crew station review at Marshall Space Flight Center. Space-sidled astronaut leaves full-size model of Saturn S—IVB rocket stage which will contain individual sleeping rooms, kitchen-dining area, laboratory work spaces, and waste-management area. hope that the conquest of space can contribute to the establishment of peace.” (Text)
Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle began 177-hr simulated space journey with Apollo 2TV—1 model spacecraft inside giant vacuum chamber at msc, to prove spacecraft structure and inner pressure vessel and verify Apollo’s environmental control system in temperature and vacuum extremes. (West, H Chron, 6/17/68; H Post, 6/18/68, 2; nar Skywriter, 6/21/68,1)
President Johnson transmitted NASA’s 15th, 16th, and 17th Semiannual Reports to Congress covering July 1, 1966, to Dec. 31, 1967. President wrote, “I commend these reports to your attention. They contain, I believe, concrete evidence that NASA is moving forward, and that America is contributing mightily in the worldwide effort to conquer space for the benefit of all mankind.” In letter accompanying 17th report, NASA Administrator James E. Webb wrote, “This period was overshadowed by the Apollo fire which took the lives of three of our astronauts. The thorough investigation of the accident and the steps that were initiated to improve safety by changes in design and procedures have previously been made matters of public record. This report shows that the same period was also one of progress in aeronautics and space as evidenced, for example, by the successful flights of Surveyor, Lunar Orbiter, and many other spacecraft. It was a difficult time for NASA, but one in which the agency showed, I believe, that it could react maturely to failure as well as success, and continue to deserve the confidence and support of the nation.” (Text; nasa LAR VII/III)
Apollo 8 astronauts were pronounced in perfect health by NASA Director of Medical Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, after three-hour physical examination as countdown proceeded toward Dec. 21 launch for moon flight. “The crew is in real fine spirits,” he added. (AP, B Sun, 12/17/68; AP, W Star, 12/17/68)
MSC engineers Edwin Samfield and William C. Huber were granted patent No. 3,389,877 for inflatable tether to connect orbiting spacecraft or to connect astronauts and spacecraft. Tether, which became semirigid when inflated to avoid problems of flexible tether, consisted of nylon tube with aluminum end pieces and shock-absorbing struts for attachment to spacecraft. It could be folded and stowed in end piece and expanded with compressed gas when needed. Prototypes were being constructed at msc. (Patent Off pio; Jones, NYT, 6/29/68, 37)
At White House Dinner honoring members of space program, President Johnson presented Presidential Medal of Freedom, Nation’s highest civilian award, to retired NASA Administrator, James E. Webb, “a most distinguished public administrator, ... a farsighted and forceful leader of this Nation in the pioneer exploration of outer space, opening new frontiers of discovery and progress for the American people,” President told 23 Apollo astronauts, NASA officials, Government leaders in space program, and heads of rocket-building firms, “I asked you to come here tonight in the twilight of this administration, so I could pay the respect and the honor and the affection that I felt for the man who has directed your efforts and directed them so well, and so that I could express my personal admiration and respect for you.” In response, Webb said, “The challenge of space is large and so is NASA. In all such human endeavors, organized institutional efforts are essential, and we know, in the words of Emerson, that they are ‘the lengthened shadow of one man.’ We in NASA know, Mr. President, that you are the man of which our civilian space effort, conducted for the benefit of mankind, is the lengthened shadow.” At predinner ceremony, document for White House Treaty Room was signed by Apollo 7 astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., R. Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele; Apollo 8 Astronauts William A. Anders, Frank Borman, and James A. Lovell, Jr.; and pioneer aviator Charles A. Lindbergh. Also in Treaty Room were commemorations of May 21, 1963, visit to White House by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper following 22-orbit mission in Faith VII May 15—16 and of June 17, 1965, award of Exceptional Service Medal to late Astronaut Edward H. White II, and Astronaut James A. McDivitt following first U.S. space walk during June 3—7 Gemini IV mission. During exchange of dinner toasts President Johnson said that “in the hundreds of laws on which I have answered the rollcall, the bills that I have sponsored or cosponsored or amended or defeated, there is not a single one that gives more pride than the Space Act.” Responding, Webb cited three generations of spacecraft in 10 yr, “put to use ... in every major field,” and said he had “strongly held view that in the kind of world we live in, our Nation needs this kind of success in this kind of endeavor.” {PD, 12/16/68, 1689—91; McCardle, W Post, 12/10/68, Dl; Shelton, W Star, 12/10/68, B6; NYT, 12/10/68, 86)
Dr. Robert H. Guest, professor of organizational behavior in Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College, was sworn in as consultant by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting nasa Administrator. Dr. Guest would serve on Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—220) At 10:42 am est 3rd stage burned for second time, injecting spacecraft into lunar trajectory, and astronauts began journey to become first men to leave earth’s gravitational field. Stage and instrument unit separated as planned and service module propulsion system was fired to increase separation distance from 3rd stage, which was trailing 500—1,000 ft behind spacecraft, spewing unused propellants. Crew fired service propulsion system (sps) engine for 2.4 sec, correcting trajectory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. Second midcourse maneuver, scheduled for second day, was canceled because trajectory was already so accurate that burn would have required velocity change of only 0.7 fps. Borman reported illness, apparently from 24-hr intestinal virus or from reaction to sleeping pills being used during space flight for first time, and Lovell and Anders reported nausea. Crew took navigation sightings and conducted first TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior and earth from 138,690-mi altitude and demonstrating food preparation and movements in weightlessness. Signals were received at ground stations and transmitted to NASA Mission Control Center in Houston before release live to commercial networks. Second TV transmission, on third day, showed excellent pictures of earth from 201,365-mi altitude, including view of Western Hemisphere in sunlight. Crew pointed out North Pole, South America, Cape Horn, and Baja California and noted that U.S. East Coast was very cloudy. Earth, they said, was beautiful; water looked royal blue, land areas brown, and clouds bright white. Reflection off earth was much greater than off moon, sm reaction control system’s four rockets were fired for 12 sec to reduce velocity by 2 fps and to make approach to moon closer to 60 mi at nearest point. On fourth day, Christmas Eve, communications were interrupted as Apollo 8 passed behind moon and astronauts became first men to see moon’s far side, sps engine was fired for 4 min 2 sec, reducing speed by 2,994 fps and placing spacecraft in lunar orbit with 193.6-mi (310.6-km) apolune and 69.1-mi (111.2-km) perilune. In third telecast Anders described lunar surface as “whitish gray, like dirty beach sand with lots of footprints on it. Some of these craters look like pick-axes striking concrete, creating a lot of fine dust.” After spacecraft passed behind moon at end of second revolution, SPS engine burned for 10 sec to reduce speed by 135 fps and to circularize orbit with 70.0-mi (112.6-km) apolune and 69.6-mi (112.0-km) perilune. Lovell said astronauts had “a grand view” of the lunar surface and confirmed that prospective landing sites were satisfactory. He reported that at about two minutes before sunrise a fan-shaped white haze appeared just behind moon’s limb. Crew continued landmark sightings and named numerous unnamed lunar features after other astronauts, NASA officials, and friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed that radio signal from earth to Apollo 8 and back to earth took three seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. Third TV transmission during ninth revolution showed heavily impacted mountains described by Anders as “a vastness of black and white, absolutely no color. The sky up here is also rather forbidding, foreboding extents of blackness with no stars visible when we’re flying over the moon in daylight. You can see by the numerous craters that this planet has been bombarded through the eons with numerous small asteroids and meteoroids, pock-marking the surface of every square inch. And one of the amazing features of the surface is . . . that most of the craters . . . have a round mound type of appearance instead of sharp jagged rocks. All, only the newest of features have any sharp definitions to them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment of small meteoroids.” The moon is “a very dark and unappetizing place. . . .” Crew read verses from first chapter of Genesis and wished viewers “good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good earth.” On fifth day, Christmas Day, while spacecraft was behind moon completing its 10th revolution, SPS engine was fired for 3 min 23 sec, increasing spacecraft velocity by 3,523 fps and propelling Apollo 8 back toward earth. Spacecraft left lunar gravity at 201,807 mi above earth. At 104 hours mission elapsed time 14-sec reaction-control-system burn increased velocity by 5 fps. Fifth TV transmission showed spacecraft interior, controls, and food preparation. Data analysis revealed sixth midcourse correction would not be necessary because of accuracy of course. Astronauts reported they had slept well and were in “very good shape.” Sixth TV transmission showed earth from 112,125-mi altitude. On sixth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from cm on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events were nominal and Apollo 8 splashed, apex down, in Pacific about 5,100 yd from recovery ship U.S.S. Yorktown at 10:51 am est Dec. 27, 147 hr after launch and precisely on time. According to prior planning, helicopters and aircraft hovered over spacecraft and pararescue personnnel were not deployed until local sunrise, 50 min after splashdown. Crew was then picked up and reached recovery ship at 12:20 pm EST. All primary ApoUo 8 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved and, in addition, five not originally planned. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan. Engineering accomplishments included use of ground network with onboard navigational techniques to sharpen accuracy of lunar orbit determination and successful use of Apollo high-gain antenna, four-dish unified S-band antenna that deployed from SM after separation from 3rd stage. Mission proved capability of Apollo csm and crew, as well as ground support and control systems, to operate out to lunar distances and return through the earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 8 was fifth Apollo mission to date, second manned Apollo mission, first manned mission on Saturn V launch vehicle, and first manned operation of Apollo system under conditions for which it was designed. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with the spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 Oct. 11—22, had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—208; NASA Special Releases; W Star, 12/21/68, Al; W Post, 12/21-28/68, Al; NYT, 12/21-28/68, 1; B Sun, 12/21-28/68, Al; MSC Roundup, 1/10/69, 3) December 21: President Johnson sent congratulatory message to Apollo 8 astronauts: “I am confident that the world’s finest equipment will strive to match the courage of our astronauts. If it does that, a successful mission is assured.” {PD, 12/30/68,1738)
White House announced from Johnson City, Tex., that President Johnson would present NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders during “Astronaut Day” ceremonies in Washington, D.C., Jan. 9, 1969. (AP, W Star, 12/31/68, A5; upi, NYT, 1/1/69, 10; W Post, 1/1/69, 2)
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., William A. Anders, and Frank Borman—scheduled to begin lunar orbital mission Dec. 21—• held preflight press conference at MSC. Borman, comparing mission to “a combat tour in Vietnam,” said: “The risks we take are acceptable ones. . . . We have to accept them if we believe it’s worthwhile. If I ever feel it’s not worthwhile, I’ll quit.” Describing the magnificence of space flight, Borman said, “When you’re finally up at the moon and looking back at the world, the nationalities blend. . . .You get the concept that this really is one world and wonder why ... we can’t live together like decent people.” Anders said crew “might use the opportunity [of being in lunar orbit ChristDeoember 7-10: NASA’s' Oao-II 21-foot-wu!e, 4,400-pound Orbiting Astronomical Observatory carried 11 telescopes into orbit to seek answers to questions on origin, evolution, and future of universe. Photo was made in final flight qualification testing. mas Day] to express to all peoples of the world our purposes and the benefits we can expect from space exploration.” (Lannan, W Star, 12/8/68, A4; AP, KC Star, 12/8/68; AP, M Her, 12/8/68)
Washington Sunday Star editorial on Apollo 6 mission: “. . . Saturn 5’s latest performance . . . suggests that our astronauts may not be able to carry out their lunar mission until considerably later than optimists have suggested—possibly not until 1971, if then. . . . However ... it is better to be safe than sorry. Saturn 5’s deficiencies must be eliminated, no matter how long the job takes, before it is used to lift a manned Apollo spacecraft to the moon. Despite loose talk about a So-viet-American ‘space race,’ there should be no all-out drive, no senseless rush, to score a first in this field.” (W Star, 4/7/68, FI)
In Washington Post, columnist Joseph Kraft said post-Apollo programs had been sharply cut in Congress and space spending had been compared unfavorably with money for pressing internal needs. “In this situation, it makes sense for this country to disengage while it is ahead. There is no need for the United States to race Russia to every new milestone in space. On the contrary, what the United States wants is a program closely connected to explicit American requirements—a program of exploration for its own sake, not for the sake of beating the Russians. In that way, this country can continue to develop a capability in space, without having to respond in a panic to the ups and downs that are necessary part of the space business.” (W Post, 12/26/68) Outgoing Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, recommended reexamination of concept of Federal Dept, of Science since science “has now assumed such importance to the nation that its position would be stronger if it had a voice in the Cabinet.” He advocated annual report on state of science similar to annual economic report and said Office of Science and Technology “could eventually evolve in an office of planning and analysis, looking broadly at national problems with some scientific or technological component, but extending well beyond the purely technical areas.” Under questioning, Dr. Hornig said he agreed with Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, President of Univ. of Oklahoma and former Assistant Secretary of Commerce, that Federal Dept, of Science, with NSF as its core, might encompass oceanographic agencies, high-energy-physics research currently funded by AEC, ESSA, Bureaus of Census and Labor Statistics, geophysics branches of Geological Survey, and some NIH programs. Dr. Hollomon also suggested NASA be added when it could be included “without having it become the tail that wags the dog.” Dr. Hornig insisted no massive “science agency” should be created to usurp supervision of Nation’s science effort. Bacteria might have caused gastrointestinal upset suffered by astronaut Frank Borman on Apollo 8 mission, Dr. Rudolf H. T. Mattoni, head of Biological Systems Div. of Nuclear Utility Services, Hawthorne, Calif., told meeting. Effects of weightlessness on bacteria on Biosatellite II flight (Sept. 7—9, 1967) suggested that lack of gravity might have allowed common, normally benign, intestinal bacteria to cause illness like Borman’s. Drs. Bouilin Browning of St. Thomas Univ. and Irwin Oster of Bowling Green State Univ. reported first experimental evidence that weightlessness can cause chromosomal damage of genetic significance, based on sperm cells flown 45 hr aboard Biosatellite. Cornell Univ. map expert, Prof. Arthur J. McNair, said sophisticated photographic mapping by satellites at 140-mi altitude would provide faster, cheaper, broader, and more detailed coverage than now possible by airplane mapping. Single map-making satellite photo, he said, would be equivalent to 1,000 photos taken by aircraft. U.S. could be fully mapped in one year from photos from satellite in near-polar orbit for four weeks. Another 11 mo would be needed for data processing. Dr. Robert H. Hardie of Vanderbilt Univ. said planet Pluto had appeared to be dimming for past 10 yr. It was moving in 248-yr orbital period to point where it reflected little sunlight and its surface temperature had dropped two degrees. He speculated that planet froze into mass of stone and solid nitrogen as temperatures reached —250° C when facing away from the sun. When bathed in sunlight, planet warmed to —200° C and formed reflecting puddles which astronomers saw as variations in light intensity. (Text; UPl, W Post, 12/28/68, A9; Lannan, W Star, 12/30/68, A3; AP, W Post, 12/30/68, A6) December 27: At White House press conference President Johnson discussed Apollo 8’s effect on U.S. position in space race: “We are very pleased with the progress we have made. . . . Each side has different examples of its achievements. But in the 10 to 11 years since Sputnik I . . . when we didn’t even have a space committee in the Congress, when we were talking about the basketball up there in the air, when we have weathered the storms that have brewed—everyone who wanted to cut anything, the first thing they wanted to cut was the space program —when we have seen the editorial professors inform us that there was really no value in doing all of this anyway, it gives me great pleasure now to see the thrill that even they are getting out of it.” President described anxiety about complex mission and said he had repeatedly asked himself whether U.S. was ready, whether date selected was best one, whether every possible precaution had been taken, and whether every man had performed his requirements. “About all you can do ... is to pick men that you have confidence in, that you trust, give them the support they need, and then hold on.” Remembering he had “recommended this goal for this decade” to President Kennedy, he said: “There have been many pitfalls every step of the way. I don’t know how many folks have just wanted to abandon it, clip it, cut it, take the money for the cities or the war or just anything else. Space has been a whipping boy. “So when you see the day approaching when visions, and dreams, and what we said to the Congress when we created the Space Administration back in 1958 are becoming reality, you naturally are hopeful.” Later, in telephone message to Apollo 8 astronauts, President congratulated crew and said: “You have made us very proud to be alive at this particular moment in history. You have made us feel akin to those Europeans nearly five centuries ago who heard stories of the New World for the first time. . . . My thoughts this morning went back to more than 10 years ago . . . when we saw Sputnik racing through the skies, and we realized that America had a big job ahead of it. “It gave me so much pleasure to know that you men have done a large part of that job.” {PD, 12/30/68, 1744-50)
Nine astronauts participated in life support training for aircraft pilots at Perrin AFB, Tex. They were second astronaut group to attend USAF course, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 7/10/68)
Apollo 7 spacecraft, which would carry three astronauts on 11-day earth-orbital mission in late 1968, was undergoing combined systems tests at KSC. Unmanned and manned altitude runs would follow, before spacecraft would be sent to Cape Kennedy to be placed on Saturn IB launch vehicle. Saturn had undergone tests and checkout on Launch Complex 34 for several months. NASA announced Apollo mission—which would demonstrate performance of spacecraft’s command module (cm), service module (sm), crew, and support facilities—would begin with mid-morning launch, carrying commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., CM pilot Donn F. Eisele, and lm pilot Walter Cunningham into earth orbit. During second revolution, crew would separate Apollo from rocket’s upper stage and perform transposition and simulated docking maneuver similar to one to be performed on lunar mission. Reentry under manual control of crew would culminate in splashdown in Atlantic at approximately 7 am EDT on 11th day. (nasa Release 68—108; ksc Release 285-68)
Chief Test Pilot Joseph S. Algranti successfully ejected from lunar landing training vehicle about four minutes into planned six-minute flight, when large lateral-control oscillation developed as he descended from maximum altitude of 550 ft. He ejected at 200 ft and landed by parachute while $1.8-million vehicle crashed and burned several hundred feet away. Flight was 14th for this Lt,TV. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, jr., was named chairman of board to investigate accident. (msc Special Releases; W Post, 12/9/68, 1; SBD, 12/10/68, 172)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., announced he would retire as NASA astronaut after commanding Apollo 7 mission. At 45, Schirra would be world’s most experienced astronaut, having flown six orbits Oct. 3, 1962, on Sigma 7 in Mercury mission and having commanded two-man Dec. 15—16, 1965, Gemini VI mission, which had participated with Gemini VII in first rendezvous of spacecraft in space. He would remain ^ in space program, he said, “until we effect the job we set out to do”— to land men on moon and return them. (W Post, 9/21/68, A7; W Star, 9/21/68, A2)
At dedication ceremony attended by 19,000, USAF officially renamed Bunker Hill afb, Indiana, Grissom afb in honor of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom who died Jan. 27, 1967, in Apollo fire. {NYT, 5/13/68)
Apollo 8 astronauts heading for moon would be “in far less hazardous position” than they would have been as crew for Columbus, NASA Director of Manned Space Flight Safety Jerome F. Lederer said in speech before Wings Club in New York. “Columbus did not know where he was going, how far it was, nor where he had been after his return. With Apollo, there is no such lack of information.” Nevertheless, mission would “involve risks of great magnitude and probably risks that have not been foreseen. “Apollo 8 has 5,600,000 parts and one and a half million systems, subsystems and assemblies. Even if all functioned with 99.9 per cent reliability, we could expect 5,600 defects. Hence, the striving for perfection and the use of redundancy.” (Text; NYT, 12/19/68, 56)
NASA announced Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had replaced Astronaut Michael Collins as prime command module pilot for third manned Apollo mission. Lovell had held same position on mission’s backup crew. Collins had undergone successful spinal surgery July 23 and would require three to six months recuperation. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup lunar module pilot, had been moved to command module pilot position on backup crew. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., had been assigned to backup crew as lunar module pilot. Lovell joined Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders on prime crew for mission scheduled for first quarter 1969. (msc Release; KSC Release KSC-374-68; AP, NYT, 8/9/68, 14; upi, W Star, 8/9/68; W Post, 8/9/68, A7; SBD, 8/9/68, 169; msc Roundup, 8/16/68, 1)
NASA’s Apollo 5 (AS—204) unmanned earth orbital mission, delayed for nearly four hours because of ground equipment malfunctions, was successfully launched from ksc Complex 37 at 5:48 pm est in fourth flight of Saturn IB and first flight of 31,700-lb lunar module (LM—1), designed to land two astronauts on the moon. Primary mission objectives were to verify operation of LM ascent propulsion system (aps), descent propulsion system (dps)—including restart—and spacecraft structures; evaluate LM staging; and evaluate 2nd-stage (S—IVB) and instrument-unit (iu) orbital performance. Launch phase occurred as planned; S—IVB ignited to insert spacecraft into orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 101-mi (163-km) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 31.63° inclination; nose cone jettisoned; spacecraft coasted for 43 min 52 sec; and LM separated from spacecraft LM adapter. LM entered orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 104-mi (167km) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 31.63° inclination. Initial 39-sec dps burn, designed to simulate deceleration for descent to lunar surface, was automatically shut down after only 4 sec because of overly conservative computer programming. Ground controllers switched to minimum requirement sequence, an alternate flight plan with shorter total dps firing time and no provision for lunar landing simulation. Second dps engine firing occurred successfully, with 26-sec burn at 10% thrust level and 7 sec at maximum thrust. Third DPS engine firing 32 sec later consisted of 26-sec bum at 10% thrust, 2 sec at maximum thrust, and ascent stage fire-in-the-hole (fith) burn during which the two stages separated and aps engine was ignited simultaneously while dps was being shut down, simulating abort during landing phase. Duration of initial aps burn during abort staging was 60 sec, aps engine fired second time for 6 min 23 sec until fuel was depleted. At end of 11-hr 10min test period, both stages of the lm were left in orbit eventually to reenter and disintegrate. Apollo 5 mission, adjudged successful by NASA in spite of premature dps engine shutdown, proved out structural integrity of lm; verified in-space operation of dps and APS; and proved value of contingency planning, lm was last major piece of Apollo hardware to have its first test in space. Command module (cm) had been tested during AS—203 mission (July 5, 1966) and with service module (sm) on AS—202 (Aug. 25, 1966) and Apollo 4 (AS-501) (Nov. 9, 1967). Final decision on whether Apollo 5 results justified omitting second unmanned test and scheduling next mission to be manned would be deferred until March, pending final mission review, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—6K, 68—19; msc Release 68-4; AP, Strothman, W Post, 1/23/68, 1; Fahnestock, W Star, 1/23/68, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/24/68, 20)
The space age, no doubt, will produce many future heroes and many other historic accomplishments, New York Times said, “but even now it is plain that yesterday Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders assured themselves of immortality as the first men literally to break the shackles of earth and travel successfully to another destination in this suddenly shrunken solar system.” (NYT, 12/25/68, 30)
usn announced selection of 54 men to serve as aquanauts in 60-day Sealab III experiment in underwater living, scheduled to begin in October. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), team leader for Sealab II (Aug. 28—Sept. 26, 1965), would serve as Senior Aquanaut. Ocean floor experiments would be conducted at 620-ft depth off San Clemente Island by 40 aquanauts in 5 teams serving 12 days each. Remaining 14 men would serve as alternates and backup surface support divers, (dod Release 579—68; Aero Daily, 6/26/68)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Stuart A. Roosa were chosen prime crew for 48-hr at-sea checkout of Apollo spacecraft, scheduled to begin March 18 in Gulf of Mexico. Apollo’s at-sea post-landing systems for first manned mission would be checked from deck of NASA’s motor vessel Retriever. (H Chron, 3/7/68)
Global military expenditures ranked first in world public expenditures. They had risen from $132 billion to 1964 to $138 billion in 1965, $159 billion in 1966, and estimated $182 billion in 1967—record high level. Preliminary data, said U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Report, World Military Expenditures 1966—67, said current military spending exceeded by 40% world’s expenditures on education by all levels of government and was more than three times worldwide public health expenditure. (Text; Shackford, W Post, 1/24/69, A21) During 1968: In 1968 U.S. orbited 64 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 74. U.S. total included 43 launched by DOD. NASA’s 21 included satellite orbited as secondary payload. Highlight of NASA’s 10th anniversary year was success in carefully planned series of Apollo missions—including first two manned flights in Apollo lunar landing program. Unmanned Apollo 5 and Apollo 6 completed inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. First manned mission, Apollo 7, carried three astronauts around earth for 11 days, verifying spacecraft operation before splashing down precisely on target. Mission included live TV transmission from space, largest number of inflight restarts of sps to date, and new record of 781 manhours in space. Apollo program climaxed Dec. 21—27 with highly successful six-day Apollo 8 mission on which three-man crew demonstrated operation of spacecraft systems in lunar environment while world watched live TV coverage via satellite. Spacecraft orbited moon 10 times, providing man with his first trip out of earth’s gravitational field and first look at moon’s far side and proving capability of crew, spacecraft, and support and control systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar-return velocity. Unmanned Surveyor VII, NASA’s first launch in 1968 and last spacecraft in Surveyor series, softlanded on moon, conducted on-site analyses of lunar soil, and took part in laser-detection communications experiment. Applications satellites launched included Intelsat—III F—2 comsat for ComSatCorp and Essa VII and VIII meteorological satellites for essa. Scientific achievements included orbiting of NASA’s Ogo V, Aao II, Explorer XXXVI, XXXVIII, XXXIX, and XL satellites and Naval Research Laboratory’s Explorer XXXVII. Oao II—heaviest and most complicated U.S. automated spacecraft ever launched—took first UV photos of stars, returning previously unobtainable data. Explorer XXXVI was successfully used by gsfc as target in first daylight operational laser tracking. Pioneer IX, launched into solar orbit, carried Tetr II pickaback and ejected it into earth orbit where it served as tracking target for nasa’s Manned Space Flight Network. Some 157 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—II spacecraft was launched on suborbital mission to obtain data on radio attenuation during reentry. X—15 rocket research aircraft made 13 flights, ending its flight program with 199 missions, including 154 at mach 4 or greater, 109 at mach 5 or above, and 4 at greater than mach 6. NASA—usaf flight research continued with 13 flights of XB—70 supersonic aircraft, usaf’s C—5A, world’s largest military cargo aircraft, made its maiden flight and three of the aircraft completed 31 flights for 88-hr total flying time. Design of sst was reevaluated and program was delayed until new fixed-wing design was selected, with prototype construction expected to begin in 1969. nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 12 successful glide flights and first powered flight. dod space program included orbiting of 8 IDCSP comsats, 1 Lincoln Experimental Satellite, 5 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, and 2 environmental research satellites; static test-firings of Titan III—M 1st stage; and near completion of mol launch complex at Vandenberg AFB. In joint NASA—aec effort, propulsion technology highlights included power tests of Phoebus 2A nuclear reactor, first tests of cold-flow test engine in flight configuration in new test stand, and first test-firings of Pewee 1 fuel element test-bed reactor. U.S.S.R. launched 74 payloads, including 64 Cosmos satellites, 1 Luna, 1 Proton, 3 Zond, and 2 Soyuz spacecraft, and 3 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz III rendezvoused but did not dock with unmanned Soyuz II launched one day earlier. Unmanned Zond V and VI completed circumlunar flights and were recovered. Zond IV circled moon and apparently crashlanded. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully made 38-min maiden flight. (Pres Rpt 68; NASA Release 68-219; B Sun, 1/18/69, 28; Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; upi, W Star, 1/1/69 A7)
In 12-yr NASA-sponsored experiments with roosters spinning at 130 rpm up to 15 mo on double-deck centrifuge, Univ. of California’s Davis Chronic Acceleration Laboratory gravity experts had noted possible adverse effects of long-term weightlessness on astronauts. Without steps to counter effects, “man in space for long periods will find his body decalcified,” said Dr. Arthur H. Smith. “He will not be able to stand up without fracturing bones. All his muscles will shrivel up including those around his blood vessels. He will be overloaded with fat which he may not be able to use.” Among methods being developed to offset disturbances to human body in space were drugs which stabilized proper balance of red cells and steroids which helped maintain calcium metabolism. Roosters were used in tests since their upright posture, heart-to-head distance, and circulatory systems were similar to man’s. (Hillin-ger,W Post, 9/19/68, Gil)
In Washington Evening Star, David Lawrence asked, “What was really the big ‘miracle’ in the voyage of the American astronauts to the moon and back?” It could have happened, “and the rest of the world would not have witnessed the dramatic arrival of the astronauts aboard an aircraft carrier in the middle of the Pacific Ocean or the pictures sent from outer space for several days if it had not been for another great feat of science—transmission of television and radio from artificial satellites direct to every continent of the world.” (W Star, 12/30/68, A9)	_
Washington Post editorial noted total cost of space program to date was upwards of $20 billion: “The expenditure of sums of money like these cannot be justified in terms of the military or civilian spinoff, although both have been substantial, or of the knowledge we have gained about the atmosphere surrounding our planet. But they can be justified in terms of the national prestige that is to be won or lost in space and of the inevitable fate of man to pursue knowledge towards its ultimate end in hope of some day achieving a better understanding of what the earth and universe are all about. It is in this latter hope that we cheer the astronauts on, wish them well in their planned 163 orbits of the earth, pray for their safe return, and urge those who make the crucial decisions about the future space program to proceed with all deliberate speed to reach the goal President Kennedy put before us.” (W Post, 10/12/68, A12)
Library of Congress had acquired from former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., The John Glenn Papers, 90,000 items representing national and international response to his first manned space flight, Feb. 20, 1962. Majority of letters covering 1962—64 were from ordinary citizens, largely elementary school children. Other items included subject files, space manuals, news clippings, scrapbooks, invitations, certificates, awards, maps, and charts which Library’s Information Bulletin said “reflect the contemporary need for a popular hero—one who can be held up to the young and who at the same time must undergo the rigorous pressures brought about by ‘instant’ fame and worldwide recognition.” Papers provided “many insights into contemporary social history.” Glenn had been asked for his opinion on every conceivable topic. (Sifton, LC Info Bull, 8/29/68)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong ejected and parachuted to safety from NASA’s $2.5-million Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) while flying simulated lunar landing at Ellington afb, Tex. Vehicle, which had reached 500-ft altitude* crashed and burned on impact. Cause of accident was unknown. (C Trib, 5/7/68; B Sun, 5/7/68; msc Roundup, 5/10/68, 1)
Television sequences showing Apollo 7 astronauts working in spacecraft as it passed Corpus Christi, Tex., and Cape Kennedy, Fla.—as well as shots of terrain more than 130 mi below and views of anything interesting in space would be telecast by three major U.S. networks “live” Oct. 12 through Oct. 19, nasa said. Pictures would be transmitted from camera in space capsule to msc for instant showing over TV networks. Neither launch day nor splashdown day would be included in 11 am to 12 pm series. (Kirkman, W News, 9/24/68, 7)
Polish noncommunist party newspaper Zycie Wrszawy said of Apollo 8 crew: “We were all with them during those five days. . . . We congratulate them heartily. At such a time we do not think about politics and we forget about the country from which they come.” Paper also said, “Only a few changes would be enough for the monstrous rocket to carry a nuclear warhead into orbit instead of astronauts.” (upi, C Trib, 12/29/68)
NASA named five-man board with counsel to investigate crash of Lunar Landing Research Vehicle piloted by Astronaut Neil Armstrong at Ellington afb, Tex., May 6. Board would determine probable cause of accident, identify and evaluate corrective actions, and evaluate implication for llrv and lunar module design and operations. (NASA Release 68-90)
New York Gov. Nelson B. Rockefeller announced Apollo 8 astronauts had accepted invitation to come to New York for special day of observance Jan. 10. (Fox, NYT, 1/1/69, 1)
Army Map Service technicians were building 22- by 14-ft hand-carved model of landing site astronauts would see on approaching lunar “target area,” to assist NASA in simulating manned landings on moon. Model, part of lunar module simulator (lms), would be constructed from high-fidelity lunar relief map made from Orbiter IV and V photography. (dod Release 966—68)
Apoilo 7 and 8 flight crews sign memorial document for White House Treaty Room. Signers are Heft to right): Astronaut!, R, Walter Cunningham, Donn F. Eisele, Walter M. Sckirra, Jr. (Apollo 7); William A. Anders, James A. Lovell, Jr^ and Frank Borman (Apollo 8). Standing are Charles A. Lindbergh (ioho also signed), Mrs. Johnson, President Lyndon B. Johnson, retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb, and Vice President Hubert H, Humphrey. dons would be made by land surface stations 300 mi apart throughout world with exception of desert areas. Further data would be passed on by weather ships, upper-air sea stations, aircraft, and meteorological satellites. (W Star, 12/9/68, A8) Committee claimed single entity could make more balanced investment choice on whether to lay more cables or launch satellites and would eliminate need for duplicate transmission facilities. Conclusions were challenged in dissenting footnote to report by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC, who said merger would inhibit development of satellite technology and reduce technological competition between cables and satellites that could result in lower rates. Report also would recommend informal merger of postal and telegraph services, with Western Union Telegraph Co. permitted to operate in post offices; relaxation of fcc restrictions on cable TV to protect broadcasters; and Government sponsorship of experimental program to test TV’s usefulness in assisting minority groups. (Finney, NYT, 12/9/68, 1; 12/10/68, 1; Aug., W Star, 12/12/68, A13)
Chicago Tribune said, “Now that Apollo 8 and its three astronauts are home from their historic trip around the moon, we can safely call it one of the most memorable Christmas gifts ever given to the American people and mankind.” (C Trib, 12/28/68, 12)
nasa issued Management Instruction establishing Committee on ExtraVehicular Activities (eva), activities performed in space by astronaut outside space vehicle. Seven-member committee, serving for two-year period, would provide Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight with recommendations on overall NASA eva planning and development by: identifying eva capabilities which must be defined and developed to support manned space flight activities; identifying ground-based, orbital, and lunar surface experiments to establish required eva capabilities; providing recommendations on short- and long-term EVA program plans; reviewing proposed eva flight experiments and making recommendations; and maintaining awareness of EVA-related activities of organizations other than NASA, (nmi 1152.36)
usaf experiments in human reactions to extreme heat had indicated astronauts could survive reentry through earth’s atmosphere if their cabin cooling system failed. In tests at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, airmen were being subjected to 300°F and 400°F heat in four-foot-high oven three times daily. Some could stand up to 15 min at 300°F; limit at 400°F had been two or three minutes. (AP, LA Times, 8/6/68)
Apollo 7 Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received Kitty Hawk Memorial Trophy for distinguished achievement in aeronautics at annual Wright Brothers memorial banquet in Beverly Hills, Calif. Banquet commemorated 65th anniversary of flight of Kitty Hawk, (upi, W Star, 12/7/68, A2)
Denver Post editorial: “With the goal of the project—landing of men on the moon by 1970—so close at hand, it would be sad indeed if NASA lost some key people now because of budget and morale problems. . . . There are future manned flights and space experiments to consider, and these will surely be crippled at infancy if NASA’s budget is cut back too severely.” {Denver Post, 6/24/68) In keynote address Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, noted no other program had given such impetus to technological and economic growth as national space program. “Those who oppose adequate spending on space technology are deliberately or inadvertently campaigning for a lower standard of living for our people, a declining Gross National Product for our Nation, and a secondary position in strength to that of the Soviet Union.” U.S. investment in space to date, he said, “has mostly been an investment in the future, the returns of which can be lost in large measure if we lack the vision and the vigor and the desire to keep this country great by maintaining a vigorous space effort. “Every major power and every nation eager to raise its standard of living and world influence strives to participate in space technology and space exploration. It certainly would be ironic if the United States, as the world’s leader in international cooperation and the world’s leader in standard of living, were to abandon or even neglect the source of such strength. I believe it might be labeled the worst mistake in history.” (Text; CR, 6/24/68, E5775—6; SBD, 6/25/68, 267; Aero Daily, 6/25/68) Gen. James Ferguson, AFSC Commander, said bioastronautics problems and provisions could have serious impact on mission performance, space station design, cost, and operations. Principal problems included those of crew rotation, crew size, compartment volume per crew member, radiation exposure, versatility of astronauts, station atmosphere, and prolonged weightlessness. In one study, savings from doubling crew rotation intervals from 30 to 60 days ranged from $220 million to $470 million per year, depending on altitude. Savings from increasing from 60 to 90 days were another $100 million a year. For same cost, slightly longer interval could support two more astronauts. Crew rotation intervals of two or more months should he goal. “If a future station can be expected to be useful over a period of many years and its cost can be amortized accordingly . . . efforts to achieve long crew rotation intervals have a very large potential payoff.” (Text; Aero Daily, 6/28/68) Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, described 100-man orbital workshop that could be operational by late 1970s. Proposed 615-ft-long, 1-million-lb vehicle, carrying 10,000 lb of experiments, would be launched in three separate parts by three Saturn V boosters and assembled in space. Baton-shaped station would revolve around hub in center which would serve as spaceport and zero-gravity laboratory. Crew would live and perform some work in 240-ft arm on one side of hub. On other side, 375-ft arm would house engine which would spin entire station at 3.5 rpm, creating centrifugal force to serve as artificial gravity. (Maloney, H Post, 6/26/68; AP, W Star, 6/26/68; CSM, 6/28/68) Arthur C. Clark, co-author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, suggested that most earth inhabitants could not be very objective about possibility of extraterrestrial life because they were too “geocentrically minded,” still considering earth the center of the universe. “The whole history of astronomy teaches us to be cautious of any theory purporting to show that there is something special about the earth. In their various ways, the other planets may have orders of complexity as great as ours. Even the moon—which looked a promising candidate for geophysical simplicity less than a decade ago—has already begun to unleash an avalanche of surprises. “The discovery that Jupiter is quite warm and has precisely the type of atmosphere in which life is believed to have arisen on earth may be the prelude to the most significant biological findings of this century.” If we discover no trace of extraterrestrial life, he said, “even such a negative finding would give us much sounder understanding of the conditions in which living creatures are likely to evolve—and this in turn would clarify our views on the distribution of life in the universe as a whole.” (Leavitt, AF/SD, 8/68, 59-62)
International comment on Apollo 8 mission:	, In statement distributed by Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., Boris Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, hailed “hardware” and “courage” of Apollo 8 astronauts but called attention to “considerable accent” placed on “automatic devices” in Soviet space program. He said, “The Soviet Union is engaged in a large-scale program of planned studies and exploration of outer space, which provides for the investigation of the earth’s upper atmosphere and of near-earth outer space and studies of sun-earth relationships and of our closest space neighbors—the moon, venus and mars, and later, on more remote planets.” Cuban National Radio called mission “a total success.” Toss: “Due tribute should be paid to the courage and mastery of Frank Borman, William Anders and James Lovell who have accomplished this outstanding scientific and technical experiment. The successful flight of Apollo 8 ushers in a new stage in the history of space exploration.” Ten Soviet cosmonauts telegraphed Apollo crew congratulations for “another milestone in scientific and technical progress.” Pope Paul VI, in message to President Johnson: “Giving thanks to God for the successful completion of the magnificent enterprise of the Apollo 8 mission, we congratulate you and the people of the United States of America and particularly the intrepid space travelers, and invoke divine blessing upon all contributing to this noble achievement.” U.N. Secretary General U Thant: “The powerful thrust of the rocket engines, the awesome speeds attained in flight, the vast distances traveled, the precision of navigation and the fidelity of communications, aural and visual, all stagger the imagination and defy the comprehension of man.” Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia: “a great milestone in man’s continued search of the unknown.” Gov. Gen. Roland Michener of Canada, in message to President Johnson: Canadians had followed astronauts’ flight with “admiration for their courage and the technical skill of all who have a part in the enterprise.” Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan to President Johnson: feat showed America’s “courage and the high level of scientific technology.” In Kaduna, Nigeria, New Nigerian said Apollo 8, “Apart from being the supreme technological achievement ... of all time,” was “another exciting chapter in man’s eternal quest to triumph over his own natural environment.” Same skills and resources which were helping to conquer space ’’could easily be diverted to giving man a better life on earth itself—if only all of us would allow the good that is inherent in all mankind to assert itself.” (AP, B Sun, 12/28/68, 1; New Nigerian, 12/27/68, 1)
nasa released plans for lunar landing experiments. First LJ.S. astronauts to land on moon in 1969 would place three scientific experiments on lunar surface instead of more complex Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) originally planned. Change was necessitated by uncertainties in workload required to deploy ALSEP by astronauts in pressurized suits on moon’s surface. Mission’s primary objective would be to prove Apollo system by achieving successful moon landing and safe return to earth. During first landing, two astronauts would leave spacecraft for up to three hours on moon’s surface, making observations and photographing area in vicinity of landed spacecraft, collecting soil and rock samples, and deploying experiments. Scientific and medical data would be obtained on expenditure of astronauts’ energy, monitoring ability to perform in vacuum, extreme temperature, and 1/6 gravity for planning of longer, more complex missions. Experiments were (1) passive seismometer (self-contained 100-lb seismic station with earth-moon communications link, designed to last up to one year), (2) 70-lb laser ranging retro-reflector, and (3) 1-Ib solar-wind-composition experiment. They would provide data on internal activity of moon; would provide data to improve measurement of earth-moon distance, fluctuation of earth’s rotation rate, and variations in gravitational constant G, as well as to test theory of intercontinental drift by direct measurements from different continents; and would entrap noble gases (helium, neon, krypton, xenon) from solar wind for analysis. In second lunar landing mission, astronauts would deploy full geophysical station or alsep and conduct detailed field geology investigation. (nasa Release 68-200)
Associated Press quoted Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair, who was instrumental in having prayer removed from U.S. public schools, as saying she would register complaints with NASA against reading by Apollo 8 astronauts of portions of Genesis during lunar orbit and would organize mail campaign to bar prayer from space. (AP, W Post, 12/28/68, A9)
Apollo 7 prime and backup crews successfully completed egress test at ksc. Astronauts performed both aided and unaided egress from spacecraft under simulated emergency conditions. At MSC three astronauts completed five-day vacuum chamber tests in spacecraft similar to command and service modules to be flown on second manned Apollo mission and lunar flights, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 9/10/69)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent five hours in briefings at ksc, ascending to spacecraft level of Apollo 8 moon rocket, performing simulated rendezvous and formation flying inside mock spacecraft, and lunching with NASA officials and Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. During visit, he said: “The space program has contributed greatly to the structure of our nation. ... I have felt it has been underfunded at times and we will pay the price. I feel it is a wise investment on the part of Congress and the public. I’ll do what I can as a private citizen and a former chairman of the space council to see it is funded.” (ksc Release ksc—496—68; AP, W Star, 11/20/68, A8; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, Cl; Today, 11/20/68, 1) _
Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved space rescue treaty providing for rescue and recovery of astronauts down in foreign lands. U.S.S.R. had given final approval along with 73 other nations. (AP, NYT, 9/25/68, 17; WSJ, 9/25/68, 1; upi, W Post, 9/25/68, A6)
History of lunar nomenclature and tradition in naming lunar features was reviewed by Director of Fels Planetarium, Dr. I. M. Levitt, in Air Force and Space Digest. Knowledge from space research had created complications for specialists who had to name lunar features. In past, craters, mountains, rills, and seas on moon had heen named for scientists, mathematicians, and philosophers. In 1647, Johannes Hevelius had published Selenographica in Danzig, setting stage for naming lunar features. Ground rules were set down in 1932 hy International Astronomical Union (iau) , which formed committee of astronomers to select names. U.S.S.R. had asked 1967 General Assembly of iau to pass on 153 more names for features on moon’s hidden side. Levitt recommended that names of dead astronauts—both American and Russian—be accepted for lunar nomenclature; later, living astronauts could be similarly honored. Also pioneers in space research—“such as Goddard, von Braun, Gilruth, Newell, Ley, Lovelace, Flickinger, Stehling, and so on” —and astronomers and; benefactors of mankind could be considered. (.AF/SD, 1/68, 66-9)
President Johnson presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest award, to recently retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb at ceremony in Johnson City, Tex. He also awarded cluster to NASA Exceptional Service Medal held by Apollo 7 commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Exceptional Service Medals to Apollo 7 Astronauts R. Walter Cunningham and Donn F. Eisele. President said U.S. was “ready to take that first great step out into the solar system and on to the surface of the nearest of the many mysterious worlds that surround us in space.” Noting that Apollo 7 had logged more than 780 man-hours in space—more than had been logged “in all Soviet manned flights to date”—and had accomplished 56 mission objectives, as many “in this one flight as were accomplished in the first five manned flights of the Gemini spacecraft,” he said: “This is not important as either a game or a contest. But it is important because the United States of America must be first in technology if it is to continue its position in the world. I believe today, as I did when we had our original hearings that created the Space Administration, that the United States must be first.” President read citation, presenting Medal to Webb for “outstanding leadership of America’s space program from 1961 to 1968. . . . More than any other individual he deserves the credit for the great achievements of the United States in the first decade of space, and for helping man to reach outward toward the stars.” Webb responded: “The citation and medal . . . should, in my view, be converted into some kind of holographic substance so it could be divided into thousands of parts . . . and each part should really go to an outstanding person in NASA, in our scientific group, Working in our universities, and in the great industrial organizations of this country that have really done the work.” (Transcript; Citation; PD, 11/8/68, 1568-71)
Senate unanimously approved space rescue treaty, providing for rescue and return of astronauts downed on foreign soil. It had been signed by '75 nations. (CR, 10/8/68, S12215-6; AP, B Sun, 10/9/68, A10)
President Johnson announced promotion of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders (Maj., usaf) to lieutenant colonel under his policy of granting one-grade promotion to military astronaut after his first successful space mission. (Maynard, W Post, 12/29/68, A4; PD, 1/6/69, 5)
Slide-wire escape way, 1,200-ft-long, from 215-ft level to ground at ksc Complex 34 was declared man-rated following tests by five dummies and five men. Slide wire was designed as last means of escape from ton of Saturn IB gantry for astronauts and close-out crews if emergency should shut off other routes. (Spaceport News, 9/12/68,1)
U.S.S.R. announced through Tass successful completion of experiment in which three researchers spent from Nov. 5, 1967, to Nov. 5, 1968, in isolated chamber consisting of living compartment and greenhouse linked to outside world by videotelephone. Purpose of experiment was to test man’s ability to live in isolation for year, using water and oxygen regenerated from waste products and dehydrated food supplemented by greenhouse-grown vegetables; study effects of various factors on human organism and establish optimum conditions for long isolation; and evaluate effectiveness of self-contained life-support systems based on regeneration of waste products. Daily requirements of astronauts on long voyage included 700 g of food, 2.4 kg of drinking water plus 5.5 kg of water for other purposes, and 800 g of oxygen, amounting to 11 tons of supplies for one-year space voyage. Report said there were no significant changes in body weight and temperature of experimenters except one lost eight to nine pounds before his weight stabilized in five to six months. Electrocardiogram remained unchanged and no dehydration was observed. Pulse and respiration rates had fluctuated before assuming lower level than at start of experiment. Researchers Gherman A. Manovtsev, Andrey N. Bozhko, and Boris N. Ulybshev were reported in good health at conclusion of experiment. (Shabad, NYT, 12/25/68, 38)
usaf test pilot Maj. William J. Knight was named 1968 winner of Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy as “world’s outstanding pilot for exceptional individual piloting performance.” He had piloted X—15 No. 2 to 4,520 mph Oct. 3, 1967. Maj. Knight held both command pilot and usaf astronaut’s command wings, having piloted research aircraft to 280,000-ft altitude. (NYT, 10/20/68, 84; CSM, 10/21/68)
NASA announced that sinus condition that was aggravated by pressure changes and had not responded to treatment led to grounding—perhaps permanently—of Astronaut John S. Bull. Astronaut Robert A. R. Parker had suffered spine fracture during parachute training at Williams afb, Ariz., but injuries were not thought to be serious. (AP, B Sun, 5/16/68, A3; W Star, 5/16/68; H Post, 5/16/68, 8)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary. In preparation for first manned Apollo flight, Apollo 7 spacecraft command module (cm) and service module (sm) had been mated in ksc altitude chamber to confirm compatible operation systems. Saturn IB launch vehicle 2nd-stage engine was being modified to strengthen propellant feed lines to augmented spark igniter. Apollo/Saturn 503 mission might be first manned Saturn V flight. Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle had successfully completed eight-day vacuum chamber test of Apollo 2TV—1 cm and sm at msc June 24. All tests necessary to help verify Apollo for first manned flight had been completed, with review of test data in progress. Last of seven scheduled verification tests of modified Apollo earth landing system had been postponed to complete analysis of all possible test conditions before drop of 13,000-lb full-scale Apollo cm from aircraft at Naval Air Facility, El Centro, Calif. Test would simulate severe landing condition using one of two drogue parachutes and two of three main parachutes. Ultimate load test of two modified Apollo drogue parachutes in reefed condition was scheduled no earlier than June 27. Repeat of unsuccessful test, it would be conducted from 13,00-lb parachute test vehicle at aircraft altitude of 46,000 ft. (Text; upi, W Post, 6/22/68, A8; SBD, 6/25/68, 270; 6/27/68, 285)
nasa’s 10th anniversary was celebrated with appropriate fanfare, but the 11th anniversary of the Space Age, which came during the same week, slipped by with barely a nod of recognition,” James J. Haggerty, Jr., charged in Armed Forces Journal. “It should have been given more attention. The U.S. needs a continual reminder that we were dragged kicking and screaming into space exploration, that the U.S. space program was born only out of reaction to the accomplishments of another nation. . . . “The summary for 11 years of space launchings shows a total of 881 launches through the Oct. 4 anniversary date. About 400 of all the spacecraft launched still are in orbit. “The U.S. enjoyed a considerable quantitative lead at the end of the 11-year period. It sent into orbit 564 spacecraft, or 64% of the total, compared with 298 spacecraft, or 33%, for the USSR. . . . “Manned flights, of course, were confined to the U.S. and the USSR. Through the anniversary date the U.S. had launched 14 flights involving 24 astronauts and 1,993 man-hours; the USSR had made nine flights with 12 cosmonauts piling up 532 man-hours.” (AFJ, 10/12/68, 13)
John N. Wilford described in New York Times front page article decline in U.S. space expenditures since 1966: “Under pressure from the war in Vietnam, civilian space spending has dropped from $5.9-billion in the peak year of 1966 to $4.8-billion this year, and it is expected to drop much lower in the fiscal year starting in July. Employment in space work at private companies, universities and Government centers has declined from 420,000 in 1966 to fewer than 300,000 today, and it is still dropping at the rate of 4,000 a month.” Signs of decline were clearly visible, in “ghost towns” that were once test sites, and in removal of numerous projects from NASA’s post-Apollo plans. Fortunately, impact of cutback was softened because NASA had not replaced many personnel who ordinarily left agency each year and because personnel dismissed were absorbed by growing aircraft industry and expanding military space program. But there was a growing feeling “that once astronauts have landed on the moon, they will have no other place of significance to go for several years because of sharp budget cuts. These cuts have trimmed to the bone all preparations for future missions. It is as if the astronauts are heading for a dead-end on the moon.” (NYT, 4/16/68, 1)
New York Times editorial on U.S.S.R.’s Zond V mission: “Until the nation [U.S.] has a better idea of the progress achieved during this long interval between American manned flights, it is premature to conclude that the Russians have a significant over-all lead in space capability and that Soviet citizens will certainly paint their flag on the lunar surface before American astronauts. “In any event, as the Soviet rape of Czechoslovakia has recently reminded the world so dismayingly, a nation’s image and prestige depend primarily upon what it does here on earth, not on its feats in space.” (NYT, 9/23/68, 32)
Dr. Charles A. Berry. Director of Medical Research and Operations, msc, was elected 1969 President of Aerospace Medical Assn, at 39th Annual Meeting in Bal Harbour, Fla. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin was named honorary member, (msc Roundup, 5/24/68,1)
Entire thrust of Soviet space program pointed to circumlunar flight by cosmonauts before U.S., according to former astronaut Cdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn). Speaking at Beloit College symposium on oceanography, he predicted NASA might try to send crew around moon in autumn as counter to Soviet manned space spectacular. (Lewis, B News, 5/19/68)
nasa issued summary of combined findings of Accident Board and Review Board appointed to investigate May 6 accident which destroyed Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) at Ellington afb. Pilot, Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, had to eject few seconds after loss of helium pressure in propellant tanks caused premature shutdown of attitude control rocket system. Helium had been inadvertently depleted earlier than usual in flight. Armstrong incurred minor injuries. Review Board, appointed by then nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Thomas 0. Paine to study accident’s possible impact on Apollo program, discovered no unfavorable effects on lunar landing project, particularly lunar module. It agreed with Accident Investigation Board in calling for improvements in design and operating practices in LLRV and urged more stringent control over such flying programs and greater attention to all NASA lunar landing simulators, (nasa Release 68—182)
NASA investigation board reported that primary cause of Oct. 5, 1967, crash of T—38 jet trainer near Tallahassee, Fla., was “a jam in the lateral control system (ailerons) from unknown source.” Accident had claimed life of pilot, Astronaut Clifton C. Williams. Board recommended improvement in T—38 inspection procedures, (nasa Release 68-102; upi, W Post, 6/7/68, A2; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 6/7/68, A3)
NASA announced award of $7.4-million contract to Link Group, General Precision Systems, Inc., for maintenance and modification support of MSc’s simulator complex, continuing services provided by Link Group since March 1964. Apollo mission simulators, at msc and at ksc, had provided flight training for astronaut crews in which nearly every detail of flight except weightlessness could be simulated, (nasa Release 68—20).
nasa said it had reassigned management responsibility for Saturn I Workshop airlock module and modified lunar module ascent stage for Apollo Telescope Mount from msc to msfc, to establish satisfactory balance between Apollo Applications and Apollo programs. Move placed aa program design and integration responsibilities under single NASA center. Management responsibilities encompassed systems engineering, including development test and integration, to ensure compatibility of flight hardware and ground support equipment. Airlock module, mounted on Saturn IB vehicle, would provide 65-in-dia airlock tunnel for Apollo astronauts between spacecraft and living area of workshop inside hydrogen tank of rocket’s 2nd stage. Lunar module ascent stage was being modified as control station for ATM. AA program would further develop space capability in series of earth-orbital long-duration flights using Apollo hardware and other facilities, (nasa Release 68—159)
msfc awarded $49,985 nine-month study contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. to assess possible radiation damage to film used on atm to record solar activity and to consider radiation hazards to astronauts in Saturn I orbital workshop, (msfc Release 68—43)
essa was studying solar flare prediction technique and ground observatory support for NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount flight scheduled for 1971. NASA had transferred $30,000 to essa for six-month investigation to enable astronauts to know when and where solar flare would occur within accuracy of 1,000 mi out of 860,000-mi-wide face of sun. essa also would study data required for maximum results from atm mission and examine existing data collection networks and observing procedures. Effort would be monitored by atm Project Office and Space Sciences Laboratory at msfc. (msfc Release 68—103; SBD, 5/15/68, 73)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart were scheduled to be launched on Saturn V in second manned Apollo space flight. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 with Saturn IB booster, would carry Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham into earth orbit in third quarter of 1968. (nasa Release 68-81; W Star, 4/28/68)
In New York Times Walter Sullivan described “The Sun-Spot Menace to Astronauts.” Apollo 7 and U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz III served as reminders that sunspots were reaching their 11-yr peak. If eruptions were particularly severe, protons were hurled out at almost speed of light. These could penetrate spacecraft. While Apollo 7 astronauts were never in danger, Soviet spacecraft placed in orbits reaching north beyond latitude 51° might “nudge zone” within which protons ejected by sun “rain fiercely on the atmosphere.” Major flare had occurred Oct. 30 just after Soyuz III returned to earth. If astronauts had been in orbit —particularly if they had been outside spacecraft—they could have been subjected to hazardous radiation. Many warnings preceded this event. For moon journey it should be possible to postpone or cut short flight if sun looked ominous. In any miscalculation, radiation exposure to astronauts inside spacecraft would be severe only during most intense outbursts. However, on prolonged journeys to other planets there would be no escape. “It may therefore be necessary to design the spacecraft so that a portion of its interior will be shielded from such radiation.” (NYT, 11/10/68, 7E) Zond VI reentered and softlanded in a predetermined area in Central Asia Nov. 17. Unlike Zond V, which had plunged directly through upper atmosphere, Zond VI skipped across outer layers of atmosphere to reduce its reentry speed and then resumed its descent with aerodynamic forces. Announcing recovery, Tass said Zond VI had for first time tested a “more complex and promising method of the return of spacecraft from interplanetary trajectories—the method of controlled descent with the use of aerodynamical lifting force (aerodynamical quality) of the descending craft. . . . “The braking of the descending apparatus in the atmosphere . . . was effected along a trajectory with two immersions in the atmosphere. During the first immersion . . . the second cosmic speed ... [11 km per sec, 24,607 mph] was reduced to 7.6 kilometers a second (17,000 mph) through aerodynamical braking. In doing so, the descending apparatus . . . was oriented through the onboard control system in such a way that it, passing through the dense layers of the atmosphere, left them and next continued along the ballistic trajectory until the second immersion . . . [in which] the further lowering of the descending apparatus was also effected along the trajectory of controlled descent with the use of aerodynamical qualities which ensured its return to the Earth in the pre-set district.” Zond VI was sixth spacecraft in Zond series [see Sept. 15—21]. (AP, W Star, 11/11/68, 1; NYT, 11/15/68, 8; gsfc SSR, 11/15/68, 11/30/68; Winters, B Sun, 11/19/68, 1; Kamm, NYT, 11/19/68, 1; SBD, 11/19/68, 71-2)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
John Lannan in Washington Evening Star called GSFC “home base” for Apollo 7 astronauts. All their communications would pass through Center. Communicating with some or all lunar spacecraft would be 14 land stations, 4 ships, and 8 aircraft around the world, manned by 4,000 persons. All circuits used would be put together from GSFC switching centers. Except for astronaut’s electrocardiagram and his voice, all mission data would be channeled in digital form, which meant vast bulk of detail controlling system itself, in addition to mission data from Houston or spacecraft, could be handled rapidly by computers. (W Star, 9/2/68,1)
Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin was uninjured when faulty landing gear on T—33 jet trainer forced belly landing at Ellington AFB, Tex. (AP, W Star, 8/16/69, A2)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders, Apollo 8 astronaut, told Western Conference of Young Presidents’ Organization in Phoenix, Ariz., that U.S. lost $13 billion each year in agricultural production from insects, disease, and fire. Use of satellite sensors could improve surveys of agricultural and forest resources, aid mineral and petroleum prospecting, obtain better inventory of earth’s water sources, detect natural and man-made geography changes, sense ocean currents and temperatures to aid fishing industry and improve routing of commercial shipping, and study effects of environmental and water pollution. While NASA space expenditures were averaging about $4.5 billion annually— about 2/3 of 1% of GNP—nearly $4 billion was spent in U.S. for nondurable toys and sport supplies, $4.7 billion for foreign travel, and over $6.5 billion in amusements. Anders urged international harmony through space. “We travel through space on a small planet. The Earth looked so tiny in the heavens that there were times during the Apollo 8 mission when I had trouble finding it. If you can imagine yourself in a darkened room with only one clearly visible object, a small blue-green sphere about the size of a Christmas tree ornament, then you can begin to grasp what the Earth looks like from space. I think all of us subconsciously think the Earth is fiat or at least almost infinite. Let me assure you that, rather than a massive giant, it should be thought of more as the fragile Christmas tree ball which we should handle with considerable care. . . . From space, the earth is indivisible. There are no flags, no national boundaries. Let us on Earth then use the Communications Revolution to break down the barriers which separate us, so that all of Earth’s people will be truly brothers.” (CR, 10/6/69, E8190—2; nasc pio) *. Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and wives arrived at Las Palmas, Canary Islands, for two-day rest before proceeding to Madrid and meeting with Gen. Francisco Franco during 38-day goodwill tour. (AP, NYT, 10/6/69)
Apollo 12 prelaunch press conferences were held at ksc and msc. Operations were proceeding as planned toward launch from ksc at 11:22 am est Nov. 14. Astronauts were in good health and weather was expected to be within minimums for launch. Liquid-hydrogen tank that had leaked Nov. 12 had been replaced, liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been loaded, and conditions were all go. Launch azimuth had been expanded to 160° to provide 120 min additional time for liftoff and greater opportunity for launch on Nov. 14. (Transcript)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman received gold medal for “distinguished service to humanity” from National Institute of Social Sciences in New York. Institute President Frank Pace, Jr., said, “The great scientific adventure in which you extend the reach of man cannot equal for us the moments in which you expanded the human spirit.” Borman replied, “The awesome power of today’s technology undoubtedly terrifies many social scientists. But far from subjugating man, I think this technology, if properly applied, is the only chance to preserve the dignity of human life.” (AP, W Star, 11/21/69, A2)
President Nixon sent telegram to Apollo 11 astronauts: “On the eve of your epic mission, I want you to know that my hopes and my prayers—and those of all Americans—go with you. Years of study and planning and experiment and hard work on the part of thousands have led to this unique moment in the story of mankind; it is now your moment and from the depths of your minds and hearts and spirits will come the triumph all men will share. I look forward to greeting you on your return. Until then, know that all that is best in the spirit of mankind will be with you during your mission and when you return to earth.” President also telephoned astronauts: “. . . as you lift off to the moon, you lift the spirits of the American people as well as the world. . . . You carry with you a feeling of good will in this greatest adventure man has ever taken. . . .” {PD, 7/21/69, 997)
MSFC announced award of eight-month identical $400,000 contracts to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. and Bendix Corp. for preliminary design and definition studies of dual-mode lunar roving vehicles. DLRV would provide mobility for one astronaut on lunar surface and could be operated by remote control from earth while making automated, long-range traverses of large lunar areas. DRLV would be delivered to moon aboard Apollo lm. After astronauts left, it would be placed in remote control for geological and geophysical trips of 600 mi or more for one year, during which it would collect up to 200 lbs of lunar samples and measure lunar terrain. It would then rendezvous with manned spacecraft and transfer samples for return to earth for analysis. (msfc Release 69-110)
Astronaut Prank Borman repeated Apollo 8 reading from Genesis at White House service attended by President and family, Vice President, Cabinet members, Congressmen, and members of Joint Chiefs of Staff, and of diplomatic corps. During sermon, Dr. Paul S. Smith, President of Whittier College and member of Religious Society of Friends, said: “It was a philosopher . . . who, two thousand years ago, first recounted a voyage to the moon. Lucian called it The True History but confessed in the preface that he wrote ‘of things which are not and never could have been.’ It was a political satirist’s precautionary disclaimer because his real subject was the stupidity of human warfare. His lunar voyagers got caught up in internecine strife between the moonmen and the sunmen over the colonization of Venus! If there is something instructive in the thought, it may be the implication that after two millennia of philosophy men are still fighting over real estate and still dying in the name of philosophical abstractions, but that a voyage to the moon is just as feasible (though somewhat more expensive) as a trip to Timbuktu.” (Wiegers, W Post, 1/21/69, Bl; CR, 7/22/69, H6189—90)
In inaugural address following his taking oath of office as President of U.S., Richard M. Nixon said: “Those who would be our adversaries, we invite to a peaceful competition;—not in conquering territory or extending dominion, but in enriching the life of man. As we explore the reaches of space, let us go to the new worlds together—not as new worlds to be conquered but as a new adventure to be shared. . . . Only a few short weeks ago, we shared the glory of man’s first sight of the world as God sees it, as a single sphere reflecting light in the darkness. As the Apollo astronauts flew over the moon’s gray surface on Christmas Eve, they spoke to us of the beauty of Earth—and in that voice so clear across the lunar distance, we heard them invoke God’s blessing on its goodness. In that moment, their view from the moon moved poet Archibald MacLeish to write:
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced 1969 recipients of National Medal of Science, Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science, mathematics, and engineering, including: Purdue Univ. chemist Herbert C. Brown, for “discovery and exploration of hydroboration reaction and for developing it into a major and powerful tool in chemical synthesis”; Princeton Univ. mathematician William Feller, “for original and definitive contributions to pure and applied mathematics, for making probability available to users, and for pioneering work in establishing Mathematical ReviewsJack S. C. Kilby, Texas Instruments Inc., for “original conceptions and valuable contributions in the production and application of integrated circuits”; and Wolfgang K. fi. Panofsky, Director of Stanford Univ. Linear Accelerator Center, for “classic experiments probing the elementary particles of matter and for contributions to advancing the means of experimentation in this challenging field.” {PD, 1/5/70, 10-1) During December: NASA issued Apollo 11: Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP—214), summarizing scientific findings of first manned lunar landing mission July 16—24. In foreword Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “The concept of traveling across the vastness of space to new worlds has stirred the imagination of men everywhere. . . . The success of this mission has opened new fields of exploration and research . . . which will lead to a greater understanding of our planet and provide a new insight into the origin and history of the solar system.” Report included photographic review of Apollo 11 mission with observations by crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Descriptions of geologic setting of lunar material, soil mechanics investigation, passive seismic experiment, laser ranging retroreflector, and solar wind composition experiment were provided by principal investigators. In addition to major findings reported Sept. 15 in summary by NASA Preliminary Examination Team (pet), SP—214 reported passive seismic experiment package deployed on moon had operated satisfactorily for 21 days and had detected seismic signals from astronaut activity or lm motions. Whether actual lunar seismic events had been detected was uncertain. Laser reflector deployed on moon had been used as target for earth-based lasers and distance to moon had been measured to within four-mile accuracy. Future studies would be made on distance variation to study motion of moon and earth. Preliminary analysis had been made on part of aluminum foil and showed helium, neon, and argon; isotopic composition of each element had been measured. (Text; NASA Release 69—160)
During stop at Hickam AFB, en route to MSC from Apollo 11 splashdown, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman said it would be “helpful and hopeful for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to cooperate in space missions. He saw “indications” during his tour of U.S.S.R. that Russians would be interested, but “talk is cheap” and U.S.S.R. “is still supplying 85 per cent of the munitions to North Vietnam.” He said U.S. had gone “95 per cent of the way” toward promoting cooperation. It was up to U.S.S.R. to do the rest, (upi, NYT, 7/26/69, 12)
In Washington Post, Thomas O’Toole said nasa Administrator was “the last big Federal post President Nixon has left unfilled.” He asked, “Is it because he can’t find the man he wants? Is it because no man he wants wants the job? Or is Mr. Nixon playing with the possibility of appointing [Acting Administrator Thomas O.] Paine to the post of Administrator?” Washington “space watchers” felt job could not be kept vacant much longer, “if only because the program to land American astronauts on the moon is rapidly nearing its goal.” (W Post, 2/9/69, All)
Princeton Univ. scientists had observed sudden speedup in fastest and youngest pulsar, in heart of Crab Nebula, Walter Sullivan reported in New York Times. With second discovery of periodic phenomenon, astronomers had taken word “glitch” from electronic engineers and astronauts to describe sudden departure from normal pulsar behavior. {NYT, 12/8/69)
Apollo 10 mission would be launched from etr May 18 carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot), on eight-day lunar orbital mission. Final decision to fly mission as previously planned followed review of technical and operational data from ApoUo 9 (March 3—13). Mission would provide additional experience in combined system operation and, with exception of actual landing on lunar surface, was same as for lunar landing mission. While spacecraft circled moon at 69-mi (111.0km) altitude, Stafford and Cernan would separate lm from csm, pilot lm twice to within 10 mi (16.1 km) of preselected landing site, and return to csm. Crew would then make landmark sightings, take photos, and transmit live TV views of moon, earth, and spacecraft interior before returning to earth, (nasa Release 69—46)
Prearranged meeting at Paris Air Show between Apollo 9 Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart and Cosmonauts Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and Vladimir Shatalov and wives developed from brief technical exchange into what U.S. officials called an epic of all space meetings. After inspecting interior of Apollo 8 spacecraft and joining astronauts for drinks in VIP lounge at U.S. pavilion, cosmonauts escorted astronauts through U.S.S.R. pavilion, provided technical explanation of 1968 Soyuz missions, and entertained with vodka and caviar in Soviet trijet Yak-40 on display field and later in 500-passenger An-22. (NYT, 6/3/69, 78; AP, B Sun, 6/3/69, Al)
In telephone interview, evangelist and presidential religious adviser Billy Graham took issue with July 24 statement of President Nixon in welcoming Apollo 11 astronauts back to earth. Graham told upi, “. . . as a Christian, I would contend that there have been three much much greater days” than those of lunar landing and moon walk. They were first Christmas, day on which Christ died, and first Easter. While he did not wish to detract from “magnificent achievement,” he felt “President was speaking extemporaneously. And I’ve found from years of speaking extemporaneously that in the excitement and emotion of a moment, you don’t think through every statement you make.” Associated Press later quoted Graham as saying, “I know that President Nixon agrees that the greatest single event in history was the coming of Christ”; he was sure President Nixon meant moon walk was probably man’s greatest accomplishment. (W Post, 7/26/69, A10)
President and Mrs. Nixon watched Apollo 8 films at White House showing attended by Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Borman narrated. (Shelton, W Star, 1/31/69, Bl; PD, 2/3/69, 194)
Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and wife inspected container vessel American Astronaut in London and signed autographs for longshoremen. Mrs. Lovell had christened vessel in April. (Reuters, C Trib, 10/7/69)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said to press representatives in Houston he was “surprised and disappointed” by May 19 speech of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) suggesting slowdown in U.S. space program after lunar landing and exploration. “He is wrong,” Dr. Paine said. “The United States should not weakly yield technological supremacy in space to the Soviets. We should not ground our astronauts after Apollo.” He told press he did not want Apollo 10 astronauts in flight to moon to hear news of speech and would not include item in news reports sent up to spacecraft. (W Post, 5/21/69, A12)
Visiting Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov received Presidential pens and bronze inaugural medals from President Nixon .during brief stop at White House. Later they flew to msc, where they were honored at dinner by 30 astronauts. Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman showed cosmonauts NASA T—38 jet aircraft. (PD, 10/27/69, 1485; AP, W Star, 10/22/69, A3)
Lunar module was “first manned spacecraft ever built that’s not tough enough to survive a return to earth,” said Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post. Vehicle from which two astronauts would descend to moon’s surface in summer 1969 was 23 ft high, weighed 8,000 lbs, and carried 12 tons of propellant. It contained 25 mi of electrical wiring and more than a million parts, most of which had been designed “from scratch,” held together by 216,000 “pins.” Pin bent more than five degrees out of shape would have to be replaced. NASA had contracted for 15 LMs at total cost of $1.9 billion from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., which had taken six years to get it from drawing board to launch pad. (W Post, 2/9/69, B2)
Press conference on preliminary science results of Biosatellite III (launched June 28) was held at NASA Hq. Spacecraft, carrying male macaque monkey Bonny, had been launched on 30-day mission to investigate physiological problems during space flight but had been deorbited after 8% days when monkey’s condition deteriorated. John W. Dyer, Manager of Biosatellite Project Operations at arc, said all of automatically controlled functions performed “beautifully” after launch and spacecraft and instrumentation performed well throughout mission. “The animal was reported to be enthusiastically eating and drinking, and after four or five days, a routine operation capable of going the duration of on-board consumables was projected.” Clear data on Bonny and entire flight system were recorded at 16 stations in 180 intervals of 5 to 10 min each and good quality data were returned from onboard tape and film records recovered with capsule. Bonny remained alert until eighth day, providing much new information on cycles of sleep and wakefulness at zero g. Dr. W. Ross Adey of UCLA, principal experimenter, said one important discovery was alterations in circadian rhythms, daily rhythms in physiological functions. “At least it is clear that if there is not an actual prolongation of the rhythms there is a very significant phase shift so that the animal woke later and later each day.” Most interesting discovery about sleep patterns was that dream sleep, which constituted 20% of normal night’s sleep on earth and was characterized by rapid eye movements (rem), occurred in space. “It had never been clear in space whether man or animals have this REM sleep, and there is evidence that decreased gravitational inputs, or decreased inputs from the body will seriously disrupt it. So we were very interested to see that REM sleep in the monkey . . . that there was indeed a great deal of sleep of this rem type, and that it occurred in ... an intermediate stage of sleep.” One of first abnormalities noted in Bonny was pendular eye movement, swinging movement that occurred when vestibular mechanism in inner ear was disturbed. Fluid was moving in some fashion that might indicate pressure or cooling if it occurred on earth. “None of these conditions applied here. But the weightlessness would allow movements of the fluid which were probably unusual. . . . This is interesting because the Apollo astronauts who have now much more room to move around than in . . . the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft have . . . almost uniformly reported some degree of vestibular disturbances.” By eighth day, brain and body temperature and central venous pressure had dropped dangerously. Fluid loss by sweating and diuresis was high, apparently because of redistribution of blood in visceral pools from weightlessness. On recovery Bonny was semicomatose and his temperature was below 35°C. Immediate resuscitation measures with intravenous fluid were begun and monkey’s condition improved substantially. “The temperature came up to about 35.8, the heart rate stabilized, and the blood pressure came up. . . . And the animal was lifting his head . . . and making coordinated movements with all four limbs. And then quite suddenly, about twelve hours after recovery, a condition of ventricular fibrillation ensued. It came on very suddenly, and the heartbeat became totally disordered, And there was no recovery. This is a common occurrence in monkeys of this species when recovering from hypothermia . . . and death is almost a certainty.” Autopsy revealed 20% loss in body weight, much higher than 3%—8% reported for astronuats in early days of flights. Restraint, weightlessness, and decreased feedback from peripheral structures had decreased shivering response, and monkey had failed to respond to falling temperature with normal thermogenic response. Restraint and, particularly, weightlessness had led to pooling of blood in thorax and abdomen, raising central venous pressures and leading to loss of fluid through kidney and sweating. Dr. Adey said mission was “highly successful in revealing physiological effects of weightlessness in spite of the reduced duration of the experiment” and indicated “great value of carefully designed animal experiments in collection of important biomedical data relevant to manned flight.” Virtually every piece of information that could be drawn about manned space flight indicated similar changes in astronauts, though to smaller degree, he said. Scientists still did not know whether gravity was necessary for long-duration space flights. “Therefore, I think it is premature to consider the design of space platforms or the larger space stations until we know more from the biomedical point of view about what is absolutely necessary.” President’s Science Advisory Committee report to President Nixon, being printed, would say necessary biomedical basis for elaborate space platforms and space stations did not exist in NASA or in scientific community. (Transcript)
nasa released first of hundreds of photos and moving pictures taken by Apollo 10 crew. Pictures showed moon from variety of positions and csm as seen from LM. Photo of Triesneck Crater showed network of broad rifles which resembled tracks left by large snowballs rolled over snow-covered plain. Photo of Sea of Tranquility, prime landing site, had only few rugged features, including medium-sized Moltke Crater and Hypatia Rifle. Pictures showed striking resemblance to aerial photos of Antarctica. Films included scenes of moon taken from lm at pericynthian and of Astronaut John W. Young shaving in CSM. (AP, B Sun, 5/29/69, Al; W Post, 5/29/69, A4)
Creation of U.N. Space Institute was urged by Columbia Univ. law professor Richard N. Gardner in New York Times. It would be “center for the cooperative planning of space exploration in which all U.N. members would be invited to take part.” U.S. and U.S.S.R. could divide responsibilities for instrumented landings on different planets. There should be “United Nations Space Station” in outer space manned by astronauts from all U.N. nations and trained at U.N. Space Institute. It would gather information about solar system and universe and be used for practical earth applications. {NYT, 7/26/69, 24)
Investigating board headed by Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., reported primary cause of Dec. 8, 1968, crash of nasa’s lunar landing training vehicle (lltv) No. 1 was “that the vehicle entered a region of flight where aerodynamic moments overpowered the control system . . . such that attitude control was lost. The source of the control problem was not identified ... in time to add (use) a second control system which could have restored control capability.” Crash did not involve any malfunctions of systems. Adverse region of flight was entered because the aerodynamic limitations of lltv were not completely understood, wind conditions were insufficiently accounted for, and displays in lltv and support van Were inadequate for conditions. Board made 11 recommendations—including wind-tunnel tests to assess lltv aerodynamic characteristics—for improved safety, (nasa Release 69—87; AP, H Chron, 6/6/69)	.
President Johnson submitted to Congress report on U.S. Aeronautics and Space Activities for 1968. In transmittal message he wrote: “Our astronauts have now flown 18 manned space missions, during which they experienced 3,215 man hours in space flight. Together with the activities of the Soviet Union, this makes a total to date of 28 manned flights and 3,846 man hours in space. Through this investment we have obtained new products, services, and knowledge; we have enhanced our national security; we have improved our international relations; and we have stimulated our educational system. Our Nation is richer and stronger because of our space effort. I recommend that America continue to pursue the challenge of space exploration.” (Pres Rpt 68; CR, 1/17/69, H405, S524)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs to succeed Dixon Donnelly who had resigned in January. Nomination was submitted to Senate Dec. 2. (PD, 12/1/69, 1667; 12/8/69, 1702)
NASA released first photos taken by Apollo 12 astronauts on and near lunar surface, including color stills and 16-mm film showing solar eclipse, lm descent to moon, astronauts walking on moon, and lm separating from csm. Still photos showed closeup of Ocean of Storms, bleak, dull-gray area strewn with rocks and sprinkled with footprints and an astronaut inspecting Surveyor 111, with LM in background at top of crater rim. (AP, NYT, 11/28/69, 32)
Washington Sunday Star published Associated Press interview with Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations: While 4,514 hrs of weightlessness endured by U.S. astronauts in space had produced no serious medical problems, on moon “we will be placing men in an entirely new environment.” After four days of weightlessness, they would step onto surface where gravity field was one-sixth that of earth. At Mission Control Center in Houston, Dr. Berry would be watching Apollo 11 astronauts’ heart rate, oxygen consumption, and temperature of water that cooled spacesuits. Preflight physicals had enabled doctors to draw metabolic profile of each astronaut, including work capacity on earth at various heart rates, oxygen consumption, and body heat generated. “We know the heat production level which the portable life support system can handle without being overburdened. If it reaches that point for five minutes, we will tell the astronauts to stop and rest.” Because of spacesuits’ bulk astronauts would start with simple tasks and work up to tougher ones. Excitement could affect ability to sleep in four-hour rest period planned before lunar walk. “We might have to make a real-time decision on whether to give them a sleeping pill or perhaps a stimulant.” Apollo had taught one “amazing medical fact—that the loss of red-blood-cell mass apparently is caused by a pure oxygen atmosphere.” Results of using mixed nitrogen-and-oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft since January 1967 Apollo fire had indicated nitrogen apparently protected cells. (Benedict, AP, W Star, 7/13/69, A9)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman met in Moscow with Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and spent 40 min with U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny in talk which Borman said was “encouraging and beneficial” in efforts to achieve U.S.— U.S.S.R. cooperation in space. (AP, W Post, 7/10/69, A23)
At Smithsonian Institution ceremony attended by Apollo 11 astronauts, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, presented two-pound, gray, lunar rock of igneous, breccia type to Smithsonian Secretary, Dr. S. Dillon Riply, for Smithsonian collection. It would be sealed in nitrogen-filled container covered by three-foot glass bubble and displayed to public beginning Sept. 17 for indefinite period in Arts and Industries Building. At presentation, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., • said: “Every human being, every animal who has looked up into the heavens has seen that rock. It is a fortunate time for mankind to look up and be able to say, ‘here is the moon.’” (Smithsonian Release SI—150—69; Shelton, W Post, 9/17/69, Bl)
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., formally announced candidacy for Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate seat being vacated by Sen. Stephen M. Young (D-Ohio). (NYT, 12/12/69, 33) December 12; NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 80,000-ft altitude and mach 1.4 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of powered flight, 31st in series, was to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Konstantin P. Feoktistov, and Georgy T. Beregovy were among Soviet officials who met Astronaut Frank Borman and family on arrival at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo Airport at start of nine-day U.S.S.R. visit. Asked if Soviet cosmonaut might visit U.S., Borman said, “I’m sure that will be discussed. Cooperation in space activities is an important aspect of the space program.” Bormans breakfasted in Moscow and returned to airport for flight to Leningrad. Schedule called for visit to Zvezdny Gorodok—Star City—where cosmonauts lived and to space communications center in Crimea; nothing in program indicated visit to U.S.S.R. launching center at Baikonur in Kazakhstan. (AP, W Star, 7/2/69, A14)
Univ. of California’s Lick Observatory successfully recorded first hits on laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. Hits, which came after 2,000—3,000 unsuccessful attempts by Lick and Univ. of Texas’s McDonald Observatory, were made by Lick’s 120-in telescope — world’s second largest. Scientists fired 500 pulses with pure red beam of ruby laser. Each pulse lasted 15-20 billionths of a second, reached moon in 1.3 secs, and bounced back in same time. Target— 18-in-square panel of 100 three-faced prisms of fused silica—was hit about three-fourths of time, (gsfc Historian)
In Brussels, Astronaut Frank Borman and family attended dinner given in his honor at palace by King Baudouin and Queen Fabiola. Borman showed Apollo 8 film, (nasa Int Aff; AP, B Sun, 2/10/69)
At hearing on suit of atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair to ban broadcast of prayers by U.S. astronauts in space [see Aug. 16], U.S. Attorney Seagel Wheatley and NASA counsel asked dismissal of suit on grounds Mrs. O’Hair and her Society of Separationists lacked necessary legal standing to sue Government. Justice Dept. Attorney James Barnes said, “nasa has no plans to instruct astronauts what to say. The statements that the astronauts made are their own. . . . NASA has no intention of circumscribing . . . the astronauts’ rights in the free exercise of religion.” (upi, W Post, 11/25/69, A8)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., received Distinguished Service Medal at dod ceremony for service as Apollo 8 command module pilot. IW Post, 4/5/69, A7)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., dressed in full landing attire, rehearsed simulated lunar landing at msc for the 2 hrs 40 min they would spend walking and working on lunar surface in July. Astronauts practiced scooping rock and soil samples, unfurled umbrella-like antenna, and deployed seismometer to detect quakes and array of mirrors to serve as laser target for astronomers on earth. (Wilford, NYT, 4/19/69; upi, P Bull, 4/19/69)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins reported on Apollo 11 mission to joint session of Congress called in their honor. Astronaut Armstrong said: “Several weeks ago I enjoyed the warmth of reflection on the true meanings of the spirit of Apollo. I stood in the highlands of this Nation, near the Continental Divide, introducing to my sons the wonders of nature and pleasures of looking for deer and for elk. In their enthusiasm for the view they frequently stumbled on the rocky trails, but when they looked only to their footing, they did not see the elk. To those of you who have advocated looking high we owe our sincere gratitude, for you have granted us the opportunity to see some of the grandest views of the Creator. To those of you who have been our honest critics, we also thank, for you have reminded us that we dare not forget to watch the trail.” Astronaut Aldrin said: “Our steps in space have been a symbol of this country’s way of life as we open our doors and windows to the world to view our Successes and failures and as we share with all nations our discovery. The Saturn, Columbia, and Eagle, and the extravehicular mobility unit have proved . . . that this Nation can produce equipment of the highest quality and dependability. This should give all of us hope and inspiration to overcome some of the more difficult problems here on earth. The Apollo lesson is that national goals can he met where there is a strong enough will to do so.” Astronaut Collins said: “We have taken to the moon the wealth of this Nation, the vision of its political leaders, the intelligence of its scientists, the dedication of its engineers, the careful craftsmanship of its workers, and the enthusiastic support of its people. We have brought back rocks. And I think it is a fair trade. For just as the Rosetta stone revealed the language of ancient Egypt, so may these rocks unlock the mystery of the origin of the moon, of our earth, and even of our solar system,” Astronauts presented Congress with two U.S. flags which previously had flown over Senate and House of Capitol and had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (CR, 9/16/69, H7937—9)
Lee R. Scherer, Director of NASA’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, testifying on FY 1970 budget request before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described extravehicular activity (eva) planned for first lunar landing. Emerging on lunar surface, astronaut would acquire and seal bagful of surface material and place it in spacesuit pocket, inspect lm, and with geological tools, fill large sample container. Location would be photographed before and after sampling. Passive seismometer would be emplaced to measure “moonquakes” and permit estimates of moon’s internal structure for comparison with that of earth. Instrument, operated on solar power, would record and transmit lunar data to earth for about one year. Laser retroreflector would be emplaced to permit measurement of earth-to-moon distance and monitoring of distance variation. Measurements would be repeated several times daily for year or more and precise times determined by atomic clock. From data on relative motion of moon and earth and of each about own center of gravity, scientists could refine “knowledge of size and shape of the Moon, detect small movements that may occur between the Earth’s continents, and perhaps even test gravitational theories.” If time permitted, second sample return container would be filled more selectively, with greater effort to document and to pack samples individually. (Testimony)
Walter Rundell, Jr., of Iowa State Univ. Dept, of History described U.S. Government historical programs at National Convention of Southern Historical Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “NASA’s historical program began in 1959 under the leadership of Eugene M. Emme. Two years later Emme launched the official publications with his Aeronautics and Astronautics: An American Chronology of Science and Technology in the Exploration of Space, 1915—1960, This has been followed by similar annual chronologies and chronologies devoted to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo projects. Since 1966 the office has published several monographs, some written under contract by private scholars, rather than being undertaken by the permanent staff. A good example is This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, by Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander.” (Text) During October: The Atlantic commented on Apollo 11: “We enthusiastically join the rest of human kind in applauding the feat of the Apollo 11 astronauts and their NASA sponsors. It is an achievement far greater, even, than the construction and successful launchings of The Brick Moon, which happened in these pages exactly one hundred years ago.” Story, by Edward Everett Hale, had told of group of New Englanders who had constructed artificial moon of bricks and launched it into orbit to provide perpetual navigation aid for seamen. “So far as we can determine, the launching of The Brick Moon provoked considerably less public interest than the latest American lunar expedition.” (Atlantic, 10/69, 3)
Dept, of Interior announced grant of $100,225 for research into health, safety, and water pollution in coal mining operations. Island Creek Coal Co. would determine if miners equipped with self-contained breathing apparatus similar to astronauts’ could work efficiently in mines filled with nitrogen or other inert gas. (doi Release 17784-69)
In NASA-funded project U.S. Bureau of Mines was seeking way to get water and air from lunar rocks, build underground lunar shelters like mines, weld and melt lunar materials, and mine planets like Mars and Venus which might bear substances more valuable than those on moon, Associated Press said. First lunar mining would occur during Apollo 13 mission in March. Astronaut would bore 10-ft hole in lunar crust to determine what lay beneath and to test drill designed for NASA by Martin Corp. Scientists at U.S. Bureau of Mines research center in Bruceton, Pa., and at six other locations had been studying since 1965 possible use of lunar materials to build and support manned lunar station. Project Director Thomas C. H. Hutchinson had said, “Even if we found pure platinum on the moon, it would cost too much to bring it back.” Goal was to establish manufacturing processes on moon to speed exploration of planets. (AP, W Post, 11/20/69, A78)
Univ. of Chicago scientist Anthony Turkevich had found by analysis of data from three Surveyor spacecraft that roeks on lunar surfaee contained sufficient oxygen to maintain life without supplemental sources, UPI reported. In interview Turkevich had said that, with nuelear or solar power sources, oxygen extraction from moon might cost less than shipping oxygen supplies to moon from earth. Also, there was little danger that moon rocks and dust carried into LM by returning astronauts would create explosion hazard because of oxygen lack. He had been unable to determine whether moon had sufficient hydrogen to allow chemical creation of water by future colonists or valuable minerals in commercially exploitable quantities and had found no evidence of fossil fuel supplies. (W Star, 6/30/69, A5)
lrl technicians Ronald J. Buffum and George E. Williams, accidentally exposed to lunar samples when glove used to examine samples cracked, were placed in quarantine with Apollo 11 astronauts, 2 doctors, and 12 technicians, cooks, and other employees. (W Post, 8/2/69, A4)
msfc announced appointment of Saverio F. Morea, former manager of F—1 and J—2 engine projects, as manager of new lunar roving vehicle project. Small manned vehicle would weigh 400 lbs and would be carried on board lm in 1971 to provide lunar surface transportation for two astronauts, hand tools, lunar samples, and other equipment. (msfc Release 69-150) Explorer XLI was seventh in series of 10 IMP spacecraft planned by NASA. Two of six previously orbited satellites—Explorer XXXIII (imp—d), launched July 1, 1966, and Explorer XXXV (imp—e), launched July 19, 1967—were still providing scientific data, imp program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-89)
Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders returned to Houston, Tex., for biggest parade in city’s history, with quarter million spectators filling sky with ticker tape and balloons. Astronauts received city’s highest honors, bronze medals for heroism with motto “per aspera ad astra.” (AP, B Sun, 1/14/69, A8; upi, W Post, 1/14/69, A4)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew announced Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., would head $4.5-million summer day camp program for youth to be administered by National Collegiate Athletic Assn, under hew contract. (Text)
In telephone interview, ucla astronomer Dr. Samuel Herrick, Jr., said planetoid Geographos, due to pass earth at 5.6-million-mi distance Aug. 27, would be best site of all asteroids for eventual space station beyond moon and good spot for manned or unmanned spacecraft landing. Its farthest point from sun in given orbit was least distant from sun and from earth of all minor planets. But astronauts landing on it would have to “dig in and tie themselves down” since its estimated g was so slight “even a sneeze directed at the surface would propel a man off into space.” (AP, B Sun, 8/23/69, A3)
NASA released first photos taken by Apollo 11 astronauts on and near lunar surface, including four color stills and 16-mm film of LM descent. Film opened as lm swung low and curved slightly over area pocked with craters and rocks and showed dust being scattered by exhaust as lm touched down safely. It then showed Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong as he descended ladder to surface, took first step on moon, and deployed initial equipment. Still photos showed closeup of brownish surface sprinkled with footprints, silhouettes of lm and U.S. flag, Armstrong inside lm, and earth with Europe, Africa, and Asia visible. (Witkin, NYT, 7/30/69, 1; Cohn, W Post, 7/30/69, Al, A3)
Space program could provide tools and knowledge to help eliminate air pollution, NASC Executive Secretary William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut, said in speech before Governors’ Conference on California’s Changing Environment in Los Angeles. With remote sensors in aircraft “pilot can quickly and accurately map pollution levels over a wide area and range of altitudes.” Pollution map of entire U.S. could be generated each day. “Thus, aircraft and satellites with these remote sensors offer the unique advantage of being able to view large areas through new eyeballs very quickly and selectively. Further, by computer, the data can be reduced to formats that can be quickly and easily understood.” Aircraft and satellite surveys would provide “data which supplement surface techniques and which, in some cases, can’t be gathered in any other way.” Rather than fantastically expensive, satellite measurements could “be competitive with surface systems.” (Text)
“We are doing the planning for ... 10 vehicles beyond Apollo 11.” After first landing NASA would stretch out flight schedule to allow time to make modifications and to understand results, with about two or three landings per year. NASA had equipment for scientific payloads for first four Apollo vehicles—of which two would land in lunar maria and two in highland areas—which would provide capability for later pinpoint landings at points of unique scientific interest outside Apollo landing zone. NASA would emplace on lunar surface network of 10 seismographs, series of heat-measuring probes, cameras, and other geophysical instruments to determine environment of lunar surface. Astronauts would wear new, “constant volume” spacesuits which would enable them to move around lunar surface very freely to conduct experiments. (Transcript)
Senate passed S.J.R. 140, providing for striking of medals honoring American astronauts who had flown in outer space. (CR, 7/30/69, S8786)
On first day out of quarantine, Apollo 11 crew visited MSC offices, then enjoyed official day off. NASA spokesman said astronauts had requested their activities be kept secret, (upi, W Post, 8/12/69, A3)
H.R. 16, 17, and 204, bills to authorize award of Congressional Medal of Honor to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, were introduced during first session of 91st Congress. {CR, 1/3/69, H33—42)
Apollo 10 astronauts would each carry out about two hours of head exercises early in mission in attempt to prevent motion sickness which plagued previous Apollo astronauts, msc Deputy Director of Medical Operations, Dr. A. Duane Catterson, said. Exercises—which included nodding, rocking, and twisting head—would be done to point just below threshold of illness until normal adaptation occurred. Since pilots who regularly performed drastic maneuvers in aircraft seldom suffered motion sickness, astronauts had flown aerobatic jet flights in barrel rolls and high-gravity maneuvers during week before launch. (Cohn, W Post, 5/18/69, A8) Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot)—entered initial parking orbit with 118.1-mi (189.9-km) apogee and 114.6-mi (184.4-km) perigee. Checkout followed lunar trajectory insertion; then csm, code-named Charlie Brown, separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, codenamed Snoopy. Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm. Excellent quality color TV coverage of docking sequences was transmitted to Goldstone tracking station and seen on worldwide commercial TV. Crew extracted lm from S—IVB and conducted 1st sps burn. All launch vehicle safing activities were performed as scheduled and successful propellant dump provided impulse to S—IVB for slingshot maneuver to earth-escape velocity. On second day, first midcourse maneuver was not required. Crew conducted midcourse maneuver number two, which was so accurate that third and fourth maneuvers were canceled. Five color TV transmissions totaling 72 min and showing excellent views of receding earth and spacecraft were made during translunar coast. Spacecraft entered moon’s sphere of influence on fourth day, May 21, at 61:50 get. Crew conducted first lunar orbit insertion maneuver with 356-sec sps burn to reduce speed to 5,474 fps and place spacecraft in initial lunar orbit with 196.1-mi (315.5-km) apolune and 68.6-mi (110.4-km) perilune. Second loi maneuver, 13.9-sec sps burn, circularized orbit with 70.8-mi (113.9-km) apolune and 67.8-mi (109.1-km) perilune. Crew tracked lunar landmarks and transmitted 29-min color TV of lunar surface. Cernan transferred to lm at 81:55 get for two hours of housekeeping activities and communications test. On fifth day Stafford and Cernan entered lm and checked out all systems before firing sm reaction control system thrusters to separate csm and lm ahout 30 ft and again for 2.3-mi separation, lm descent propulsion system burn propelled lm to within 9.6 mi of lunar surface over landing site No. 2. Crew had no difficulty identifying landmarks and Stafford said, “It looks like all you have to do is put your tail wheel down and we’re there. . . . The craters [around No. 2 landing site] look flat and smooth at the bottom. It should be real easy” for Apollo 11 landing, lm crew took numerous photos of lunar surface and provided continuous commentary on their observations after cameras malfunctioned. Astronauts described volcanoes and light-colored craters that glowed as if lit by radioactive substance. Crew conducted lm radar test during low-altitude pass which indicated 47,000-ft pericynthian (lowest point in orbit), dps phasing burn raised apocynthian (orbital high point) to 218.6 mi (351.7 km). lm descent stage was jettisoned and Res separation maneuver and staging were accomplished. Anomaly in automatic abort guidance system caused lm ascent stage to undergo extreme gyrations. By taking over manual control, Stafford reestablished proper attitude. APS insertion maneuver burn at pericynthian established equivalent of standard LM insertion orbit of lunar landing mission (51.8 by 12.9 mi), where lm coasted for one hour. Concentric sequence initiation at apocynthian, constant-delta-height maneuver, and terminal maneuver were conducted. lm successfully docked with csm at 106:33 get, after eight-hour separation; and lm crew returned to csm. On sixth day lm ascent stage was jettisoned; its batteries burned to depletion and it entered solar orbit. Crew made 18 landmark sightings and took extensive stereo and oblique photos of moon. Two scheduled TV periods were deleted because of crew fatigue and crew rested and prepared for return to earth, sps burn at 137:36 get injected csm into transearth trajectory after 61.5 hrs (31 orbits) in lunar orbit. Maneuver was so accurate that two other scheduled midcourse maneuvers were not necessary. During return to earth astronauts made star-lunar landmark sightings, live color TV transmissions, star-earth horizon navigation sightings, and csm S-band high-gain antenna reflectivity test. Pictures of moon from receding spacecraft were spectacular. Scheduled 10- and 29-min color TV broadcasts of earth, moon, and spacecraft interior were later followed by unscheduled TV transmission, which provided beautiful pictures of earth and brought total color TV broadcasts to 19 transmissions totaling almost six hours. On eighth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from CM on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 10 splashed down in Pacific at 12:52 pm edt May 26, 3.4 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Princeton 192 hrs 3 min after launch and precisely on time. Crew was picked up and reached recovery ship at 1:31 pm edt. All primary Apollo 10 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor discrepancies, which were corrected. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits were continually evident. Accomplishments included evaluation of LM steerable antenna at lunar distances; demonstration of lunar landing mission profile; low-level evaluation of lunar visibility; inflight demonstration of Weslinghouse color TV camera; testing of landing radar in near-lunar environment; and manned navigational, visual, and photographic evaluation of lunar landing sites 2 and 3, and in addition other possible lauding sites in highland areas. Apollo 10 was seventh Apollo mission to date, fourth manned Apollo mission, largest payload ever placed in earth and lunar orbits, and first demonstration of lunar orbit rendezvous. Mission acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for Apollo 11 and subsequent missions and numerous visual observations and photos of scientific significance. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of manned LM to operate in space. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, M5FC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj OH; NASA Release 69-68; W Post, 5/19-27/69, Al; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/19-27/69, Al; W Star, 5/19-27/69)
Washington Post Federal Diary column noted Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong would receive $2-per-day travel allowance as civil servant during Apollo 11 mission. As GS—16 at NASA, Armstrong collected maximum per diem of $16 when traveling on duty. But for Apollo 11 mission, it had been ruled that he would be enjoying Government billeting and subsistence. (Clopton, Causey, W Post, 6/11/69, Bll)
U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts, in joint space efforts, could succeed in improving U.S.-Soviet relations where “tired old politicians” had failed, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said during visit to msc. “Maybe this would be a way to break through to the rulers of Russia. When you get professional people together—scientists, aviators . . . you find you have many common problems.” Sen. Goldwater said he hoped Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman would not seek Senate seat in 1970 but would wait awhile “and take mine.” (upi, NYT, 11/16/69, 79)
Worldwide audience focused on Apollo 11 launch: At summer residence, Castel Gondolfo, Italy, Pope Paul VI asked for prayers for U.S. astronauts a few hours before launch toward moon. U.S.S.R. radio and TV gave factual accounts of Apollo 11 launch but maintained third day of silence on Luna XV. Major Soviet news program at 8:30 pm Moscow time showed tape of Apollo 11 liftoff taken from live comsat coverage. In U.K. TV viewers saw launch via transatlantic satellite. BBC scheduled live coverage through July 24 splashdown and would relay broadcasts to continent by cable. London newspapers frontpaged Apollo 11. Daily Express headline read, “Ho Hum—Anyone for the Moon Today?” over report on Telaxed astronauts. Polish TV viewers saw launch via 45-min transmission directly from Cape Kennedy. Hundreds of Germans and Americans crowded Apollo 11 exhibit in Mannheim, Germany, department store. Swedish TV viewers were advised by state broadcasting company not to turn off sets Sunday night—so they could be awakened for scheduled moon landing Monday. Hippies in Iran held milk and honey pots in Teheran restaur ant to toast astronauts. In Egypt, Moslem world’s leading moon expert, Sheikh Ahmand Haredi said, “The Koran urges Moslems to look up from their earthly abode to what lies behind the moon and stars.” Japanese department stores featured models of Apollo command module. In Greece, Aspis-Pronoia insurance company issued first outer-space life insurance policy, to cover Apollo 11 crew at $10,000 each. In Spain people called event most interesting since Columbus discovered America.	• Israel’s state radio broadcast in Hebrew from Cape Kennedy while Israelis stood around TV sets and portable radios in streets. U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv and U.S. Consulate in Jerusalem opened Apollo 11 information offices. Apollo 11 reaction was “generally tepid” in Lagos, Nigeria. Radio Nigeria reported launch seven minutes into its morning broadcast. Later it became number one newscast item. Most of Latin America missed launch on TV because of failure of Intelsat-111 F—2 June 29. Latin American newspapers and TV correspondents traveled to U.S. to cover launch and were reported to be outraged by absence of TV coverage in their countries. In Colombia, government asked TV manufacturers to put sets in all town squares. Bogota students would have July 21 off to watch lunar landing. (NYT, 7/17/69, 21, 22; Bishop, C Trib, 7/17/69)
NASA announced addition of two lunar orbits to Apollo 11 flight plan, which would increase revolutions to 30 and total time in lunar orbit to 59 hrs 30 min. Addition of orbit before lm/csm undocking would improve communications during critical maneuver by bringing LM within radio sight of 210-ft dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station during its descent to lunar surface. Addition of orbit after redocking and before lm jettison would allow astronauts two more hours for decontamination of equipment exposed to lunar environment, (nasa Release 69—83A)
President Nixon, at White House ceremony, presented National Space Club’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Apollo 8 astronauts and announced nomination of Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to be NASA Administrator. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., accepted award for himself and Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders. Citation: “In an epic journey man for the first time in December 1968 soared out of the earth gravitational field, flew unerringly into a close orbit of the moon, then back to a precise and safe landing. This historic voyage performed at times before the largest television audience in history, and open for coverage by the world’s press, reflects the utmost credit on the United States Space Program, Congress, nasa, and thousands of companies and employees in industry representing all these, the courageous, competent crew of Apollo 8.” Following award presentation, President announced Dr. Paine’s appointment: “There has been a great deal of interest as to who would be the new head of NASA. ... we have searched the country to find a man who could take this program and give it the leadership that it needs, as we move from one phase to another. This is an exciting period, and it requires the new leadership that a new man can provide. But after searching the whole country for somebody, perhaps outside of the program, we found . . . that the best man in the country was in the program.” Dr. Paine in his response said: “I believe in the space program. I believe in this country, and I think that this country should indeed be the preeminent nation in space-faring, and ... I am sure that we can go ahead to . . . see that the NASA program in the second decade of space will even out-perform the accomplishments in the first.” (PD, 3/10/69, 369-71)
September 6: Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders were named winners of 1969 Harmon International Astronaut’s Trophy for December 1968 Apollo 8 mission. Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) was awarded Aviator’s Trophy for testing NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle. Harmon trophies were awarded annually to world’s outstanding pilots for feats of individual piloting skill, (upi, W Star, 9/7/69, A7)	.
Mexican President Gustavo Diaz Ordaz announced in Coahuila, Mexico, that President Nixon had accepted invitation for ApoUo 11 astronauts to start round-the-world tour in Mexico. He repeated congratulations to Government and U.S. people on Apollo 11 success: “The United States gave proof of its greatness when it achieved this triumph, but it became even greater when they understood it and accepted it as a triumph of all humanity.” President Nixon was in Mexico to attend dedication of Amistad Dam on Rio Grande. (PD, 9/15/69, 1241)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family ended official goodwill tour of Western Europe with lecture and luncheon in Lisbon. During final European news conference previous day, he had predicted U.S. would put man on moon in summer 1969 “if everything goes well.” (upi, W Star, 2/20/69, A8)
Apollo 11 astronauts discussed possible manned Mars landing by 1982 on CBS TV program “Face the Nation.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said, “I am quite certain that goals of the Mars variety are within our range, should we choose . . . that investment of our national resources.” First exploratory flights could be combined with earthorbiting spacecraft to develop long-term capability with same kind of spacecraft. It was “well within our capability” to be prepared for Mars launch in 1981. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said he was “not so sure . . . this is the time that we can accurately set a date like 1981.” Setting goal was worthwhile but as intermediate goals were reached “I believe we will be able to better define exactly what our longer term goals are in terms of ten years from now.” Astronaut Michael Collins said, “I don’t think 1981 is too soon. I think it is well within our capabality to do so.” Long-duration trip “requires careful design and testing of the equipment, which could easily be done in Earth orbit with a number of ancillary benefits.” He defended Bible reading in space and announced he would not fly in space again, because he found it increasingly difficult “to keep up year after year” with rigorous training required. (SBD, 8/19/69, 159; W Post, 8/18/69, A2; NYT, 8/18/69, 33)
Hours before lunar landing attempt by Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Pope Paul VI said at Castel Gon-dolfo, Italy: “In the ecstasy of this prophetic day, a real triumph for means produced by man for the domination of the universe, we must not forget man’s need to dominate himself. Admiration, enthusiasm and passion for instruments, for the products of man’s hand, fascinate us, perhaps to the point of madness. . . . This is the danger: We must beware of this worship.” (Schmick, B Sun, 7/21/69, A4)
Saturn V (left) thrust Apollo 11 spacecraft toward the moon, watched by former nasa Administrator James E. Webb (below at left), former President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Kennedy Space Center. In ksc Launch Control Center (above) mission officials relaxed after launch; left to right were Charles W. Matthews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr, George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and l/g Samuel C, Phillips, Apollo Program Director. was heading was in center of large, rugged crater with 5- to 10-ft-dia boulders. Consequently crew flew past crater to more suitable touchdown point by controlling attitude manually and adjusting descent rate and horizontal velocity. Officials later attributed change in course to malfunction in onboard radar and subsequent critical overload of computer, which caused warning alarms and could have aborted mission. lm landed on moon at 102:46 get (4:18 pm edt July 20) in Sea of Tranquility, 20,800 ft west and 4,000—5,000 ft south of center of planned landing ellipse. Landing-point coordinates were approximately 23,5°E and 0.64°N and site altitude was approximately 8,600 ft below moon’s mean radius. Armstrong reported: “Houston, Tranquility Base here—the Eagle has landed.” Mission Control replied: “Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We are breathing again. Thanks a lot.” Armstrong said landing area contained numerous boulders up to two feet in diameter, some apparently fractured by LM engine exhaust, and surface color varied from very light to dark gray. Crew immediately adapted to one-sixth (earth) gravity in lm and moved with ease. About two hours after landing astronauts requested and were granted permission to perform extravehicular activities (eva) on moon’s surface before sleep period—about 4Vs hrs earlier than originally scheduled. After postlanding checks, Armstrong opened LM hatch, descended lm ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera, which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Aldrin remained inside LM and recorded Armstrong’s descent with 16-mm Maurer camera. Armstrong took man’s first step on moon at 109:24 get (10:56 pm EDT July 20). Some 600 million viewers on earth—one-fifth of world population—watched live TV transmission and heard him describe feat as “one small step for a man—one giant leap for mankind.” Collins, orbiting moon alone in CSM Columbia, was unable to see landing and subsequent eva because csm was not equipped to receive TV transmission. Armstrong said moon had “stark beauty all its own"’ like desert in southwestern U.S. Lunar surface was “fine and powdery” and could be kicked up loosely- “It adheres like powdered charcoal . . . but I only go jn a small fraction of an inch. I can see my footprint in the moon like fine grainy particles.” Armstrong checked EM exterior and reported penetration of EM footpads into lunar surface was three to four inches and that strut collapse was minimal. Blast of descent engine had not formed crater in surface and about one foot of clearance remained between engine bell and lunar surface. He reported only problem was seeing his footing in darkness of lm shadow. He emplaced microdot containing messages from world leaders, collected contingency sample of lunar soil near lm ladder, and reported that, although surface consisted of soft loose material, material six or eight inches under surface was very hard and cohesive. Rocks were very slippery, apparently because vesicles (pores) were filled with powdery surface material. Armstrong photographed Aldrin’s descent to lunar surface at 11:15 pm edt and astronauts unveiled plaque mounted on strut behind ladder and read its inscription to tneir worldwide TV audience; “Here men from the planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.*’ Armstrong then removed TV camera from MESA, obtained panorama, and placed camera on tripod 40 ft from LM to view subsequent EVA, Aldrin experimented to assess mobility on moon by walking, running, leaping, and doing twofooted kangaroo hops between LM and camera. He indicated some difficulty in maintaining balance but said that his agility was better than expected and that he was able to move with great ease. Mass of backpack affected inertia and caused “slight tendency ... to tip backwards, If I’m about to lose my balance in one direction, recovery is quite natural and easy. You’ve just got to be careful landing in die direction you want to go in.” Aldrin deployed solar wind composition experiment in sunlight north of LM and joined Armstrong in erecting three, by five-foot American flag on eight-foot aluminum staff. Astronauts saluted flag and then talked by radiotelephone with President Nixon at White House in what President called “most historic telephone call ever made from the White House,” President said: “Because of what you have done the heavens have become a part of man’s world. As you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth. For one priceless moment in t	mn 1 rssi xh-e mi m First footsteps on H.-Kficn: TM* ■#* tLCtt UTI, EfMMK, JDIT H, I*, ’I.K JQTTWat LA UHIE GOHOIIi; 1g_ll*k u*w JtAVU *1 THE TIMES sS JMan takes first steps on the moon . |..rsn magnthg, r y«m\ && | ip- * l=ij s the whole history of man all the people on this earth are truly one— one in their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth.” Astronauts saluted President and expressed honor and privilege of representing U.S. and world on moon. Continuing eva, Armstrong collected bulk sample of assorted surface materia] and selected rock chunks, inspected lm, deployed passive seismic experiment package and laser ranging retroreflector, and collected two core samples and 20 lbs of discretely selected material. Throughout EVA continuous black-and-white coverage of crew activity provided live documentation, with telemetered data and voice comments. Lunar surface photography included both still and sequence coverage using Hasselbtad, Maurer data-acquisition, and Apollo lunar surface close-up cameras. Astronauts completed eva, transferred film and samples to LM, reentered LM and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by Hl:39 get (1:11 am edt July 21). Armstrong and Aldrin rested inside LM seven hours and checked out systems. At 124:22 get (1:54 pm July 21) lm successfully lifted off moon, after 21 hrs 36 min on lunar surface. All lunar ascent and rendezvous maneuvers were nominal. Eagle reported to Mission Control: “Eagle TOUm 0EU5MDE, YLtEOIMWA. JULY Jl, BMHTHIfJ! [ISSl RMlflBM	jiebUwJ ^LV¥~l* J_—
Apollo 11 astronauts on world tour arrived in Seoul, Korea, for overnight stay. They were treated as state guests and decorated in ceremony at presidential mansion. (AP, W Star, 11/3/69, A21)
Transfer of usaf mol officers to NASA astronaut corps [see Aug. 14] was criticized in Washington Sunday Star by William Hines: “With the initial moon landing now an accomplished fact, the pace of manned space operations has slowed down to three flights per year. This means that no more than nine men can fly annually, and with 54 astronauts now on board, this, in turn, means an average of six years between flights.” Though pace might accelerate in time and future space stations would increase annual number of crew assignments, “the glamor and glory of being an astronaut—particularly a nonflying one—no longer compensates for the enforced idleness imposed by the modified flight schedule.” (W Star, 8/24/69, D4)
Across U.S. on eve of Apollo 11 launch, newspaper editorials commented on lunar landing mission: Los Angeles Herald-Examiner; “It is with an almost breathless sense of awe that we await tomorrow’s blast-off from Cape Kennedy—the launching of three space explorers on the most ambitious and fearsome adventure in all human history. Mere words cannot capture the immensity of the flight of Apollo 11. Quite literally, man will be attempting a final break of the chains which have bound him to this earth.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/15/69) Newport News, Va., Times-Herald: “Now, this triumph of human courage and knowledge stands poised on the threshold of accomplishment. For a few fleeting moments, the attention of the world will follow the Eagle as it ferries its two astronauts toward a destiny until now only dreamed of in our history. Then, most probably, our attention will filter back to the pressing problems on earth.” (Times-Herald, 7/15/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Apollo 11 is providing insight into the meaning of life and the imperatives of human society. It is forcing us to face the grim paradox of exploiting human reason and the marvels of machinery to soar into the majesty of space while the world becomes fragmented into selfish national sovereignties—some armed, some arming, with the hideous capacity to end life itself.” (Milwaukee Journal, 7/15/69) Denver Post: “The Soviet attempt to send an unmanned spaceship to the moon in advance of Apollo 11 is a bold bid to draw attention to Soviet space prowess. But even if it succeeds ... in mechanically scooping up samples of the moon and returning to earth, the Soviet project will not overshadow the American mission. Instead, the Soviet flight will serve to underscore the expensive duplication of effort created by the space race. If the Russians and Americans had cooperated, rather than competed, the risks and the costs involved in landing a man on the moon would have been far less.” (Denver Post, 7/15/69) Washington Evening Star: Soviet Luna XV seemed strangely timed. During their Moscow discussions on space cooperation, U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny had not given Astronaut Frank Borman “slightest hint that the Kremlin was planning to send an unmanned spacecraft to the moon to coincide with the history-making Apollo 11 American mission.” Was it really possible “to work together in space exploration with a country that seems to be playing tricks with ours at a moment when we are engaged in a historic effort to land men on the moon?” (W Star, 7/15/69, A12)
At Geneva luncheon during meetings of Disarmament Conference, U.S. and U.S.S.R. opened exploratory talks on proposed treaty banning use of seabed for stationing nuclear weapons, (upi, W News, 3/20/69, 2) for “national program for the development of a permanent space station and a logistic support system in a way that will not only serve the needs and goals of the civilian space program, but will also be capable of supporting future defense research and developments as needs become clearly defined.” (Text) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator, said: “Although similar space technology is used in Apollo Applications and the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, there is no unnecessary duplication in the experiments planned. These activities require different equipment, different orbits and different timing. I believe that any attempt to combine the two programs would jeopardize the returns to each agency and would ultimately increase the cost. There is a distinct need to continue with manned space operations under both military and nonmilitary auspices. Cooperation between nasa and dod has been close, and will continue.” (Text) afa’s highest award, Henry H. Arnold Trophy, was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. NASC Executive Secretary, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, received Gill Robb Wilson Trophy for Arts and Letters for his part in interpreting aerospace role in modern society, afa’s Citation of Honor went to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) for his management of NASA Apollo program, and to Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) for “outstanding contributions to the Air Force and the nation for being the first to achieve hypersonic winged flight while piloting the X—15 aircraft to a speed of 4,534 miles per hour.” (afsc Newsreview, 3/69, 1; AFJ, 3/8/69, 30)
U.S. patent No. 3,420,471 was granted to John D. Bird, Howell D. Garner, Ernest D. Lounsberry, and David E. Thomas, Jr., LaRC engineers who assigned rights to NASA for jet shoes to enable astronauts to move in space. Wearer could rotate body by natural ankle and leg motions and control direction by turning body and aiming head in swimming motion. Previous devices for similar purpose required use of one or both hands or operation of complex arrangement of control jets and gyroscope sensors. Toe pressure in new shoes would release nitrogen through thruster in sole of each shoe. With electrical control, pressure would be applied to switch. Alternate method would be fluidic control, with toes pressing syringe. (Pat Off pio; NYT, 1/11/69, 39)
House adopted conference report on H.R. 11271, FY 1970 NASA authorization, and sent it to Senate for further action. Report retained Senate’s $3.716-billion authorization—$280 million below FY 1969 NASA authorization and $285 million less than $3,966 billion passed by House June 10. It accepted House amendment requiring astronauts to plant U.S. flag on any planet visited for first time on U.S.-financed mission, Senate amendment requiring public disclosure of names and salaries of employees who exchanged positions between NASA and aerospace industry, and House provision withholding funds to any college which barred military recruiters. (House Rpt 91—609; CR, 11/6/69, H10679-84)
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, both U.S. Naval Academy graduates, presented Academy flag carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft to brigade representing 4,000 midshipmen at Annapolis. (AP, B Sun, 4/3/69, All)
During “Meet the Press” interview shown on nbc TV Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said he thought Apollo 11 spacecraft would have crashed if Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong had not piloted it on final lunar approach. Quick reactions hy Apollo 12 crew had helped save mission from power failure on its launch. “I think that the [Apollo 12] launch would have been a success. But we felt a good deal better with the astronauts there.” Dr. Paine thought U.S.S.R. would attempt moon trips “in the next few years.” (W Post, 11/17/69, A3)
Edgar L. Piret, U.S. Embassy Scientific Attache in Paris, accepted Prix Pierre Guzman gold medals on behalf of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Award had been established by Mme. Anna Emile Guzman in 1889 for first persons “to find the means of communicating with a heavenly body—Mars excluded” [see Aug. 13]. (AP, W Post, 12/9/69, A23)
At White House press briefing President Nixon introduced Apollo 8 astronauts and announced that Astronaut Frank Borman would make eight-nation goodwill trip to Western Europe. Tour would point out “what is the fact: that we in America do not consider that this is a monopoly, these great new discoveries that we are making; that we recognize the great contributions that others have made and will make in the future; and that we do want to work together with all peoples on this earth in the high adventure of exploring the new areas of space.” Later, Press Secretary Ronald Ziegler announced Borman family would visit England, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, West Germany, Italy, Spain, and Portugal. {PD, 2/3/69, 189-90; AP, W Post, 1/31/69, A2)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman acknowledged that he had discussed possibility of running for Governor of Arizona or U.S. Senate with Rep. Morris K. Udall (D-Ariz.) but said he did not “foresee right now” that he would do so, Associated Press reported. (W Post, 6/4/69)
msc announced appointment of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper as Assistant for Space Shuttle Program in msc’s Flight Crew Operations Directorate. Cooper would be responsible for flight crew training program, astronaut inputs into design and engineering, and directorate’s part in hardware development and testing for Space Shuttle. He would remain on flight status and eligible for space flight, (msc Release 69/67)
Second official public display of lunar rock fragment retrieved from moon by Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled at MSc by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director. Exhibit included 12 photograph and text panels and four-foot-diameter opaque sphere with 20-in viewing port, (msc Release 69—73)
At msc news conference following Apollo 11 splashdown, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: . . we now stand at what is undoubtedly the greatest decision point in the history of this planet.” Apollo 11 had proved “that man is no longer bound to the limits of the planet on which for so long he has lived. We will return to the moon first in November and then at regular intervals in the coming year. But these trips are only the first step. . . . Will we press forward to explore other planets or will we deny the opportunity to the future? To me, the choice is clear. We must take the next step. . . . This is the time for decision. . . . The knowledge possessed by men is sufficient, the resources are adequate for the task of carrying out this next step. . . . “In this moment of man’s greatest achievement, it is timely for us to dedicate ourselves to the unfinished work so nobly begotten by three of us. To resolve that this nation, under God, will join with all men in the pursuit of the destiny of mankind will lead to the way to the planets.” In answer to questions, Dr. Mueller said next major step should be manned landing on Mars which would be possible “sometime after 1980.” l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo Program Director, told press Apollo team was “strongest team that’s ever assembled in the history of man. It has the strength of technical and engineering confidence, scientific competence, and management competence that’s unexcelled. It has the dedication that’s necessary to be able to tackle an almost impossible job and bring it through” and an exciting future in lunar exploration. Second manned lunar landing mission, Apollo 12, would be launched from ksc Nov. 14 toward touchdown on Site 7 in moon’s Ocean of Storms. Primary objective would be to deploy Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), explore and survey mare area, and return samples to earth. Secondary objective, if lm softlanded on target, would be to examine Surveyor III spacecraft (launched April 17, 1967), which was resting on moon near planned Apollo 12 touchdown point. Astronauts would have two periods for extravehicular activities (eva), during which they would explore surface and conduct experiments for over three hours and walk farther away from spacecraft than had Apollo 11 crew. Maximum lunar stay time would be 28—32 hrs. Schedule called for planning to fly follow-on missions through Apollo 15 at four-month intervals and missions after that at five-month intervals. (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong (commander), Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (lm pilot), and Michael Collins (cm pilot) held press conference at msc. Astronauts were seated 50 ft from nearest newsmen and were partially enclosed in plastic booth as part of plan to limit crew’s contacts during 21 days immediately preceding flight and prevent development of illness. Collins told press that from CM viewpoint, Apollo 11 should not be very different from previous manned Apollo missions. He did not feel “slightest bit frustrated” about going to moon without landing on it: “I’m going 99.9 . . . percent of the way there, and that suits me fine.” lm flight plan would pick up where Apollo 10 left off with phasing maneuver, Aldrin explained. There would be number of “firsts”: “the ultimate test,” actual touchdown; 1/6 g environment; new thermal conditions; two-man EVA on lunar surface; sleeping in LM on moon; star sighting technique with alignment telescope on lunar surface; and powered ascent from moon with seven-minute engine burn. One of important early activities after exiting from lm on moon would be determining best pace for moving about: “. . . there have been several different techniques employed in the partial zero gravity training. And, it looks like you can walk conventionally one foot after another. It also looks as though you can do a two-footed hop—kangaroo style.” In training in aircraft flown at 1/6 g, “a fairly rapid pace” appeared quite easy to perform. “It looks like we shouldn’t have too much difficulty in moving at something like 6, 8, or 10 miles per hour.” Armstrong said crew would use “somewhat hybrid methods of manual and automatic” for descent to moon. “The predicted method at this point, although we have a great deal of flexibility and choice, based on the situation at the time, would he to maintain manual control of attitude and automatic control of throttle through the final descent from an altitude of somewhere between 500 and 1000 feet until such time as the automatic throttle rated descent was unsatisfactory, at which time we’ll go full manual on the throttle ... flying it in a manner like a normal vtol machine.” Code names for cm and lm had been selected as “representative of the flight, the nation’s hope,” Armstrong revealed, lm would be called “Eagle” for U.S. national emblem, and cm would be called “Columbia” for U.S. symbol, statue on top of Capitol, and Jules Verne’s fictional spacecraft, “Columbiad,” which flew to moon 100 yrs ago. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 7/6/69, Al) Borman and family visited Star City, home of cosmonauts outside Moscow, where he presented color film of Apollo 8. Cosmonauts presented Borman with model of Vostok 1, first manned spacecraft. Later Borman toured major space tracking station at Eupatoria near Yalta in Crimea. (AP, W Star, 7/5/69, A13; UPl, W Star, 7/7/69, A2)
NASA announced it would conduct 26 major launches from etr and WTR during 1969. First launch was Oso V Jan. 22. Launches from etr would include five manned missions: Apollo 9, scheduled for Feb. 28, would place three-man crew in earth orbit for 11 days to flight-test lunar module; Apollo 10 would place three astronauts in lunar orbit and two would fly lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface; and Apollo 11 would land two members of three-man crew on lunar surface. Two additional lunar landings would be conducted if first landing was successful. Unmanned launches from etr would include two Intelsat III comsats, two Mariner-Mars missions, Tiros weather satellite, Biosatellite carrying monkey, Pioneer E interplanetary spacecraft, Applications Technology Satellite (ats), Orbiting Solar Observatory (oso), Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao), and two U.K. comsats. wtr launches would include three Tiros weather satellites, Explorer (imp—g), Canadian International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (isis), Nimbus weather satellite, and Thor-Agena (ogo—f) mission to test experimental ion-thruster, (ksc Release 19—69; NASA ossa)
NASA began distribution of IS pounds of lunar material to scientific investigators in the United States and eight other countries for on ay sis. The rock above, one of the samples collected by Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, ft., on the moon July 29, teas studied at msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory. stroyed during experiments; residues and remaining 5.1 kgs would be returned to NASA. Results of analyses were to be reported early in 1970. Among measurements to be made were those of physical properties of rocks or soil to help in understanding optical observations of moon from earth and future seismic experiments; mineralogy and petrology to show mineral content, amount of water present when rocks crystallized, and how surfaces were eroded by particles; chemical composition of rocks and fines to determine concentration of 92 elements occurring on earth and in meteorites, times of crystallization of igneous rocks, and periods rocks had lain on lunar surface. Studies of rare gases in soil would furnish first data on isotopic compositions of solar materials. Biologists and organic chemists would determine structures and abundances of carbon compounds in and on lunar surface and their origin, catalog microstructures in terms of organized elements and microfossils, and define presence or absence of viable lunar organisms. {NASA Release 69—130)
New York City held ticker-tape parade for Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, followed by presentation at City Hall Plaza of Medals of City of New York, luncheon at Lincoln Center, appearance at U.N., and Waldorf-Astoria dinner attended by 2,500 political leaders and guests. (NYT, 1/10/69, 30; Aarons, W Post, 1/11/69, Al; AP, B Sun, 1/11/69, A4)
Apollo 11 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility (mqf) , arrived at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, where they were greeted by 12,000 cheering people and Mayor of Honolulu Frank F. Fasi. MQF was then transported to aircraft which would carry it to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. At lrl, scientists opened first of two boxes of lunar samples and made preliminary examinations of samples in one box. (Wooten, Wilford, NYT, 7/27/69, 47, 1)
Dept, of Commerce, dod, Dept, of Interior, DOT, AEC, NASA, and nsf released News from BOMEX, report of Barbados Oceanographic and Meteorological Experiment to be conducted in May, June, and July in cooperation with government of Barbados. Scientific study of joint behavior and interactions of atmosphere-ocean system in subtropical and tropical waters was part of Federal Air-Sea Interaction Research Program and major U.S. contribution to Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp). bomex would study continuous exchange of energy, momentum, gases, particulates, and electrical charges at air-sea interface and study ways in which energy and other properties were transported from area by atmosphere and ocean. NASA would test concepts of satellite sensors for weather and oceanographic observations. Its experimental weather and communications satellites (Ats III, Nimbus III, and essa satellites) and devices being developed under Earth Resources Survey Satellite program would be directly engaged in bomex. Photos taken by Apollo 9 astronauts with hand-held Hasselblad camera of 900 sq mi of equatorial Atlantic Ocean off Barbados would be used in project. (Text; NASA News; Science, 3/28/69, 1435-6)
Welcome back to earth: Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left to right inside the mobile Quarantine facility), were greeted by President Nixon aboard the V.S.S. Hornet after their splashdown. is back in orbit, having left Tranquility Base, and leaving behind a replica from our Apollo 11 patch with an olive branch.” LM docked with CSM at 128:03 get. Crew transferred with samples and film to csm, and LM ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit. SM reaction-control-system separation maneuver placed CSM into orbit with 72,0 mi (115.9-km) apolune and 63.0-mi (101.4-km) perilune, where crew rested and prepared for return to earth. cm separated from SM on schedule at 194:49 GET. Because of deteriorating weather in nominal landing area, splashdown point was moved 247.4 mi downrange, where weather was excellent. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 11 splashed down in mid-Pacific at 12:51 pm edt July 24, 15 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Hornet, 195 hrs 19 min after launch. Swimmers attached flotation collar and seven-man raft to spacecraft and helicopter dropped biological isolation garments, which were donned by astronauts inside CM and by one swimmer. Two other swimmers moved upwind of CM on another large raft. Postlanding ventilation was turned off and CM powered down, and astronauts climbed out and helped swimmer close hatch. Swimmer then decontaminated all garments, hatch area, flotation collar, and area around postlanding vent valves with Betadine disinfectant. Helicopter carried astronauts to recovery ship, where they entered 32-ft-long mobile quarantine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. They were congratulated by President Nixon and Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, who were on board ship. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory (lRl) in Houston July 27. cm was retrieved, placed in dolly on board recovery ship, moved to MQF, and mated to transfer tunnel. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, mqf engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to lrl. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Johnston Island and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 11 mission objective—to perform manned landing on moon and return—and all detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor, corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits and proficiency were major factors in mission’s success. Accomplishments included first manned lunar landing and return; first lunar surface EVA; first seismometer, laser reflector, and solar wind experiment deployed on moon; first lunar soil samples returned to earth; largest U.S. payload ever placed into lunar orbit (72,037.6 lbs at lunar orbit insertion); acquisition of numerous visual observations, photos and TV transmissions of scientific and engineering significance; and first operational use of mqf and lrl. Apollo 11 was eighth Apollo mission to date, fifth manned Apollo mission, and first manned lunar landing mission. Mission acquired major quantities of data for subsequent Apollo flights. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distance and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of lm to operate in space under manned conditions. Apollo 10 (May 18—26, 1969) had successfully operated complete Apollo spacecraft on lunar orbital mission and had provided major quantities of scientific and training materials for Apollo 11. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-83K; NYT, 7/16-25/69; W Post, 7/16-25/69; W Star, 7/16-25/69; B Sun, 7/16-25/69; PD, 7/28/69, 1016)
In telephone call to Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong on eve of, Apollo 11 astronauts’ round-the-world tour, President Nixon asked astronauts to invite foreign countries to become “partners in space” with U.S. He also invited astronauts and wives to White House dinner Nov. 5. (upi, W Star, 9/29/69, A3)
In Sydney, Australia, during world tour of Apollo 11 astronauts, Astronauts Michael Collins said NASA might someday send women on space flights, “nasa has never barred women,” he told news conference. “Flying background is usually what has prevented the young ladies from participating.” (AP, W Post, 11/2/69, 18)
In fourth big city welcome within one week, Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders received tribute from estimated 1.5 million persons in Chicago reception at which they were made honorary citizens of city, (upi, NYT, 1/15/69, 1)
In international reaction to Apollo 12 moon walk Moscow Radio announced landing eight minutes after touchdown, followed with brief progress bulletins, and broadcast seven-minute film on event seven hours after lm landed on moon. Foreigners in Moscow said BBC broadcast was jammed by two stronger stations just before lunar touchdown. Pope Paul VI at Vatican watched astronauts on TV, then knelt for short prayer. He sent message to President Nixon: “Many, many congratulations to you and the American nation on yet another magnificent step for the human race.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, saluted “precision and accuracy” of Apollo 12 lunar landing. He said, “Until the Russians achieve a rocket with the thrust of the order of Saturn 5, or greater, it is unlikely they will be able to stage any manned flight comparable with Apollo.” London’s morning newspapers put Apollo 12 story well down on front pages in contrast to Apollo 11 banner headlines. In Helsinki, Finland, Soviet diplomats attending strategic arms limitation talks toasted Apollo 12 crew. Tokyo TV dealers expressed unhappiness because repeat of run on color sets after Apollo 11 landing failed to materialize. West German Foreign Minister Walter Scheel said Apollo 12 was an invitation to Europe to organize its own space potential. Egyptian newspapers gave Apollo 12 second billing to continuing conflict with Israel. In Poland millions watched lunar landing by direct TV transmission. In Sweden TV reception was poor and viewer interest lagged. Former Argentine President Arturo U. Illia, in Buenos Aires, called lunar landing “a victory for democracy.” Australians watched landing 10 secs before U.S. because of time lag. In France many viewers were unable to watch landing because of electric utility strikes. Moon walk was one of few programs shown on Italian TV during day of general strike. Shah of Iran sent congratulations to President Nixon and Apollo 12 crew for “untiring endeavor.” Landing was shown live on Iranian TV. West Germany’s Wickert Public Opinion Institute estimated 82% of German adults watched TV shots of lunar landing, 92% watched Apollo 11. It concluded Apollo 12 lacked suspense that attended first moon shot. (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 30; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
naa announced Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders would receive 1968 Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics, as representatives of “entire United States space flight team for the successful and flawless execution of the first manned lunar orbit mission in history.” Trophy would be presented by President Nixon at Washington, D.C., luncheon May 7. (naa Release)
President Nixon announced appointment of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong as Chairman and member of Peace Corps National Advisory Council to succeed W. Thomas Johnson, Jr., who resigned May 27. (PD, 12/8/69, 1696)
Astronauts Alan L. Bean, R. Walter Cunningham, and Joseph P. Kerwin were grounded by NASA for 30 days for minor infractions of aircraft flight rules. Groundings—apparent attempt by NASA to emphasize importance of safety during jet training flights—were first for astronauts ; in past, infractions had been discussed at weekly pilot meetings. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/7/70, A3)
In response to telephone inquiry by Astronaut Frank Borman, Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, sent telegram guaranteeing that Luna XV, orbiting moon, would not interfere with Apollo 11 mission and assuring Borman that he would be notified of any changes in spacecraft’s course. Under 1967 U.N. Outer Space Treaty, U.S. and U.S.S.R. were bound to furnish each other this kind of information. (Wilford, NYT, 7/19/69, 1)
McDonald Observatory in Texas successfully recorded its first hits on laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts at 9:30 pm cdt. Scientists said distance at that moment was 232,271.406 mi and moon was 131.2 ft farther from earth than previously believed. Lick Observatory in California had recorded first hits Aug. 1 and had estimated earth-moon distance to be 226,970.9 mi at that time. (AP, W Star, 8/21/69, A3)
msc announced Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had been cleared medically for return to space flight status following correction of inner ear disorder which had grounded him in 1963. (NYT, 5/8/69, 2; W Post, 5/8/69, A7)
Controversy was building up over astronauts’ future, Apollo program, and manned space flight generally, Harry Schwartz said in New York Times. Three major debates were over whether engineer-astronauts or scientist-astronauts should be sent on future Apollo missions; who should control mission schedules and astronaut activities, “nasa hierarchy” or ground-based scientists in NASA; and whether U.S. should emphasize unmanned probes or crash program to put men on Mars in early 1980s. “The fact that it is the scientists who have been resigning while astronauts with test pilot backgrounds have been receiving unprecedented public acclaim makes it evident where the balance of power lies for the moment within nasa. But the issue is far from settled, since NASA itself must and does use the prospect of scientific advances as a key argument in seeking appropriations for space activities. Hence the dissident scientists could have substantial leverage if they teamed up with Congressmen and others who oppose the space appropriations for other reasons. It would not be surprising ... if nasa sought to ease the scientists’ irritation by satisfying some of their demands.” {NYT, 8/17/69, D2)
U.S. Patent Office issued patent No. 3,456,387 to Clyde A. Tolson, Associate Director of Federal Bureau of Investigation, for equipment to operate emergency windows and exits in aircraft and space vehicles. Without action of occupants, sensors would detect abnormal conditions and computer would weigh considerations before opening appropriate escape exits. Patent No. 3,456,445 was issued to Curtiss-Wright Corp. for improved version of astronaut maneuvering unit, Cap Pistol, intended to propel man outside space vehicle by capsules spaced along tape strip and fired by engine in pistol fashion. Inventors were Joseph F. Loprete, Max Beniele, and Richard E. Biehl. (Pat Off PIO; Jones, NYT, 7/26/69, 31)	'
Atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair—on behalf of herself, her husband Richard O’Hair, and her “Society of Separationists”—filed suit in Austin, Tex., District Court against NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to prevent U.S. astronauts on duty from practicing religion on earth, in space, or “around and about the moon.” She objected specifically to Apollo 8 Christmas Eve 1968 Bible reading by Astronaut Frank Borman and placing by Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., of disc containing microfilmed prayers on moon July 20. (upi, W Post, 8/7/69)
Apollo 11 astronauts and wives on world tour had private audience with Pope Paul VI at Vatican and later met with bishops from around the world. During Papal audience, 200 dissident bishops attending “shadow synod” near Vatican issued denunciation of meeting. Pope had previously refused to see them. Priests said poor people of world would interpret astronauts’ audience with Pope to mean “that the Church is ready to link itself with power, of which the astronauts are the symbol, and that she refused to accept direct contact with weakness, of which our modest assembly is a symbol.” (AP, P Bull, 10/16/69)
Approximately nine hours of satellite time had been booked for TV coverage abroad of Apollo 11 astronaut events during coming week, ComSatCorp said. They included more than two hours live coverage of Aug. 12 MSC news conference, to be relayed via Intelsat-III F—2 to Western and Eastern Europe and, in part, to Tokyo and Sydney via Pacific Intelsat-Ill F—4. Nearly two hours coverage of New York ticker-tape parade and visit to U.N. would be transmitted to Europe Aug. 13. Ceremonial dinner in Los Angeles, later in day, would be taped for transmission to Europe Aug. 14. (ComSatCorp Release 69-50)
NASA named Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong (.commander), Michael Collins (cm pilot), and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (lm pilot), as prime crew of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission scheduled for summer 1969. Backup crew would be Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (commander), William A. Anders (cm pilot), and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (lm pilot), (nasa Release 69—9)
Scientists at Lick Observatory in California unsuccessfully tried for third consecutive night to bounce ruby laser beams off reflector left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts. They admitted difficulty in pinpointing reflector’s exact location and speculated that it might have been knocked down by lm exhaust during ascent. (AP, W Star, 7/23/69, A7)
Catastrophic contamination of earth by returning Apollo 11 astronauts and lunar samples was “extremely unlikely,” Philip H. Abelson explained in Science. “One argument is that a form of life adapted to the absence of H2O, O2, and organic compounds could scarcely be expected to survive on earth, much less infect earth’s creatures. The most compelling argument, however, is that the lunar-return experiment has been conducted many times in the past. It has been estimated that millions of tons of unsterilized lunar material have reached the earth as a consequence of meteor impact. . . . Sterile containment of lunar specimens during the journey to Houston is assured. . . . “Procedures involving the astronauts are more controversial. Careful effort to keep to a minimum the amount of adventitious material returned to earth is a substantial factor in the procedures that have been adopted. The astronauts face a difficult and dangerous mission. Were their procedures to be made even more complex because of panicky, last-minute objections, their chances of a safe return could he needlessly jeopardized.” (Science, 6/13/69, 1227)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
Associated Press said Astronaut-Aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) would retire from usn July 1 to enter private business in oceanography field. He was second U.S. astronaut to orbit earth, during May 24, 1962, Mercury mission in Aurora 7. (W Post, 5/10/69, A3)
aec’s SNAP—3A nuclear generator, launched on board usn’s Transit IV—A navigational satellite June 29, 1961, completed eight years in orbit—three years longer than five-year design lifetime—after circling earth 40,530 times and traveling more than 1 billion mi. First nuclear generator to operate in space, 5-in-dia, 5]/>-in-high SNAP—3A converted heat given oft by plutonium directly into 2.7 w of electricity. Five snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) generators had been launched to date, including two on NASA’s Nimbus III (launched April 14). Atomic-fueled generator would be placed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts to power instrument package, (aec Release M—150)
Senate confirmed nomination of former Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to be Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs. (CR, 12/12/69, D1201)
Former astronaut and aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter announced he would become President and Chief Executive of Sea Sciences Corp., private enterprise formed to develop underwater projects. Prince Bernhard of The Netherlands would be board chairman, (upi, W Star, 10/30/69, A16)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., appeared in nationally televised press conference. Interview with four newsmen was conducted over closed-circuit TV, with astronauts at ksc and press 15 mi away. TV cameramen allowed in auditorium with crew had undergone thorough medical examinations. Armstrong, mission commander, said that after decade of planning and hard work astronauts were “willing and ready to attempt to achieve our national goal. This is possible because very many Americans across the nation have dedicated themselves to quality craftsmanship and ingenuity.” In response to question on astronauts’ attitudes toward mission, Armstrong said fear was not unknown, but added: “Fear is characteristic particularly of a knowledge that there may be something that you haven’t thought of and feel that you might be unable to cope with. I think our training and all the work that goes into the preparation for a flight does everything it can towards erasing those kinds of possibilities and I would say that as a crew we . . . have no fear of launching out on this expedition.” (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/69, 1, 20)
Climaxing day of cross-country celebrations, President and Mrs. Nixon hosted formal state dinner at Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles to honor Apollo 11 astronauts, their wives, and “historic achievement of the first manned landing on the moon.” Guests included other astronauts and wives; widows of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H.	White II; Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard; NASA and other space program officials; U.S. and international aviation pioneers; Cabinet members; Chief Justice and Mrs. Warren E. Burger; governors of 44 states; members of Joint Chiefs of Staff; Diplomatic Corps members representing 83 nations; Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower, widow of former President; former Vice President and Mrs. Hubert H. Humphrey; and Congressional leaders. President asked NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to read citation of posthumous awards: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration awards posthumously to Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee the NASA Distinguished Service Medals for professional skill, courage, and dedication to duty in Project Apollo. They gave their lives in their country’s historic undertaking to realize the goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth.” President also asked Dr. Paine to read citation of NASA Group Achievement Award to Apollo 11 Mission Operations Team “for exceptional service in planning and exemplary execution of mission operational responsibilities for . . . first manned lunar landing mission.” Award was presented to Apollo Flight Control Engineer Stephen G. Bales, who bad made decision to proceed with lunar landing when computers failed just before Eagle’s landing on Sea of Tranquility, on behalf of 400,000 persons who had contributed to Apollo program success. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, as nasc chairman, presented Medal of Freedom, nation’s highest civilian honor, to Apollo 11 astronauts for participation in “a unique and profoundly important adventure. The accumulated scientific knowledge and technological ability of mankind made man’s first step on the moon practicable; the courage and skill of men like these made it possible. Their contributions to this undertaking will be remembered so long as men wonder and dream and search for truth on this planet and among the stars.” Replying to honors, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said: “What Apollo has begun we hope will spread out in many directions, not just in space, but underneath the seas and in the cities, to tell us unforgettably that we can do what we will and must and want to do.” During evening orderly crowd of peace and antipoverty protesters gathered outside hotel. (PD, 8/18/69, 1141—2, 1148—51; Roberts, NYT, 8/15/69, 14; B Sun, 8/14/69, Al)
nasa announced selection of United Aircraft Corp. for $4-million, threeyear contract to design and develop life support and environmental control systems to sustain astronauts for long-duration earth orbital space flights. (WSJ, 6/5/69)
President Nixon addressed U.S. Embassy staff in London during eightday goodwill visit to European heads of state: “You have had a very distinguished visitor to this country, Frank Borman, a few days ago. .. . I recall when I was at the White House I was congratulating him in a toast for what he and his fellow astronauts had done. ... He said, ‘We appreciate the remarks you have made about us.’ But, he said, ‘I want to point out that there are 400,000 Americans who, in one way or another, contributed to the building of the Apollo spacecraft and to this program.’ He said, ‘I want to point out that there are 2 million parts in an Apollo spacecraft. So, if something went wrong with one of those parts, which had been created by these 400,000 Americans, that tremendous, exciting journey around the moon could not have been possible.’ That, of course, is what government is about.” {PD, 3/10/69, 341-2)
Apollo 11 booster, spacecraft, and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., completed final countdown rehearsal test. Astronauts achieved simulated liftoff at 9:32 am edt—exact time of scheduled July 16 launch. Final countdown for manned lunar landing mission would begin July 10. (AP, B Sun, 7/4/69, A10)
Pope Paul VI received Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family for 17-min audience in Papal library. Pope said in English, “Man’s reaching out to unravel the mysteries of the universe reveals more and more the wonders of God’s work and shows forth His glory.” Pope Paul sent personal greetings to Astronaut James W. McDivitt who had audience in 1967. (upi, W Star, 2/16/69, C5)
NASA named flight crews for Apollo 13 and 14 lunar landing missions. Prime crewmen for Apollo 13 were Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (commander), Thomas K. Mattingly II (cm pilot), and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (lm pilot). Backup crew was composed of Astronauts John W. Young, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Apollo 14 prime crewmen were Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Joe E. Engle. Both missions would include lunar exploration and deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiment packages (alsep) . Total lunar surface stay time would include two EVA periods of three hours each and would not exceed 35 hrs. Flights would be first for Astronauts Mattingly, Haise, Roosa, and Mitchell, (nasa Release 69—115)
In Paris during world tour Apollo 11 astronauts were made chevaliers of French Legion of Honor by Premier Jacques Chaban-Delmas and met with French President Georges Pompidou. Paris Mayor Etienne Royer de Vericourt presented them with city’s Gold Medal, (upi, C Trib, 10/9/69)
SNAP—27 nuclear generator placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts had continued to operate during first 28-day-and-night lunar cycle despite temperatures from —291 °F to +283°F, AEC announced. It was producing more than 70 w of electricity to power five instruments deployed Nov. 19 to transmit lunar data, (aec Release M-274)
nasa announced new quarantine procedures for Apollo 12 lunar landing mission scheduled for launch Nov. 14. Procedures had been recommended by Interagency Committee on Back Contamination. If astronauts’ condition was normal at splashdown they would don fresh flight suits and oral-nasal masks instead of biological isolation garments (big) used on Apollo 11. big would be available in case of unexplained crew illness. Swimmer would swab hatch and adjacent areas with liquid decontamination agent and crew would be carried by helicopter to mobile quarantine facility (mqf) on board recovery ship. Subsequent crew quarantine procedures would be same as for Apollo 11. Spacecraft would be returned to Hawaii by recovery ship, where team would deactivate pyrotechnics and flush and drain fluid systems (except water). It would then be flown to Lunar Receiving Laboratory for storage in special room until release from quarantine Jan. 7, 1970. (nasa Release 69—148A)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in by Vice President Spiro T, Agnew ,as NASA Administrator in ceremony in Vice President’s office. Dr. Paine said: “I am particularly anxious to see that in the second April 3; Dr. Thomas O. Paine (right) was sworn in as Administrator of the National Aeronautics anil Space Administration by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. decade of space we bring down to the people on earth more of the benefits that can be obtained from this wonderful new technology. . . . Such areas as navigation, communications and particularly earth resources are things that are very much on our minds as we look out to the moon and beyond.” (nasa Hq WB; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/4/69; AP, W Post, 4/4/69) * National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal for research, exploration, and discovery was presented by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A, Anders in Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C. Vice President Agnew said: “The possibilities of space exploration are so infinite they overwhelm the mind. The speed with which we have reached this new threshold of hope itself is awesome. Less than half a century has passed since the Hubbard Award was presented to Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh for his solo flight from New York to Paris. Less than a decade has passed since Colonel John Glenn was awarded the first Hubbard Medal for exploration in space.” Award, one of Nation’s highest honors, had been given only 24 times in 63 years, for outstanding achievement in geography and exploration. First medal had gone to Robert E. Peary in 1906 for Arctic explorations. Earlier in day at National Geographic headquarters, Apollo 8 astronauts had received General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1968, awarded to military or civilian usaf member making most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release )
First decade in space corresponded with early years of aviation following Wright brothers flight at Kitty Hawk, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, told Annual Kiwanis Dinner in Milledgeville, Ga. “I recently calculated the costs per seat mile of their first flight for comparison with our Apollo flight to the moon. They probably had ten thousand dollars invested in first Kitty Hawk flight that went one fifth of a mile, giving a cost per seat mile for Orville of fifty thousand dollars. We will have about twenty-four billion dollars invested in our first five-hundred-thousand-mile trip for three astronauts to the moon, giving a cost of only about sixteen thousand dollars per seat mile. We are ahead of the Wright Brothers— but we have a long way to go to catch up with the DC—8 or 707. If subsequent flights to the moon cost two hundred million dollars each, that’s less than one hundred and fifty dollars a seat mile, so we are going in the right direction.” (Text)
In Houston, Tex., press interview Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Capt., usn), said he had turned down offers for Naval promotion to admiral and NASA Hq. executive position, to become president of Regency Corp. in Denver, Colo., financial complex leasing industrial equipment worldwide. One of original astronauts and only veteran of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions, Schirra said he did not want to “stick around as a half astronaut.” He had rejected aerospace offers because “I might be limiting the contribution of which I feel I’m capable.” (AP, W Post, 3/12/69, A8)
Senate Committee on Banking and Currency favorably reported S.J.R. 140 with amendments, providing for striking of medals honoring U.S. astronauts who had flown in outer space. (CR, 7/28/69, D681)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders as Executive Secretary of nasc to succeed Dr. Edward C. Welsh. It was highest Government post ever offered to an astronaut. {PD, 5/19/69, 705; Kirkman, W Post, 5/15/69, A25)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and his first-grade school teacher, Mrs. Peggy Crowley, would receive 1969 Golden Key Awards from six national school organizations at annual convention of American Assn, of School Administrators, Atlantic City, N.J., Feb. 15, Parade reported. Awards had been founded to dramatize teacher’s role in U.S. life. (Parade, 2/9/69, 4)
President Nixon’s post -Apollo 11 tour of Asia and Romania July 25— Aug. 3, plus his remarks and reactions aboard U.S.S. Hornet at splashdown and during welcoming ceremony for astronauts, were recorded in New York Times Magazine article by Max Frankel and Robert B. Semple, Jr. Authors were among press accompanying President and Mrs. Nixon on tour. President and party had basked “in reflected moonglow.” When President walked toward reviewing stand in Guam, spectator had remarked, “that’s his moon walk.” Apollo 11 had given President “new exuberance.” [NYT Magazine, 8/17/69, 26—9, 76—80)
New York Times editorial on Aug. 12 Apollo 11 news conference in Houston: “What came through most clearly in yesterday’s enthralling first-hand report by the Apollo astronauts was the infinitesimal margin by which Eagle escaped either catastrophe or a decision to abort the moon landing. Either of the two major problems that emerged in those nerve-wracking moments before touchdown—the overburdened computer and the near-exhaustion of their fuel supply before Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin found a suitable landing spot—might have forced a very different ending to the historic mission. That all turned out perfectly is a tribute to the astronauts’ skill, courage and poise as well as to the ability of the back-up personnel at Mission Control in Houston.” (NYT, 8/13/69, 40)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced H.R. 465 “providing for the establishment of the Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct and erect with funds a memorial in the John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, or the immediate vicinity, to honor and commemorate the men who serve as astronauts in the U.S. space program.” (CR, 2/19/69, H1087)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Co. Aerospace Group to receive 119million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to design, develop, test, and deliver four flight-qualified lunar roving vehicles and related test and training equipment. Four-wheeled vehicles would be carried on board Apollo lm descent stages in 1971—72 to transport astronauts on lunar surface and store equipment and lunar samples, (nasa Release 69—147)
At gsfc, satellite mapping authority Dr. John A. O’Keefe was preparing first precise maps of Tibet using photographs taken from 100-mi altitude by U.S. astronauts and data obtained between 1890s and 1935 by Swedish explorer Sven Hedin during only extensive survey of area by outsider. Expedition’s survey sightings on mountain peaks were being applied to numerous photographs from space. Revised maps would be published in Sweden. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/13/69, 14)
At White House, President Nixon proclaimed July 21 National Day of Participation. “Apollo 11 is on its way to the moon. . . . Never before has man embarked on so epic an adventure. ... As the astronauts go ... we on earth will want, as one people, to be with them in spirit . . . and to support them with prayers that all will go well.” All Executive departments and Government agencies would be closed and U.S. flag would be displayed on public buildings. With many members at Cape Kennedy, Senate and House met briefly and conducted only routine business. Congressional Record was filled with comments on Apollo 11 and wishes for Godspeed to astronauts. (PD, 7/21/69, 997-8; CR, 7/16/69)
NASA was allowing Apollo 12 crew and colleagues to take part in Jewish National Fund dinner Dec. 14 in Houston “after years of guarding against the use of its astronauts as fund-raisers,” Associated Press said. Proceeds of $100-a-plate affair honoring Apollo 12 and other astronauts would be used to plant trees in Israel. (AP, W Post, 12/13/69, A12)
From summer residence, Castel Gondolfo, Pope Paul VI asked Christians worldwide to pray for Apollo 11 astronauts and said mission showed man was a “giant.” (AP, B Sun, 7/14/69, A5) At White House religious service the Rev. Paul H. A. Noren of Mount Olivet Church in Minneapolis led 300 people in prayer: “We ask Thy divine protection for our space pioneers who will soon make footprints on the moon.” (AP, NYT, 7/14/69, 23)
White House announced Apollo 11 astronauts would make 22-nation tour starting Sept. 29, to stress U.S. willingness to share space knowledge. Itinerary would include Mexico City; Bogota, Colombia; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Las Palmas, Canary Islands; Madrid; Paris; Amsterdam and Brussels; Oslo; Cologne, Germany; Berlin; London; Rome; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; Ankara, Turkey; Kinshasa, Congo; Teheran, Iran; Bombay, India; Dacca, Pakistan; Bangkok, Thailand; Darwin and Sydney, Australia; Guam; Seoul; Tokyo; Honolulu; and return to Houston, Tex., Nov. 5. Additional trip to Ottawa and Montreal, Canada, was planned for December, (upi, NYT, 9/20/69, 5)	_
San Francisco Board of Supervisors had voted to negotiate with Texas millionaire Lamar Hunt on lease of 22-acre Alcatraz Island, United Press International reported. Hunt planned underground museum in tribute to Apollo 11, while restoring island’s historic buildings. (W Star, 10/20/69, B4) weather satellite itos that would be launched in prototype by NASA later in 1969 and in operational form by ESSA in early 1970. “It combines in one spacecraft both the stored-data and direct readout cameras of the present two-satellite [tiros] arrangement. Fewer launches will be required to keep the system in operation. The design allows for growth and the capacity to accommodate a variety of instruments to meet new and developing needs.” System would contain high-resolution infrared radiometer for “nighttime observations approaching daytime pictures in resolution and quality” thus providing 24-hr weather satellite coverage. “This step will enable us to meet fully the first national program objective—providing twice-daily observations of the entire earth, both by stored and direct readout systems, day and night.” (Text) Fifty years of transatlantic flight—from usn NC—4 flying boat’s Lisbon arrival May 27, 1919, to June 3, 1969, maiden Atlantic crossing of Boeing 747—was traced in paper by Dr. Richard K. Smith, Ramsey Fellow at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. During “the Heroic Years on the North Atlantic between 27 May 1919 and 27 May 1939, there were 175 flights across the Atlantic; 142 were by airplanes, 33 by airships. ... It is confidently believed that all the persons who flew the Atlantic by airplane during that period could be accommodated aboard a 747, perhaps with some seats to spare. However, at least three more 747s would be required to lift those persons who flew by airship during 1919—1937!” (Text) msc Flight Operations Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said Apollo program might be extended to 1973 to allow NASA to fly three space station training missions in 1972. “It’s going to be some time before we settle it. But it’s going to be difficult to handle both Apollo and Apollo Applications from an operational point of view as well as a people point of view in 1972.” Revised launch schedule set Apollo 19 landing back to November 1972 and Apollo 20 to May 1973. Between Apollo 18 launch Feb. 11, 1972, and Apollo 19 were three orbital flights preparatory for establishment of first U.S. permanent space station in 1975. These flights could come just after Apollo 18, in May 1972 and in September 1972. Further reason for Apollo landings delay was possibility they would be made in remote lunar areas like crater Tycho, almost 1,000 mi below moon’s equator and rated among top-priority landing sites. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/23/69, A21) Dr. Arthur D. Code, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer, reported discovery that relatively young stars in constellations Orion and Scorpius were generating heats of 45,000°F—5,000° hotter than had been thought. Finding, from data obtained by NASA’s Oao II satellite (launched Dec. 7, 1968), suggested young stars might be more massive and maturing faster than originally believed and supported theories of thermonuclear processes in stars’ interiors that generated such heats. Oao II data also showed younger stars had more complex chemical composition than stars formed near universe’s beginning. They contained fairly large amounts of carbon, silicon, magnesium, and heavier elements, as well as predominant hydrogen and helium. Other Oao II data indicated particles in interstellar space were variety of complex matter, much of which might be debris ejected from stars. (Wilford, NYT, 10/21/69, C19) msc Director of Engineering Development Maxime A. Faget outlined concept of space vehicle with two reusable stages—booster rocket and orbiter craft—both with fixed wings, long fuselages, and rear rocket engines. Vehicle would be 225 ft high and weigh 2.5 million lbs at launch. Orbiter vehicle, capable of carrying 25,000 lbs of cargo and passengers, would be attached pickaback to booster stage’s upper half. Booster, burning liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, would elevate orbiter to fringe of space, separate, drop away, and cruise to landing like jet airliner. Booster probably would be piloted by two astronauts. Orbiter would ignite rocket engine to continue upward to space station orbiting at 300-mi altitude. After link-up with space station, transfer of cargo or 12 passengers, and pickup of new load, orbiter would be steered by pilot into atmosphere and controlled glide to landing on 10,000-ft runways used by aircraft. Key to reentry would be orbiter’s “angle of attack” when hitting atmosphere. Faget proposed 60° angle with nose up, so flattened bottom would catch airflow to slow descent. Small jet engines would be fired to help control final descent phases of both orbiter and booster. Outer surface of vehicles would be made of metal alloys that could sustain temperatures to 2,700°F. (Wilford, NYT, 10/24/69, 43) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed dod space activities: “In communications, meteorology and surveillance . . . we are actively pursuing increased capability. . . . Tactical communications using satellite relays are presently being intensely tested and show great promise in improving control of field units and increasing . . . cooperation between land, sea and air forces. In surveillance, our efforts have produced results. Of first importance is a new satellite early warning system that will do a great deal to further insure our ability to deter nuclear attack.” Savings in space travel costs “must be linked to the recovery and reuse of space vehicles. . . . Since major improvement in our ability to use space environment would be of direct assistance to both NASA and the military, we are jointly planning our research and development towards this objective.” (Text) Major aiaa awards presented included Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to George M. Low, former Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, currently on special assignment to msc Director, for “his leadership role in bringing the Apollo Program to fulfillment, and to the thousands of engineers who dedicated their careers, without public recognition, to the conquest of space.” Daniel Guggenheim Medal for 1969 was presented to retired arc Director H. Julian Allen for “personal contributions to outstanding research and development leading to vastly improved re-entry bodies, missiles, satellites, and spacecraft, and for leadership in directing and inspiring a large group of research men at Ames Laboratory.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given Edgar C. Lineberry, Jr., Chief of Orbital Mission Analysis Branch, msc, for “significant advancement in the field of rendezvous mechanics through his development of the space maneuver logic and associated control techniques, and his formulation of the mission plans which contributed decisively to the success of all rendezvous operations conducted during United States manned space flights.” De Florez Training Award was given to Gifford Bull, Principal Engineer and Engineering Pilot at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, for “establishing the use of variable stability airplanes as flight dynamics training vehicles for engineering test pilots.” New aiaa Award for Spacecraft Design was awarded Otto E. Bartoe, Jr., Vice President, Aerospace Div., Ball Brothers Research Corp., for “concept and preliminary design of the Orbiting Solar Observatory spacecraft configuration and control systems, the first embodiment of the spin-despin design.” Aerospace Communications Award was awarded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency and former JPL Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, for “development of phase lock systems for space communications, guidance and control, and for contributions to the design, development and operation of NASA’s Deep Space Network.” (msc Release; aiaa Releases; aiaa Booster, 10/20/69) Honored as new Honorary Fellows at Honors and Award Banquet Oct. 23 were Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Among 29 new Fellows were: Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, Deputy Director, Flight Crew Operations Directorate, msc; former gsfc Director, Dr. Harry J. Goett, Chief Engineer, Space and Re-Entry Systems Div., Philco-Ford Corp.; Najeeb E. Halaby, President, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Samuel L. Higginbottom, Vice President, Operations Group, Eastern Airlines, Inc.; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director; John G. Borger, Chief Engineer, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Walter Haeussermann, Director, Astrionics Laboratory, MSFC; Dr. John C. Houbolt, Vice President and Senior Consultant, Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, (aiaa Release) During third aiaa President’s Forum, Under Secretary of Interior Russell E. Train said, “Photographs of Earth, taken by our astronauts from the vicinity of the Moon, bring home more forcefully than the words of all scientists of all times the fact that we live on a finite planet with finite but poorly known resources.” (A&A, 2/70) October 21: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCIV into orbit with 760-km (472.2-mi) apogee, 742-km (461.1-mi) perigee, 99.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69)
In Madrid during European goodwill tour, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman placed wreath at statue of Columbus and met Cristobal Colon de Carvajal y Maroto, 17th duke of Veragua and hereditary “admiral of the ocean sea,” title created in 1537 for explorer’s son, Diego Columbus. (AP, C Trib, 2/18/69)
President Nixon welcomed returned Apollo 11 astronauts aboard U.S.S. Hornet: “I think I am the luckiest man in the world . . . not only because I have the honor to be President of the United States, but particularly because I have the privilege of speaking for so many in welcoming you back to earth.” Washington had received messages from more than 100 foreign governments: “Emperors, Presidents, Prime Ministers, and Kings, have sent the most warm messages that we have ever received. They represent over 2 billion people on this earth, all of them who had the opportunity, through television, to see what you have done.” Week of mission had been “the greatest week in the history of the world since the Creation, because as a result of what happened in this week, the world is bigger, infinitely, and also, as I am going to find on this trip around the world ... as a result of what you have done, the world has never been closer together before.” (PD, 8/4/69,1032-3)
NASA’s 363-ft-tall Saturn V launch vehicle, tipped with Apollo 12 spacecraft scheduled to carry astronauts toward moon Nov. 14, was placed on launch pad at KSC. (AP, W Post, 9/9/69, A2)
White House announced Apollo 11 crew on way to moon was carrying Soviet commemorative medals brought back to U.S. by Astronaut Frank Borman, who had received them from widows of Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Vladimir M. Komarov during his Moscow visit. Apollo 11 also carried Apollo 204 crew patch and commemorative medals struck for families of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee before astronauts died in Jan. 27, 1967, fire. President Nixon said, “The names of Gagarin and Komarov, of Grissom, White, and Chaffee, share the honors we pray will come to Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. In recognizing the dedication and sacrifice of brave men of different nations, we underscore an example we hope to set: that if men can reach the moon, men can reach agreement.” (PD, 7/21/69, 999)
Recording by seismometer on moon of seven external impacts near Apollo 12 landing site since astronauts left moon Nov. 20 was reported by Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo program’s seismic research. Each impact had produced tremors. Dr. Latham said meteors might have struck Ocean of Storms, whose surface resonated when hit. Lack of internal quakes indicated moon had not been heated substantially for about 4.6 billion yrs. (AP, W Star, 12/9/69, A6)
President Nixon, accompanied by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, visited dod employees at Pentagon. President recalled reference made by Astronaut Frank Borman at White House Apollo 8 briefing Jan. 30 to “400,000 men and women in the Nation who at one time or another had played a part in making this great, spectacular feat possible.” President said, “I was glad to see Colonel Borman bring it home that way. Four hundred thousand made it possible for this magnificent achievement to occur. I trust that all of you can convey that kind of spirit to those who work in the Defense Department.” {PD, 2/3/69, 194)
Electrostatic zero-gravity workbench experiment by Chrysler Corp. at Michoud Assembly Facility might provide substitute for gravity in small space-station area, NASA reported. If successful, experimental equipment—three-foot-square workbench with coated metal top, high voltage and variable power supply, and ion source with interconnected cabling—would enable astronaut to manipulate loose objects like tools in weightlessness of orbiting space station. Ion source and high-voltage power supply, directed downward, would create force field to hold tools to bench top. Ground experiments would be completed in six months. (NASA Release 69—58)
usaf promoted Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to full colonel. In congratulatory message Gen. John P. McConnell, Air Force Chief of Staff, said Apollo 11 mission was “indeed a momentous achievement” and promotion was “token of appreciation for the part you played.” (upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 28)	<
Europeans were “as excited as many Americans” about Apollo 11 launch, New York Times reported. But “only the sharpest observer of the Soviet news media could guess, as he went to bed tonight, that Americans will try to send men to the moon tomorrow,” according to Baltimore Sun. Last mention of Apollo 11 in Soviet press had been July 9 meeting of President Nikolay V. Podgorny with Astronaut Frank Borman. In U.K., bbc and commercial TV were planning extensive Apollo 11 coverage, some live via comsat. British newspapers were competing with special space supplements and guides. Exceptions to generally “adulatory” reportage was The Times of London article in which philosopher Lord Russell had said: “Men will not be content to land upon the moon and try to make it habitable. They will land simultaneously from Russia and the United States, each party, complete with H-bombs and each intent upon exterminating the other.” American Embassy in Warsaw was packed every day with Poles viewing space films. Spain’s Evening Daily Pueblo had sponsored contest to send 25 readers to Apollo 11 launch. In France 22-page space supplement issued by France-Soir had sold 1.5 million copies at $1 each. Bild Zeitung in Germany had noted 7 out of 57 Apollo supervisors were of German origin. Austrian press had lionized Dr. Wernher von Braun during recent visit to Salzburg. Volume of Western European newspaper space devoted to lunar landing mission rivaled that in U.S., New York Times said, and “the whole story of the moon effort is improving the ‘prestige’ of the United States. . . . But. .. respect voiced by individuals is often for America’s technological power, not her humanity or civilization.” (Lewis, NYT, 7/16/69, 20; B Sun, 7/16/69, A8, Mills, A9)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean achieved mock liftoff at 11:22 am edt-—exact minute planned—completing final phase of initial countdown demonstration test (cddt) for Nov. 14 launch to moon. No major problems arose in spite of gusty winds and rain that would have delayed actual launch. (W Post, 10/30/69, A8)
Astronaut Alan L. Bean described plans for Apollo 12 extravehicular activities to press at KSC. Mission, to begin Nov. 14, would include two 3Vs>-hr eva periods on moon. For first EVA main objective was to deploy alsep, deploy TV camera and take photos, deploy lunar equipment conveyor, take contingency sample, deploy S-band antenna and solar wind experiment, and collect lunar material. After rest in lm astronauts would return to lunar surface for second eva period, to collect good documented sample and document geologically interesting features with photographs, samples, and description. “There’s not going to be a lot of time to pick up a rock and think about it . . . but there’s going to be time to look at the craters and try to determine what kind they are and where they came from, if this one’s different from that one, what part of the crater you want to sample. . . . We’re going to take photographs as we see all of it. And when this is finished we’re hopefully going to be over near Surveyor.” Examination of Surveyor 111 (launched April 17, 1967) was second objective. Crew would retrieve parts for evaluation of how materials withstood long-term exposure in space. Final surface experiment would be conducted after liftoff from moon when crew crashed LM ascent stage onto surface. Crash would be recorded by seismometer and was expected to provide data from which scientists could make inferences about moon’s internal structure. (Transcript)
Report of President Nixon’s Task Group on Space [Sept. 15] and Apollo astronauts’ speeches to Congress [Sept. 16] had brought some “rationality back to the discussion of whither the space program,” Washington Post editorial said. Acceptance by President of recommendation “would eliminate talk of abandoning manned space flight, which would be a foolish course of action, or of proceeding toward Mars in a crash effort to get there as quickly as possible.” It was important “for the nation to push ahead on the immediate recommendations of the Task Group— exploring the moon, developing the tools that are needed for systematic exploration of our space travel capability, and extracting from the space program more benefits for those of us who are earthbound.” (W Post, 9/19/69)
Apollo 9 mission had gathered new evidence of clearer visibility-in space and “marvelous” acuity of human eye, Associated Press reported. Astronauts had told officials onboard recovery ship after splashdown they could see much farther in space than in earth’s atmosphere—both with telescopes and with naked eye. They had tracked several orbiting space objects up to 1,600 mi away with telescope and had tracked jettisoned 2%-ft-long, 14-ft-dia LM ascent stage to 1,000 mi. (W Star, 3/17/69, A4; W Post, 3/17/69, A4)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., quarantined in lrl, discussed lunar surface activities with about 40 scientists and geologists over closed-circuit TV. Astronauts said lunar surface was rich with interesting rocks. They described small, lyalnut-size fragments which appeared translucent or transparent, with reflecting surfaces like quartz crystals; spatters of glass on rocks, especially on rocks on bottom of craters; and rocks shaped like automobile distributor caps, which appeared to be weathered or eroded and sculptured at top in cylindrical shape. Astronauts said they regretted not being able to retrieve more lunar rocks and suggested that future Apollo astronauts be equipped with extra pocket or shoulder bag so they could collect interesting rocks as they saw them. (W Post, 8/7/69, A4; AP, B Sun, 8/7/69, A8)
President Nixon approved H.J.R. 775, to authorize President to award Congressional Space Medals of Honor to astronauts [see Sept. 15]. (CR, 10/6/69, 1362)
“We have entered a new era,” Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press in Houston following Apollo 11 lunar landing. “The significance of the trip is that mankind is going to establish places of abode outside of his planet earth.” In telephone call to White House, Dr. Paine had told President Nixon, “It is my honor on behalf of the entire NASA team to report to you that the Eagle has landed on the Sea of Tranquility and our astronauts are safe and looking forward to starting the exploration of the moon.” Dr. Paine said President Nixon had spoken with “excitement and awe in his voice” and mood was that of “considerable tension relieved.” NASA planned tentative six additional manned lunar missions over next few years. Dr. Paine praised U.S.S.R.’s cooperation in providing Luna XV information to Astronaut Frank Borman [see July 18]. He also said if Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong had not assumed manual control of lm to steer it from crater during lunar landing, “we might . . . have had considerable- difficulty.” (McGehan, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al)
Apollo 11 astronauts on world tour arrived in Tokyo. Tight security measures prompted by fears of possible attack by radical students protesting Japan’s defense treaty with U.S. permitted public exposure for only half hour. Police estimated 120,000 people watched brief parade down Ginza, Tokyo’s main street. Later astronauts and wives were received by Emperor Hirohito and Empress Nagako. Astronauts were presented cultural medal by Prime Minister Eisaku Sato—first time medal had been presented to foreigners. (Pepper, B Sun, 11/5/69, A2)
At Andrews afb, on return from world tour, President Nixon said: “In Bucharest I noted that so many, particularly of the young people, held up a newspaper picture of the astronauts landing on the moon, and everywhere we went it was the same. Some way, when those two Americans stepped on the moon, the people of this world were brought closer together. ... I really feel in my heart that it is . . . the spirit of Apollo, that America can now help to bring to all relations with other nations. The spirit of Apollo . . . can bring the people of the world together in peace.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1071—2)
Hungary and Romania had issued souvenir stamps commemorating Apollo 8 mission and astronauts, U.S. newspaper philatelic columns announced. Photograph taken from Gemini IV of Arabian coast provided design for new stamp in sultanate of Muscat and Oman. (Faries, W Star, 2/9/69, D10; AP, W Post, 2/9/69, K8)
Glazing discovered on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts was analyzed in Science by Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., senior investigator for close-up photography. Glossy surfaces similar to glass found clumped in centers of small lunar craters appeared to have been swept in after craters had been formed. Glazed areas were also concentrated toward tops of protuberances and, in some cases, droplets appeared to have run down inclined surface and congealed on sides. Glazing might have originated from effect of exhaust of lm descent stage, splashing of liquid drops from larger impact elsewhere, shock heating or volcanism on moon, same impact that created craters in which glazing was found, or intense radiation heating. Intense radiation was most probable cause, Gold said. Source could have been impact fireball on moon, impact fireball on earth, or most likely, solar outburst in geologically recent times. (Science, 9/26/69, 1345—9)
Time-Life, Inc., would pay minimum of $400,000 for exclusive book rights of lunar landing story to the combine established by NASA astronauts in 1959, Don Kirkman said in Washington Daily News. Money would be split equally into 60 shares for 52 active astronauts and widows of 8 deceased. (W News, 7/2/69, 7)
Apollo 11 launch brought mood of reflection across Nation, New York Times said. Dawn was breaking in western U.S. when blastoff occurred. Workers in San Francisco’s open air fish markets stood in silence to hear radio report. In San Diego motorists crossing U.S.-Mexican border listened to countdown on car radios. In mid-America, classes were postponed at Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colo., while cadets watched launch on TV. Cowhands at northern Wyoming ranch, inaccessible to radio or TV, interrupted work to honor Apollo 11. Ranch owner Dr. Oakleigh Thorn II said, “We feel so close to the moon shot out here, because we’re so close to the stars and sky.” In Biloxi, Miss., harbor fishermen paused on wharf to hear countdown. In Tennessee, tobacco farmers listened to transistor radios in fields. Washington, D.C., schoolteacher said, “The astronauts didn’t just go to the moon. All our minds went to the moon and intellectually man’s horizons have jumped leaps and bounds beyond the historical situation they’ve always been confined to.” (Fosburgh, NYT, 7/17/69, 1)
Royal Crown Cola International announced former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had become its president. He had been chairman since January 1967. (NYT, 2/8/69)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., practiced splashdown and anticontamination procedures they would use after return from moon in July. Astronauts donned plastic-coated biological isolation garments and sprayed each other with Betadine disinfectant before leaving dummy spacecraft in Gulf of Mexico, (upi, W Star, 5/25/69, A6)
On arrival in Saigon, Republic of Vietnam, President Nixon said: “I am happy that the moon landing, which in its universality signifies a symbolic drawing together of all mankind, has provided an occasion for me to meet with President Thieu in the capital of his country.” Later, after discussions with President Nixon, President Nguyen Van Thieu said, “The Vietnamese people fully concur in the message of peace which the three brave American astronauts deposited on the moon for all mankind.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1051—4)
Apollo 9 commander James A. McDivitt was appointed Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, replacing George M. Low, who was temporarily on special assignment to msc Director to plan future msc programs and work on organizational matters, (msc Release 69-66) *	East Germany’s People’s Chamber unanimously ratified nuclear nonproliferation treaty. West Germany had not yet signed. (P Inq, 9/25/69) *	House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably S. 1287, which authorized appropriations for FYs 1970, 1971, and 1972 for metric system study. (CR, 9/25/69, H8488) Lee B. James, Director of Program Management at msfc, said next moon flights could suffer from lack of proper employee motivation. “We are completing [rocket] stages with welders who know they are going to be laid off.” Sheet metal workers in plants with termination papers were working on vital space hardware. Twenty defects attributed to human error had been uncovered in single rocket. Apollo Program Director Rocco Petrone said future moon landings would be even more demanding than first, with astronauts spending 54 hrs on moon during some. To make missions successful, workers must be motivated to pay greatest attention to detail. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said NASA hoped to cut payload launch costs to $200 per pound and reduce number of workers on Saturn V launches from 20,000	to about number required to get Boeing 747 off ground, (msc Release 69—65; Maloney, H Post, 9/26/69)	•	v
Sequence of five color photos of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., performing extravehicular activities on lunar surface were released by NASA. Vivid sequence showed Aldrin descending ladder to surface, walking near LM, posing near U.S. flag, deploying seismometer, and walking with Armstrong’s reflection visible in his visor. NASA also released two-part 16—mm film which showed moon fading away as LM ascended and Lm’s rendezvous with CSM in lunar orbit. It also showed Astronaut Michael Collins shaving inside CSM. (W Post, 8/1/69, A7; Witkin, NYT, 8/1/69, 16)
Apollo 11 preparations were proceeding well toward launch to moon at 9:32 am edt July 16, Apollo Mission Director George H. Hage told Washington, D.C., press conference. Hypergolic propellant loading would begin June 18, wet phase of countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin July 1, and crew participation in cddt without propellants would begin July 2. After landing on moon astronauts would descend ladder to lunar surface. When Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong reached second rung of ladder, he would pull D-ring to activate camera for TV coverage of descent to lunar surface. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., would descend about 15 min after Armstrong. Entire 21/£-hr period during which astronauts explored lunar surface, set up experiments, and collected lunar samples within 100 ft of landing site would be telecast live to TV viewers on earth. (Transcript)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong would be first man to step on moon, according to NASA plans for July 16 Apollo 11 mission, Apollo Program Manager George M. Low told msc press conference. Armstrong, mission commander, followed by Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., lm pilot, would leave LM and spend 2 hrs 40 min walking on lunar surface, gathering rock samples, setting up experiments, and taking pictures within 100 ft of LM. Astronauts would not go farther, Low said, because “all that we need to carry out in deploying the experiment in doing all of the activities that we have to do on the surface the first time . . . can be done within the first 50 or 100 ft from the LM and we see no reason to go any further and use up a lot of energy walking as opposed to doing those things that we would like to do. . . .” (Transcript)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1968 was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A, Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Statler Hilton Hotel ceremony in Washington, D.C. National Aeronautic Assn, award was made annually for greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. toward improving performance, efficiency, and safety of air or space vehicles, (naa News; W Star, 5/8/69, A3)
Apollo 11 astronauts lunched with King Olav of Norway in Oslo before spending weekend at cottage of Norwegian Defense Minister Otto Greig Tidemand during world tour, (upi, W Star, 10/10/69, A9)
NASA announced resignation of Astronaut F. Curtis Michel, effective Aug. 18. Dr. Michel, who had been on one-year leave of absence from NASA to do scientific research at Rice Univ. in Houston, said that—although he was reluctant to leave NASA and prospect of flight in space—he wanted to devote full time to research at Rice. Resignation reduced number of NASA astronauts to 48. (msc Release 69—55)
AFSC Neuisrevieui editorial commented on Apollo 11: “If, like the early Vikings or Columbus at the shores of the New World, Amundsen at Antarctica, Hillary at the peak of Mt. Everest—our astronauts stood alone with their thoughts on unknown soil, they were not alone. With them was the invisible presence of the most extensive, highly trained, professionally competent, and thoroughly dedicated task force we have known. We in the Air Force Systems Command salute the astronauts on their accomplishment. We are proud that we have been able to contribute to their magnificent achievement.” (afsc Newsreview, 8/69, 2)
Apollo 11 astronauts were welcomed by estimated 100,000 persons in Bangkok, Thailand, after flight from Dacca, Pakistan, during world tour. (C Trib, 10/29/69)
Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov told press conference at MSC they had declined invitation to visit Cape Kennedy because they could not reciprocate and invite U.S. astronauts to Soviet launch facilities. (C Trib, 10/24/69)
Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham was named a director of American Systems Inc., Los Angeles electronics firm. Cunningham, lm pilot on Oct. 11—22 Apollo 7 mission, would continue duties as astronaut. (Reuters, W Post, 4/10/69)
Scientists at msc, monitoring seismometers left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts, recorded five-minute tremor they said could have been internal activity—moonquake—or meteoroid strike on surface. Scientists expressed concern that seismometer was overheating, probably because of damage to protective cover from lm exhaust, and might not survive heat of lunar moon. (McGehan, B Sun, 7/23/69, Al; Cohn, W Post, 7/24/69, A15)
Apollo 11 astronauts placed wreath at Christopher Columbus monument in Madrid and later met Gen. Francisco Franco and Prince Juan Carlos during world tour, (upi, W Star, 10/7/69, A6)
Apollo 12 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility, arrived at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, where they were greeted by huge crowd, Marine band, civic and military officials, and hula troupe. (Rossiter, W Post, 11/29/69, A3)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received first Pere Marquette Discovery Award of silver medal from Father Marquette Tercentenary Commission of Marquette Univ. (CR, 12/4/69, E10223)
Plans for proposed $l-million Neil A. Armstrong Aerospace Museum at Apollo 11 astronaut’s birthplace, Wapakoneta, Ohio, called for completion in 1970, Ohio Historical Society Director Daniel R. Porter said, (upi, W Post, 7/26/69, B7)
NASA program of returning man from lunar landing was based on conclusion there was no risk, Stanford Univ. geneticist Dr. Joshua Lederberg said in Washington Post. “We could not mount an effective quarantine against a real peril of global infection unless we were prepared to sacrifice the astronaut, which is unthinkable.” Arguments for zero risk were “quite persuasive”—lack of atmosphere on moon, “an absolutely necessary condition for life to flourish,” and fact that earth had experienced lunar material samples from secondary meteorites. Main purpose of quarantine was “to protect the samples from earthly contamination—not altogether successfully, in view of the exhalations from the landing rocket and from the astronauts’ space suits. It was then reasonable to add on whatever additional precautions against back-contamination were possible without impeding the mission.” Project had helped show lunar arrangements would be “quite inappropriate to a real risk, for example a sample return from Mars.” For Mars program, “we must learn a great deal more by instrumented observations left there, before we can begin to design the precautions needed for samples, or men, returned to earth.” (W Post, 7/12/69, A15)
Meteor Crater, Arizona, 640-acre site containing crater three miles in circumference and 570 ft deep, was attracting 200,000 visitors annually as “finest example on earth” of what Apollo 11 astronauts found on moon. (Arline, W Star, 10/16/69, A21)
Eleven scientists and technicians joined Apollo 12 astronauts in quarantine at Lunar Receiving Laboratory after accidental exposure to lunar samples, (upi, NYT, 12/2/69, 49)
Scientist Dr. Edwin C. T. Chao, quarantined with Apollo 12 astronauts at LRL, said mound on moon photographed by Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., during Apollo 12 moonwalk could be crushed rock ejected from crater, msc geologist Dr. Robin P. Brett said 1.5-lb rock among Apollo 12 samples had been formed far beneath surface and could be deepest piece of lunar material man had yet studied, (upi, NYT, 12/4/69, 17)
Estimated 1.5 million persons lined streets of Bombay, India, to welcome Apollo 11 astronauts. It was largest reception given to astronauts and wives during 22-nation tour. (AP, B Sun, 10/27/69, A3)
Apollo 9, carrying Astronauts James M. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39A at 11:00 am est Feb. 28, NASA announced. The 10-day earth orbital mission would include simulated translunar insertion; CSM separation, transposition, and docking with LM; onboard LM systems evaluation; extravehicular maneuvers between lm and CM; manned LM active rendezvous; and six sps burns, (nasa Release 69—3)
Apollo 11 astronauts and wives arrived in Mexico City for start of 39-day tour of 22 countries [see Sept. 19]. (AP, B Sun, 9/30/69, Al)
Senate passed H.J.R. 775, “to authorize the President to award, in the name of Congress, Congressional Space Medals of Honor to those astronauts whose particular efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind have been exceptionally meritorious.” (CR, 9/16/69, S10630)
Univ. of Texas astronomers reported second unsuccessful attempt to bounce laser beam off reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. McDonald Observatory Director, Dr. Harlan Smith, said he expected eventual success. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69, A8)
While spaceborne, Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt was selected to receive Ancient Order of Hibernians’ John F. Kennedy Medal for National Civic Service. Award would be presented by Irish-descent society in Newark, N.J., May 10. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/10/69, Al; W Post, 3/10/69, A5)
Economist commented on lunar investigation: “Scientists, unlike engineers, are not at this stage interested in whether the moon can be made habitable; but this, rather than its age, or peculiarities of its composition, is what the astronauts went out to the moon to find. The results are more encouraging than anyone but the confirmed star gazers could have hoped. Space is not unfriendly; nor is the moon, superficially barren though it looks. What we need are more assurances about sources of water which space planners continue to be convinced is trapped in, and can be extracted from, the rocks. Also more data on those surprising experiments where plants have thrived on moon soil. . . . And some idea about whether it will be possible to protect man from ultraviolet radiation up there, without having to put him in a protective pressure suit.” (Economist, 9/20/69, 17)
Press in U.S. and around the world underscored Apollo IPs landing on moon and man’s first steps on another planet. St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “There is no doubt that the United States should continue to support a substantial spacefaring program. Anything else would be a denial of the scientific spirit of the century and the qualities that have made America what it is. But its scope should be measured by findings and probabilities—and one other factor. Future spacefaring ought to be a co-operative effort of all nations able to participate, with the benefits to be shared by all.” (St. Louis P—D, 7/20/69) Washington Sunday Star: “A creature that can stand where Armstrong and Aldrin stand tonight—that can, in the future, move among the spheres and literally explore new worlds ... is unlikely to give up on the hard task of perfecting himself and his life in his natural environment on earth. The God who brought him thus far from a blob of squirming protoplasm ... is unlikely ... to let man blow it all now. Here . . . must be the answer to the national debate as to whether we go ahead in space, or whether we tend to our knitting at home. We are bound to do both. . . . The progressive expansion of the physical and spiritual domain of man inevitably will intensify our determination and ability, in concert with other nations, to build a home world where hunger, fear and violence no longer have a place.” (W Star, 7/20/69, Gl) William Hines in Washington Sunday Star: “One cannot question the majesty of conception or magnitude of effort that made Apollo 11 possible.” But one could ask, “Is this trip really necessary?” One saw in Apollo “that fundamental failing called hubris, which got so many protagonists into hot water in the old Greek mythology. Hubris in English is usually taken to mean prideful arrogance; in ancient Greek the word meant simple insolence. The Apollo enthusiast rejects the concept of hubris; he says we go to the moon not because we are arrogant, but because we are driven, and thereby implicitly rejects the concept of free will and substitutes sappiness for sassiness. The majority asks, ‘But if we didn’t go, what?’ and the minority responds, ‘If we didn’t go, so what?’” (W Star, 7/20/69, G2) Humorist Art Buchwald in Washington Post: “Sometimes one gets the feeling that the right hand germs in the Government don’t know what the left hand germs are doing. This was brought home to me . . . when I read about the millions of dollars that were being spent to see that the astronauts did not bring back a single germ from the moon. Unfortunately, across the page from that story was another that the Army was going ahead with open air testing of nerve gases and germ warfare.” (W Post, 7/20/69, B6) Los Angeles Herald-Examiner: “America’s moon program has benefited all mankind. It has brought better color television, water purification at less cost, new paints and plastics, improved weather forecasting, medicine, respirators, walkers for the handicapped, laser surgery, world-wide communications, new transportation systems, earthquake prediction system and solar power. . . . The Mars goal should bring benefits to all mankind even greater than the tremendous contributions of the moon program.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/20/69) Baltimore Sun: “. . . it is still almost incredible that in the afternoon of a Sunday on earth two humans found themselves within a vehicle resting on the surface of the moon. Nothing could quite prepare one’s mind for that, or for the subsequent moment of climax, the actual setting of a human foot on the substance of our barren satellite. One of the mysteries that had engaged the infinitely inquisitive mind of man is now made tangible. Others remain beyond our planet and upon it.” (B Sun, 7/21/69, A16) Chicago Daily News: “These have been moments to savor—moments in which uncounted millions have shared the immediacy of a turning point in history. This time there was no lapse of weeks or months, waiting for the event to be confirmed. We were all there, bound together by the miracle of communication that intertwined all the other miracles of technology that marked man’s first step on a celestial body.” (C Daily News, 7/21/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Superlatives pale before the magnificence of the achievement. . . . but how many years before the astounding performance of Armstrong and Aldrin will seem as primitive as the pioneering work of the Wright brothers?” (MJ, 7/21/69, 14) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Man’s store of scientific knowledge will be vastly enriched by the landing on the moon. In no other single event in history has there been greater opportunity to unlock the mysteries of the universe.” (Plain Dealer, 7/21/69) London Daily Sketch: “America’s moon triumph offers this old world’s bickering and jealous people a parable of hope.” (B Sun, 7/22/69, Al) Montreal Star: “The deepest hope for a world starved for some form of symbolism, of an attempt at harmony in place of selfishness and narrow nationalism, came from the astronauts,” CFOX Radio, Montreal, broadcast. “Eliminate war? Yes! Eliminate poverty? Yes! But the exploration of space will help us, not impede us, in reaching these goals.” (Am Consul, Montreal) Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden (principal organ of Social Democratic Party): “No Soviet politician has ever before used such conciliatory tones toward the U.S.A. as did Foreign Minister Gromyko recently in his speech before the Supreme Soviet. . . . This Russian position seems generally to be based on fears of a confrontation with China. . . . One of the side effects can be increased Russian interest in broader scientific cooperation in space research. Nothing else could be better designed for global cooperation, since nothing else gives us clearer testimony that we live in one world.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Apollo 11 was producing noticeable effect on business and consumer products, Washington Post said. Snoopy the Astronaut dolls were selling out; sales of color TV sets had risen in some stores; and sales of “moon maps and globes, as well as toy rocket ships and lunar exploration vehicles had also lifted skyward.” Two Washington, D.C., department stores were offering Japanese telescopes ranging from $19.99 to $1,000.00. One toy store manager said sales of space-related toys had jumped 70% or 80% in two months. Rockets propelled by solid-fuel inserts sold for $1.50 to $5.00 complete with recovery parachute. One Washington store had sold out supply of $10 spacesuits. Demand for rental of color TV sets in Washington area had been “terrific,” according to area dealer. (Cushing, W Post, 7/16/69, Dll)
Apollo 12 congratulatory telegrams at msc suggested “crew members of Apollo 12 will not be lacking their own fan club,” Washington Post article said. Meanwhile, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Apollo 8 crew continued to receive fan mail. Biggest fans of space program appeared to be “little children and supporters of prayers in outer space.” (Lardner, W Post, 11/22/69, A6)
The Biomedical Foundations of Manned Space Flight: A Report of the Space Science and Technology Panel of the President’s Science Advisory Committee was submitted to President’s Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge: “In order to define an appropriate mix of manned and unmanned operations, NASA will need to ‘qualify man for space flight’ in the broadest sense. That is, NASA should pursue a biomedical program which explores the optimization of man’s role in space, the limitations on his effectiveness and means to circumvent those limitations ... a program to determine the best use of man as a space subsystem in interaction with automated subsystems. An effective program directed to this objective exceeds the present capabilities of NASA and involves resources not yet developed in the biomedical community.” Report criticized NASA for not implementing previous recommendations toward strong biomedical research capability. “Pressures for early and reasonably certain success led to placing primary emphasis initially on validation of the capability to construct, orbit, and recover manned spacecraft, with long-range, scientific goals in the biomedical field set aside as potentially interfering with flight objectives. Scientific requirements were thus deemphasized at the very time when development of basic scientific knowledge and a cadre of scientific talent should have been begun.” NASA was now faced “with the question of qualifying man for more complex tasks in space, for longer duration flights, and of evaluating man as an integral part of the spacecraft man-machine system, without sound biomedical foundation.” In particular, “decisions concerning development directions for the next generation of manned spacecraft systems for use in earth orbit must be made without an adequate basis of understanding.” NASA should plan overall biomedical program using resources, personnel, and experience of other Government areas, especially dod, and support multidisciplinary environmental medical laboratories within universities. Report favored international cooperation in space exploration for peaceful purposes, close communications with biomedical community, and broadened participation of biomedical scientists in space flight programs. NASA should affiliate biologically and medically trained astronauts with research components of NASA or qualified institutions. They should be assigned to msc flight-crew organization only when participating in specific missions. Report recommended that NASA consider separating space biomedical research from organization conducting space missions and from flight medical services. (Text)
Apollo 12 astronauts and wives attended Sunday services at White House and later were guests at informal dinner given by President and Mrs. Nixon. They stayed overnight at White House. {PD, 12/22/69, 1763; AP, B Sun, 12/22/69, A3)
At Leningrad news conference during U.S.S.R. tour, Astronaut Frank Borman said he hoped U.S. and Soviet spacemen would fly together in joint mission by mid-1970s. (Reuters, W Post, 7/4/69, A3)
Astronaut promotion policy seemed “certain to discomfit someone after the end of Apollo 12 no matter whether it’s followed or ignored,” Washington Post said. President Johnson had decreed in 1965 that each military astronaut would get one spot promotion after his first space flight. Apollo 12 commander Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., and cm pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr., had both received promotions to commander, usn. Apollo 12 LM Pilot Alan L. Bean, also commander, USN, now rated promotion to captain, but was junior crewman in age, service in grade, and space experience. Bean promotion might “irritate” others but would be fair to Bean. Promotion for all three astronauts would be “unfair to other astronauts who have flown twice or three times and only promoted once.” President Nixon might have to make “sticky” decision. (W Post, 11/21/69, A17)
U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov would arrive in New York Oct. 20 to begin two-week visit to U.S. as guests of astronauts, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman announced. He had extended invitation during his July tour of U.S.S.R. Beregovoy had flown Soyuz 111 mission, Oct. 26—30, 1968; Feoktistov was scientist aboard Oct. 12, 1964, Voskhod I flight. Itinerary was expected to include msc, Grand Canyon, California, Detroit, and Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 69-141; AP, W Star, 10/21/69)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial on Apollo 9 mission: “In the first Apollo launchings, it was the taming of sheer, brute power that awed the on-looker. “At the moment of ignition, it was not what lay beyond the astronauts that gripped the millions watching TV. It was the question whether the huge Saturn V booster would respond to command, whether it would hurl the astronauts into orbit or collapse, toppling slowly into a furnace of its own making. “But with yesterday’s flawless Apollo 9 launch, the Saturn V booster seemed to emerge as a proven piece of space hardware. The preoccupation now is with the complexity, sophistication, the intricate workings of the most complicated of the several machines the United States has put together for the conquest of the moon. ... In its sophistication and vulnerability, [the LM] is ... an extension of man himself.” (P Bull, 3/4/69)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and 20 otjier persons quarantined in Lunar Receiving Laboratory were released shortly after 9:00 pm cdt—four hours earlier than planned. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, Msc, said astronauts, who had been confined since July 24, showed no signs of any possible infection from exposure to moon. He cautioned that astronauts might become ill after release— not from lunar contamination, but from earth organisms to which they were highly susceptible after long period of isolation. Report on health of persons under quarantine would be presented by NASA Aug. 11 to Interagency Committee on Back Contamination, which had approved early release. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/11/69, Al; AP, W Post, 8/10/69, A7) _
Baltimore Sun noted Apollo 10’s first day in space enabled men to be “as near as they will ever come to being in two places simultaneously— there in their own living rooms with their television sets before them and, at the same moment more than 22,000 miles away, observing the planet on which they live. “What we saw with such marvelous cold clarity was, of course, a round and mottled swirl of blue, brown and white, a small fragment of the cosmos which until less than a decade ago had fixed absolute limits upon all of mankind’s history. Now suddenly we saw it as a unity, a whole, as the habitation common to all of us, just as it would be seen by a non-human visitor approaching it as the astronauts are approaching the moon, silent, mysterious and seemingly lifeless and motionless. The observer had to remind himself that this was indeed the earth he knew. .. .” (B Sun, 5/20/69)
National and international press commented on successful completion of Apollo 11 mission: Washington Post: “It has been eight days of triumph for America, eight days of triumph for mankind. Much more will undoubtedly follow as the secrets of space bow to the advances of science. But it is enough now—more than enough for an entire lifetime when you think about it—to have seen the first men walk on the moon and then, less than four days later, to welcome them back home safely.” (W Post, 7/25/69) New York Times: “For the first time in history, men have gone from this earth to another celestial body, landed there and returned'home, . even bringing back with them extraterrestrial matter. Not since the human race evolved has there been a comparable event, nor one so capable of lifting all mankind’s horizons, dreams and aspirations. What was fantasy to preceding generations is now accomplished fact. The achievement will be remembered so long as civilization survives.” Of President Nixon’s round the world tour, Times said: “The spectacular success of Apollo 11 has vastly increased good feeling toward the United States throughout the world. The President obviously wants to capitalize on it both for foreign and domestic political purposes.” {NYT, 7/25/69, 46) Cleveland, Ohio, Plain Dealer: Apollo 11 mission “closes out one aspect of the exploration program but opens wide the door of what can be an almost endless journey. . . . Although the Apollo program is not complete, the lure of Mars, 5 million miles away, grows in bold anticipation of the future. ... the race has only just begun.” (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 7/25/69) Newport News, Va., Times Herald: “All of the money poured into the space program would appear justified if one of the side products was the kind of cooperation [with the U.S.S.R.] now possible.” (Newport News Times Herald, 7/25/69) El Rai El Amm, Khartoum, Sudan: “America achieved a victory for the human mind by sending the first man from the earth to the moon. . . . But America, the great power that achieved this astonishing big success, must stop doing things that are far below these standards.” (Am Embassy, Khartoum) Somali News, Mogadiscio, Somali: “It is true that the responsibility for the Apollo-Eleven is entirely American, but the message left behind on the moon for posterity by the astronauts . . . acknowledges the universal aspect of such a feat. We think ... of those courageous astronauts not... as Americans but as worthy representatives of the human race on whose total achievement they relied in carrying out their mighty and splendid mission.” (Am Embassy, Mogadiscio)
Project Tektite civilian aquanauts Richard A. Waller, Conrad V. M. Mahnken, John G. Van Derwalker, and Dr. H. Edward Clifton set 32-day record for remaining under water in “habitat” off St. John Island in Caribbean. Previous record was held by former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, who had remained submerged 30 days in 1965. In Project Tektite* aquanauts were trying for 60-day submersion. (dod Release 204-69; upi, W Post, 3/20/69, A2)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family flew from New York for nine-day tour of U.S.S.R. Institute for Soviet-American Relations in Moscow had extended invitation through Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. Itinerary included Moscow, Leningrad, Novosibirsk, and Crimea. {W Post, 7/1/69, A15; AP, W Star, 7/1/69, A4)
Washington Post Apollo 12 editorial: “Although it will be weeks or months before we know what the harvest of knowledge from this trip has been, the first impression is that the harvest has been a rich one. The astronauts accomplished everything they had been asked to do and more. The pinpoint landing indicates that the navigational problems are not nearly as great as once thought, clearing the way for future astronauts to go precisely where the scientists want them to. The ease with which Mr. Conrad and Mr. Bean functioned on the moon’s surface indicates that their successors will be able to range farther afield and undertake more complicated assignments. Even the accidental fall of Pete Conrad is a plus. It cuts down the fear that a fall would be extremely serious and points out . . . that man may be more adaptable to alien conditions than he dreams.” (W Post, 11/25/69, A20)
Apollo passive seismic experiment, part of extravehicular activity to be performed by Apollo 11 astronauts on moon, was described in Science as “the most exciting experiment in seismology.” Dr. G. Latham and Dr. M. Ewing of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, Dr. F. Press of mit, and Dr. G. Sutton of Univ. of Hawaii explained objective was to detect naturally occurring seismic events on lunar surface through early Apollo scientific experiment package (easep) planted on moon. Package weighed 105 lbs and would transmit data to earth one year (or maximum two years), during lunar days because its solar cell panels required illumination to provide power. Complete Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep), containing at least three additional experiments for measurements of solar wind and magnetic field, would be included on Apollo 12 for day and night operation. In Apollo 11 experiment astronaut would remove instrument from lm to smoothest area within 6.6—9.8 ft (20—30 m) of lm, unfold solar panels, adjust package level to within 5°, orient it with azimuth for maximum illumination of solar panels, and aim antenna toward earth. MSC would issue commands to uncage and level seismometers and select proper gain. Expected sources of lunar seismic activity included several hundred monthly moonquakes, thermal stresses produced by rapid temperature variations at surface; tidal stresses exerted by earth and sun; and meteoroid impacts. By end of Apollo program, scientists hoped to have achieved crude curves of travel time for body and surface waves and beginning of seismicity map of moon. During post-Apollo period, seismologists wanted to achieve wider distribution of detectors to map seismically active belts in greater detail; study mechanisms of energy release; lower minimum detectable ground motion of individual seismometer; and improve performance of long-period seismometer systems at ultralong-period end of spectrum for recording surface waves from moonquakes, free oscillations of moon, and lunar tides. (Science, 7/18/69, 241—50)
Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Apollo 12 Mission Director, described Apollo 12 plans to press at NASA Hq. [see Oct. 2]. Mission would be launched toward moon at 11:22 am est Nov. 14, carrying Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Alan L. Bean (lm pilot), and Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (cm pilot). Primary objectives would be to perform selenological inspection, survey and sample mare area, deploy Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), develop techniques for point landing capability, and photograph candidate landing sites. Basic flight plan would be similar to one for Apollo 11 (July 16—24) with modifications to improve landing accuracy and increase data return. Launch azimuth had been narrowed from 72°—108° for Apollo 11 to 72°—96° for Apollo 12 and trajectory had been changed from free-return to hybrid. Lunar orbit stay time for Apollo 12 would be increased from 59.6 hrs for Apollo 11 to 89 hrs; lunar surface stay time, from 21.6 hrs to 31.5 hrs; EVA from one 2-hr 32-min period to two 3-hr 30-min periods; and total mission time, from 195.3 hrs to 244.7 hrs. LM sleeping arrangements would be improved with hammocks, color TV if repaired by launch date would be used on surface, and LM ascent stage would be crashed onto lunar surface near seismometer after ascent from moon and redocking. To increase navigational accuracy crew would avoid waste and water dumps 10 hrs before landing to prevent thrust that might carry them off course, would approach moon upside-down so landing radar would be operational during entire landing phase, and would speed up descent to conserve fuel at landing. (Transcript)
U.S. Geological Survey Director William T. Pecora said in Washington, D.C., that rocks brought back by Apollo 11 were geologic “hors d’oeuvre” but Apollo 12 rocks “will be a veritable feast.” Geologists were delighted “by the onsite descriptions provided by astronauts Conrad and Bean” who were “eager rock hounds.” (upi, NYT, 11/25/69, 32)
Astronaut Anthony W. England suffered symptoms of bends while testing moon-walking equipment in vacuum chamber at MSC. NASA spokesman said cause of symptoms, which disappeared as soon as chamber was returned to full atmospheric pressure, was not known. England was placed under 24-hr observation, (upi, W Post, 10/9/69, A28)
MSC announced revised quarantine procedures for Apollo 11 after landing. To prevent back contamination from moon, astronauts would dispose on moon under containment conditions equipment exposed there; brush, vacuum-clean, and bag other equipment and clothing for return; prevent dust from being transferred from LM to CM; and continuously filter CM atmosphere during return trip to remove dust particles. Under original plans Apollo 11 crew would have remained in cm after splashdown while it was hoisted onto recovery ship. After reviewing loads to be lifted in transferring CM to deck, reliability of shipboard cranes, and capacity of available load-limiting elastic tackle, NASA decided to retain helicopter lift used on previous Apollo missions. Crew would emerge from cm to raft, where they would put on biological isolation garments that would cover them completely and provide high-efficiency air outlet filter. Interagency Committee on Back Contamination—NASA, Dept, of Agriculture, hew, Dept, of Interior, and NAS—had agreed that helicopter lift, combined with other prelanding procedures, would provide maximum achievable precautions against back contamination, (msc Release 69—47)
North American Rockwell Corp. announced plans to develop for NASA flying lunar excursion experimental platform (fleep)—one-man, jet-propelled craft with adjustable hand controls—to transport astronauts across lunar surface. (AP, NYT, 11/22/69, 38)
President Nixon addressed Air Force Academy commencement in Colorado Springs, Colo.: “A nation needs many qualities, but it needs faith and confidence above all. Skeptics do not build societies; the idealists are the builders. Only societies that believe in themselves can rise to their challenges. Let us not, then, pose a false choice between meeting our responsibilities abroad and meeting the needs of our people at home. We shall meet both or we shall meet neither. “This is why my disagreement with the skeptics and the isolationists is fundamental. They have lost the vision indispensable to great leadership. They observe the problems that confront us; they measure our resources and then they despair. When the first vessels set out from Europe for the New World these men would have weighed the risks and they would have stayed behind. . . . “Our current exploration of space makes the point vividly, here is testimony to man’s vision and man’s courage. The journey of the astronauts is more than a technical achievement: it is a reaching-out of the human spirit. It lifts our sights; it demonstrates that magnificent conceptions can be real. “They inspire us and at the same time they teach us true humility. What could bring home to us more the limitation of the human scale than the hauntingly beautiful picture of our earth seen from the moon? “When the first man stands on the moon next month every American will stand taller because of what he has done, and we should be proud of this magnificent achievement. “We will know then that every man achieves his own greatness by reaching out beyond himself, and so it is with nations. When a nation believes in itself—as Athenians did in their Golden Age, as Italians did in the Renaissance—that nation can perform miracles. Only when a nation means something to itself can it mean something to others. “That is why I believe a resurgence of American idealism can bring about a modern miracle—and that modern miracle is a world order of peace and justice.” (PD, 6/9/69, 797—802)
Apollo 11 astronauts, welcomed by crowds in Amsterdam during world tour, presented Queen Juliana with plaque similar to one they left on lunar surface. In Brussels later in day they were decorated by King Baudouin with insignia of the Order of Leopold, nation’s highest honor. (AP, Huntsville Times, 10/9/69; upi, W Star, 10/10/69, A9)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean held press conference at msc. Code names for Apollo 12 LM and cm had been selected, they said, from entries submitted by North American Rockwell Corp. and Grumman Aerospace Corp. employees. CM would be called “Yankee Clipper” and lm, “Intrepid.” Major differences from Apollo 11 mission would be increase in geology and photography. Detailed documented sample collection would be team effort. Description would tell geologist about rock’s location, including how it was related to other rocks, whether it was partially covered, and why it attracted attention. Astronauts would carry bags and tongs at all times during eva to collect rocks when sighted instead of being limited to collecting during specific period of EVA. Photographic activities, described by Conrad as “the world’s greatest zero-G juggling act,” would include multispectral photography of lunar surface, using four Hasselblad cameras in hatch window. Three cameras would have black-and-white film with filters; fourth would have infrared film. Purpose of camera setup, Gordon explained, was to “photograph the illuminated side of the moon from one minute after sunrise to one minute prior to sunset in a stiff manner.” Every 20 secs “cameras would be activated, to give complete strip photography across the surface of the moon. . . . The big step photography I think is probably one of the most important things we’re doing on this flight. . . .” (Transcript; msc Release 69—68)
Apollo 11 astronauts arrived at Belgrade from Rome during world tour. They were cheered by crowd estimated at 400,000 to 500,000 persons between airport and tomb of Yugoslavia’s Unknown Soldier, where they placed wreath. Later, at luncheon in their honor, President Tito said, “I do not like invaders on earth, but I hold in high esteem the conquering of celestial bodies, and I express my wishes for biggest success.” (NYT, 10/19/69, L69; upi, W Star, 10/19/69, A4)
New York Times commented on Soviet decision to participate in February intelsat conference [see Jan. 22] and on Soviet coverage of Apollo 8 which was “treated more generously in the Soviet press than any earlier American space accomplishment.” Editorial said: “These indications of a positive shift in Kremlin thinking seem to enhance hopes that President Nixon will have an opportunity for creative diplomacy and action of the kind he envisaged in his Inaugural Address. Thought might be given, for example, to inviting Moscow to designate a Soviet astronaut to participate in an Apollo flight late this year or early next year. Or Washington might suggest that the United States and the Soviet Union coordinate their programs of planetary exploration with one nation, say, having primary responsibility for studying Venus and the other Mars. With the landing of men on the moon now probably only months away it is certainly not too early for the two nations that have pioneered most actively in space to discuss concrete means for involving the United Nations directly in the future exploration and exploitation of the moon, as well as of the planets when men reach them.” (NYT, 1/24/69, 46)
In Kinshasa, Republic of Congo, Apollo 11 astronauts were awarded National Order of the Leopard, Congo’s highest decoration, by President Joseph D. Mobutu for “setting an example to all mankind.” (C Trib, 10/24/69)
Galabert International Astronautics Prize for 1969 was awarded in Paris to Apollo 11 astronauts. Award of .$4,000 was presented annually for notable contributions “to human progress for the advancement of all sciences and techniques associated with astronautics.” (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69, A8)
Author Norman Mailer’s total publishing rights on book on lunar landing would exceed $1 million when book was published by Little, Brown & Co. in January or February 1970, according to his agent, Scott Meredith. If film rights were sold, total could approach the $1.5 million paid for Lyndon B. Johnson memoirs. Mailer planned to visit KSC during Apollo 11 launch to interview astronauts and describe space center operations. He also planned chapter On philosophical and technological implications of lunar landing. Meredith said he was surprised at “phenomenal competition among foreign publishers for book and magazine rights.” (Raymont, NYT, 5/13/69, 44)
U.K.’s Royal Geographical Society awarded special gold medal—its first for space exploration-—to Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong for leading Apollo 11 mission. Other gold medalists included Capt. Roald Amundsen, first to reach South Pole; Adm. Robert E. Peary, first to reach North Pole; Sir Edmund Hillary, conqueror of Mt. Everest; and Sir John Hunt, leader of Everest expedition. (AP, W Star, 7/28/69, A5)
Apollo 11 astronauts attended celebrations in their hometowns. In Wapakoneta, Ohio, Neil A. Armstrong was cheered by crowd estimated at 10 times normal 7,000 population, addressed teen-age rally, and led parade including Gov. James A. Rhodes, Dr. Albert D. Sabin (developer of oral polio vaccine), and comedian Bob Hope—all Ohioans. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., on second visit to hometown as astronaut, presented Montclair, N.J., Library with autographed photo of plaque left on moon; Library named its science collection in his honor. Astronaut Michael Collins, who was born in Rome, Italy, visited New Orleans, La., as his adopted hometown. He attended luncheon in his honor and visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility. (W Post, 9/7/69, A3)
U.S.S.R. had ordered 100 space pens developed for U.S. astronauts and 1,000 special pressurized ink cartridges which enabled pen to write in weightlessness according to pen’s inventor, Paul C. Fisher. When he presented models of pen to Soviet Cosmonaut Alexey Leonov at German trade fair in 1968, Leonov said Soviet cosmonauts were writing with grease pencils during space flights and incurring difficulty with their flaking, (upi, W Post, 2/13/69, D24)
Lunar Science Institute and Msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory were preparing for “lunar knowledge explosion” expected to follow first manned lunar landing, Washington Evening Star reported. Laboratory would quarantine astronauts and lunar samples brought back from landing, storing samples for study and distribution to scientists. Institute, funded by NASA and administered through nas by Rice Univ., would facilitate lunar research by nonspace scientific community, Administrator Robert C. Wimberley said in interview. Directed by William C. Rubey, Institute was soon to be turned over to consortium of universities. U.S. Public Health Service, nas, Dept, of Interior, Dept, of Agriculture, and NASA had planned 30-day quarantine and study of moon material and 21-day quarantine of astronauts. Samples would be sealed on lunar surface and would be flown from recovery carrier to Laboratory after spacecraft return. Astronauts were to be transferred from spacecraft into sealed van through plastic tunnel aboard carrier [see May 16]. Van would be delivered to nearest port and then flown to Houston to sealed-off laboratory. Objective was to prevent importing viruses, some of which had been known to survive thousands of years under unlikely conditions. During three-week debriefing, crew would live in glassed-in quarters including medical area. Samples would be maintained under vacuum seals until opened in high-vacuum chambers containing remotely controlled equipment. Once photographed, catalogued, and processed, content and structure would be studied to determine composition and origins. (W Star, 3/12/69, A13)
At first day ceremonies for commemorative moon landing stamp in Washington, D.C., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount presented Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, with albums containing 32 stamps each. He said: “In the largest sense we pay tribute today to the spirit of man. We cannot separate the accomplishments of Apollo 11 from those of Yostok 1; we cannot separate the contributions of Michael Collins, or Edwin Aldrin or Neil Armstrong from those of Goddard and Einstein, Kepler and Newton, Copernicus and Galileo. We know this. And in the knowing again we find hope. For if men of all nations, together, can achieve dominion over the heavens, men of all nations, together, can achieve peace on earth for men for all time.” Armstrong said astronauts had deferred cancellation of stamps until they were reunited in cm, July 22. They had then grasped canceler simultaneously and pressed it upon die-proof version of commemorative stamp affixed to unaddressed envelope. Cancellation date remained July 20, day of lunar landing. (PO Dept Release 135; Shandler, W Star, 9/10/69, A3)
President Nixon telephoned congratulations to Apollo 10 crew following successful splashdown after lunar mission for its “magnificent achievement” and invited astronauts and their wives to dinner at White House. “This is a proud moment for the country,” President said. (NYT, 5/27/69, 29; PD, 6/2/69, 775)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong arrived in Bangkok, Thailand, to meet with Peace Corps officials on Presidential mission. (AP, W Post, 12/21/69, A17; W Star, 12/21/69, D7)
Apollo 11 recovery physician, Dr. William R. Carpentier, reported from inside Mobile Quarantine Facility onboard U.S.S. Hornet that astronauts had completed preliminary medical examination and were “fine.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s slight ear infection had disappeared and all three astronauts were in excellent condition. (Wooten, NYT, 7/26/69, 1)
Visiting Soviet Cosmonauts Konstantin P. Feoktistov and Georgy T. Beregovoy left New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport for Moscow after two-week U.S. visit. During airport interview Feoktistov said he liked U.S. astronauts’ “sincerity and hopeful approach to life.” Beregovoy said, “Friendship is a force which will help the world to conquer space.” Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was at airport to see them off. (NYT, 11/5/69, 52)
President Nixon and Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan issued joint statement following White House discussions on international situation. On space, statement said: “The Prime Minister congratulated the President on the successful moon landing of Apollo XII, and expressed the hope for a safe journey back to earth for the astronauts. The President and the Prime Minister agreed that the exploration of space offers great opportunities for expanding cooperation in peaceful scientific projects among all nations. In this connection, the Prime Minister noted with pleasure that the United States and Japan last summer had concluded an agreement on space cooperation. The President and the Prime Minister agreed that the implementation of this unique program is of importance to both countries.” {PD, 11/24/69, 1633—7)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President, Prof. Mstislav V. Keldysh, said in Stockholm, “We no longer have any time plan for manned moon trips. Right now we are concentrating on constructing big satellite space stations.” He predicted expanded scientific cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R. with possibility of cosmonauts and astronauts aboard same spacecraft in future. In Sweden for Swedish Academy of Engineering’s 50th anniversary, Prof. Keldysh implied U.S.S.R. planned to assemble spacecraft in orbiting stations and launch them from there. He indicated existence of conflicting views in U.S.S.R. as to space research funding. “My personal view is that, when man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (upi, W Post, 10/25/69, A3)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins held first postflight press conference at MSC, narrating 45-min film of mission and answering questions. On meaning of lunar landing, Collins said it was “technical triumph for this country to have said what it was going to do a number of years ago, and then by golly do it. Just like we said we were going to do. Not just . . . purely technical, but also a triumph of the nation’s overall determination, will, economy, attention to detail, and a thousand and one other factors that went into it.” To Aldrin mission meant “that many other problems perhaps can be solved in the same way by taking a commitment to solve them in long time fashion. I think that we were timely in accepting this mission of going to the moon. It might be timely at this point to think in many other areas of other missions that could be accomplished.” Armstrong said moon landing heralded “beginning of a new age.” He said moon was “stark and strangely different place, but it looked friendly . . . and proved to be friendly.” Astronauts had much less trouble than expected on lunar surface. Primary difficulty was that “there was just far too little time to do the variety of things that we would have liked to have done. . . . We had the problem of the 5 year old boy in a candy store. There are just too many interesting things to do.” Armstrong said that during landing they “were concerned about running low on fuel on range extension we did to avoid the boulder field and craters. We used a significant percentage of our fuel margins and we were quite close to our legal limit.” On possibility of abort during period they were receiving alarm signals, Aldrin said procedure in preparation simulations had been always to “keep going as long as we could. . . . The computer was continuing to issue guidance . . . and it was continuing to fly the vehicle down in the same way that it was programmed to do. The only thing that was missing ... is that we did not have some of the displays . . . and we had to make several entries ... to clear up that area.” Armstrong added, “We would have continued the landing so long as the trajectory seemed safe. And landing is possible under these conditions, although with considerably less confidence than you have when you have the information from the ground and the computer in its normal manner available to you.” (Transcript)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale posthumously awarded its highest honor—Gold Medal—to nasa test pilot Joseph A. Walker for “his many enduring contributions to the advancement of aviation made during a 21-year flight research career marked by extraordinary perfection and valor.” . Award was received by his widow at Edwards afb ceremony. As FRC chief research pilot, Walker had flown X—15 to its highest altitude, 354,200 ft (67 mi); was first man to fly llrv astronaut training craft; was author of 20 technical papers and articles; and had taught Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong at frc. (frc Release 17—69)
msfc issued rfps for design, development, test, and delivery of four flight models of manned lunar roving vehicle. Four-wheeled, 400-lb vehicle would be carried to moon on board LM in 1971, to transport astronauts, tools, lunar samples, and other equipment and experiments. (nasa Special Release)
NASA announced availability of 16-in-dia globe of moon prepared by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center from NASA photos made by Lunar Orbiter series. Lovell Observatory, Ariz., prepared art work with exaggerated color tones showing lunar landscape bathed in morning sunlight and large Ring Plains, or explosive craters, on far side. One globe had been presented to President Nixon by Apollo 10 astronauts. (NASA Release 69—83G)
U.S. delegate to U.N. William B. Buffum, responding to Soviet tribute to Apollo 11 astronauts by U.S.S.R. delegate Aleksey V. Zakharov, said before Security Council he hoped “fraternal spirit” demonstrated by astronauts and cosmonauts would lead to greater cooperation on earth also. {NYT, 7/25/69, 31)
At Apollo 11 splashdown party at Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D.C. —attended by Apollo 11 astronauts and wives—NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced new Apollo Achievement Award of lapel button and certificate. He presented awards to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller; former Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) ; and former Deputy Director of Apollo Program George H. Hage. (Beale, W Star, 9/10/69, FI)
NASA had assured Post Office Dept, that master die for 10-cent moon landing commemorative stamp [see July 9] had gone all the way to lunar surface as planned. It had returned to earth in cm and been rushed to Washington, D.C., July 31 after decontamination at msc. However, moon letter envelope with die proof of moon landing stamp had not been postmarked on lunar surface. Because of tight schedule for lunar eva, letter had heen left with Astronaut Michael Collins in cm Columbia while Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Al-drin, Jr., worked on moon. “Moon Landing” postmark had been applied during return voyage. Letter had been decontaminated at msc and returned to Postmaster General Winton M. Blount Aug. 5. (Fairies, W Star, 8/10/69, Hll)
Time named Apollo 8 astronauts its Men of the Year for 1968. “For all its upheavals and frustrations, the year would be remembered to the end of time for the dazzling skills and Promethean daring that sent mortals around the moon. It would be celebrated as the year in which men saw at first hand their little earth entire, a remote, blue-brown sphere hovering like a migrant bird in the hostile night of space.” {Time, 1/3/69, 9)
Time magazine said Astronaut Frank Borman had amused audiences during February 1969 European tour by claiming Apollo 8 astronauts deserved overtime pay because they had aged about 300 microseconds more than people on earth during moon mission. At NASA’s request, Univ. of Maryland physicist Carroll Alley had calculated effects on astronauts of phenomena described in Einstein’s relativity equations— time ran slower for object as its speed increased, and time accelerated for object as it moved away from body exerting gravitational force. Alley found Apollo 8 spacecraft speed was predominant factor when it was within 4,000 mi of earth; time slowed and astronauts actually aged more slowly. Beyond 4,000 mi, effects of earth’s gravity lessened as Apollo’s time passed 300 microseconds faster than earth’s. Despite Alley’s calculations, said Time, Borman’s claim was valid only for Astronaut William A. Anders, who made his first space flight on Apollo 8. Astronauts Borman and James A. Lovell had been crew-mates on Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini VII, when time dilation effect was dominant for entire two weeks. They had aged less than those on earth by 400 microseconds. Lovell’s time also had been slowed during four-day Gemini XII mission Nov. 11—15, 1966, by about 100 microseconds. “Thus,” said Time, “during all their missions in space, Lovell and Borman respectively spent 200 and 100 microseconds less time than was recorded on earth—which means they were paid for more time than they actually worked.” [Time, 3/7/69, 42)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Michael Collins, their families, and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, flew in presidential jet from Houston to New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles during day of cross-country celebrations. Three-hour New York visit included greeting at City Hall by Mayor John V. Lindsay, motorcade to U.N. for greeting by TJ.N. Secretary General U Thant, and ticker-tape procession to John F. Kennedy International Airport for departure to Chicago. New York Public Events Commissioner John S. Palmer estimated crowds at 4 million; other observers said there were fewer and blamed ahead-of-schedule appearance and TV coverage. In Chicago, welcoming crowd was estimated at 3.5 million. Mayor Richard J. Daley greeted party at Civic Center and presented medals symbolic of honorary citizenship to astronauts and Dr. Paine. Illinois Gov. Richard B. Ogilvie said, “To these first citizens of the new epoch, the people of Chicago and Illinois offer their profound admiration and respect.” Astronauts spoke to 15,000 young people in Grant Park before returning by helicopter to O’Hare International Airport for flight to Los Angeles. Mayor Samuel W. Yorty met party at Los Angeles International Airport. After brief ceremony, party sped to Century Plaza Hotel for reception preceding state dinner. (Lelyveld, NYT, 8/14/69, 1; Ober-dorfer, W Post, 8/14/69, Al; NASA pao)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial on Apollo 10 color TV pictures: “Of all the visions man sees from his new and precarious vantages in space, the most compelling is still the planet from which he comes. In the eye of Apollo 10’s color TV camera, Earth is indeed the fairest object, the ‘oasis’ the Apollo 8 astronauts saw last Christmas on Earth’s first manned mission to the moon. “For a stranger entering the solar system from the outer reaches of the Universe, surely Earth’s mist-shrouded blues, browns and reds would be a goal to satisfy the utmost yearning. Set against the cold blackness of space, it would be a prize to draw bold and venturesome inhabitants of other planets across incredible distances. It would be a goal courageous strangers would endure incredible hardships to win. . . . “The awe expressed by the intrepid Apollo 10 astronauts ... is further reminder that the greatest space prize presently within man’s comprehension is already in his keeping. And it is one to leave man wondering whether beings on other planets strive and dream as he does. For the moment certainly, it would not seem so. For what people on another planet could resist the vision in the eye of Apollo 10’s TV camera?” (P Bull, 5/20/69)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family returned from European goodwill tour made on behalf of President Nixon. At Andrews afb, Md., Borman told press on arrival that Europeans found, it hard to believe U.S. “could spend all that money on its space program and still make public everything we learned.” He said reception had been uniformly friendly, “but they would hesitate to ask us questions, because they assumed . . . information about the Apollo 8 flight must be classified.” Borman and family reported at Capitol to Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of nasc. Borman told press conference he had found “extreme identification of people in all walks of life in Europe with our flight. They were very well informed about it and looked on us as representatives of Earth. I hope that feeling of comradeship can continue.” (AP, W Post, 2/22/69, A2)
House passed by vote of 328 to 52 H.R. 11271, FY 1970 nasa authorization of $3,966 billion, allocating $3.26 billion for R&D, $58.2 million for construction of facilities, and $643.8 million for research and program management. House had adopted amendment canceling $327 million authorized for FYs 1967, 1968, and 1969 for which appropriations had not been made. It also adopted amendment requiring emplacement of U.S. flag, exclusively, on moon or any other planet by U.S. astronauts during visits financed entirely by Government funds. Act would be symbolic gesture of national pride in achievement, not declaration of national appropriation by claim of sovereignty. (Text; CR, 6/10/69, H4615-56)
At Cape Kennedy press conference, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman termed “totally ridiculous” cancellation of President Nixon’s dinner with Apollo 11 crew on eve of launch to avoid contaminating crew with presidential germs. He had delivered invitation to dinner to White House and President Nixon had accepted when msc Medical Director, Dr. Charles A. Berry, criticized dinner [see July 7]. Borman said his talks with U.S.S.R. officials during recent tour had left him convinced they planned lunar landing soon but, “from the people on the subways to their president, all I heard was that they are wishing success for Apollo 11.” (Greider, W Post, 7/13/69, A4)
Austin, Tex., District Judge Jack Roberts dismissed suit by atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair and Society of Separationists, Inc., to stop astronauts from saying prayers in space [see Nov. 25]. He ruled prayers were not NASA policy but individual decision by astronauts. If nasa had forbidden astronauts to pray in space it would have been unconstitutional abridgment of their rights. Mrs. O’Hair planned to appeal decision. (NYT, 12/3/69, 44)
In nationwide reaction to safe return of Apollo 11 astronauts, New York Stock Exchange went wild though stocks continued to fall. Numbers on annunciator boards flapped in unison as message “New York Stock Exchange shares the world’s joy at the safe return of Apollo from the moon—Astronauts Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins—So proudly we hail you” appeared on tape and illuminated on screen. Along Fifth Avenue church bells rang. Hayden Planetarium suspended usual program to throw “splashdown party” with champagne and live color telecast of Apollo 11 recovery operations flashed on blackened dome. San Franciscans exploded firecrackers and threw ticker tape from windows, and 10-story-high figure “11” was fashioned in lighted windows at mit in Boston. Des Moines, Iowa, rang Liberty Bell reproduction for first time since its 1950 installation on State House grounds. In Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s home town, Wapakoneta, Ohio, high school band marched playing moon songs. Montclair, N.J., theater marquee read, “Congratulations Buzz Aldrin—Mqntclair’s Man on the Moon.” In Huntsville, Ala., Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was hoisted on shoulders of four local councilmen while thousands at msfc site cheered and waved banners saying “Huntsville is Rocket City.” City of Houston planned “Texas size” celebration for Apollo 11 astronauts Aug. 16, including ticker-tape parade and huge program in city’s Astrodome coliseum. (Sloan, Weinraub, Hicks, Borders, upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 67, 29, 69, 31, 30; B Sun, 7/25/69, 45)
In letter to Astronaut Frank Borman, Board of Education of Glendale Union High School District No. 205, Glendale, Ariz., said it had named planned high school “Apollo” in “honor and appreciation of the accomplishments of the participating astronauts.” It invited Apollo 8 crew to participate in 1970 dedication ceremony. (CR, 2/21/69, E1216)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean underwent last major preflight medical examination at KSC and were cleared for Nov. 14 launch. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, said astronauts were rested and in good spirits and showed no evidence of any infectious disease that might interfere with launch, (upi, NYT, 11/10/69, 10)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong joined comedian Bob Hope in entertaining 15,000 U.S. troops at field headquarters of 25th Infantry Div. near Saigon, South Vietnam, (upi, W Star, 12/24/69, A5)
U.S. newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 12 landing on moon: Washington Post: “The sheer joy of these two astronauts . . . shines out over everything else. They are obviously moon-struck. Conrad sounded like the most eager and happiest young geology student in the universe as he hummed and laughed his way from rock to rock, grabbing one after the other and complaining that he couldn’t get enough. And who would have thought that one of these highly skilled men would resort, as Bean did, to bonking the television camera with a hammer in an effort to make it work? Unfortunately, the failure of the camera did deprive us of seeing this frolic. . . . There was much to be learned from it about the moon and about the men who combine such cool technical competence with such zest for a serious and dangerous job.” (W Post, 11/20/69) Detroit News: “To travel 230,000 miles and hit the target on the button is almost unbelievable except that NASA, its crews and its machines are making believers of us all. But there’s a lesson to be taken to heart in the camera’s freak failure. Conrad and Bean tried to remedy the defect. . . . But they had to drop that to get on with more essential scientific exploratory experiments. Conrad’s oxygen limit was four hours. He hadn’t time to spare. . . . that should be warning to those euphoric advocates of setting a target date for a trip to Mars. An astronaut limited to four hours work on the moon is a reminder of the vast project ahead in confounding the elements in this untapped lunar mystery. Prophecies of colonizing the moon should be set against that four-hour limit, even though we no doubt will improve on it.” (D News, 11/20/69) Atlanta Constitution: “This second landing, more than 900 miles from where the pioneers of Apollo 11 put down last July, notably extends our knowledge. New landing techniques, a longer lunar stay, nuclear-powered experiments—they all serve to push back a fantastic frontier which only a few short years ago was regarded as a most implausible province of man.” (Atlanta Constitution, 11/20/69) Houstin Chronicle: “Our admiration for the coolness and the skill of astronauts Conrad, Bean and Richard F. Gordon, Jr.—the latter still in lonely orbit around the Moon—is boundless. The astronauts continue to perform, one mission after the other, in story-book perfection. We marvel, too, at the ability of the technicians on the ground to quickly respond to unexpected eventualities, like the electrical difficulty just after the launch, and to enable the mission to proceed unimpaired. These achievements inspire all men. They lift our sights for the future.” (.H Chron, 11/20/69, 2 Sec, 5) Birmingham, News: “The flight has been so predictably on schedule that its very success is certain to help push moon travel back into the ho-hum recesses of blase mankind’s mind, as each success in the Mercury and Gemini and early Apollo series made earth orbital spaceflight seem routine.” (B News, 11/20/69)
msfc announced that it had issued $10,751,000 contract to General Electric Co.’s Apollo Systems Div. for electrical support equipment for Apollo Telescope Mount and launch systems for Saturn V Workshop multiple docking adapter and airlock. Work was to be completed June 30, 1975. msfc had also issued six-month $56,727 contract to Bionic Instruments, Inc., to develop lunar roving vehicle hazard locator. Locator, which would be installed on lunar rover or dual-model vehicle, would use laser beam to spot rocks, holes, and other, obstacles on lunar surface and display on screen warning of obstacles hidden from astronauts’ view, (msfc Releases 69—223, 69—224)
nasa was using July 26 edict against unauthorized use of Apollo flight insignia to make “unauthorized” possession of souvenir Apollo flight patches Federal offense, 'Washington Post said. While astronauts felt they should be only ones entitled to distribute patches, businessmen contended they ought to be in public domain. NASA contractors like Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. had been granted exceptions to blanket rule. (Lardner, W Post, 11/25/69, A8)
Associated Press quoted Col. Edwin E. Aldrin (usaf, Ret.) as saying nasa had rejected his proposal to postpone Apollo 12 and run it in tandem with Apollo 13 so crews could protect or rescue each other in emergency. Aldrin was father of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and a NASA safety consultant. NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Director Jerome F. Lederer had called proposal impractical, “tremendously expensive, and I don’t know if it could be done.” Lederer had said there was no question that astronaut rescue capability from lunar surface or orbital emergency must be provided, but it was “out of the picture for Apollo.” (Haughland, AP, W Star, 9/22/69, A4)
President Nixon and his daughter Tricia {foreground) watched preparations jor the launch of Apollo 12 from ksc, while Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA A rimin' istrator, shielded Mrs. Nixon from rain. Seconds into flight an electrical discharge shut down the spacecraft fuel cells, but the astronauts corrected the condition. 10,000	ft with tops at 21,000 ft. During ascent observers on ground saw two parallel streaks of lightning flash between clouds and launch pad. NASA reported electrical transients, later attributed to electrical potential discharges from clouds through spacecraft to ground, had suddenly shut off spacecraft’s electrical power at 00:36 get and turned on numerous alarms in cm. Spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while crew restored primary power system. Commander Conrad radioed, “We had everything in the world drop out.” Control Center commented, “We’ve had a couple of cardiac arrests down here, too.” “There wasn’t time up here,” Conrad answered. Power system remained normal throughout rest of mission. Spacecraft entered planned parking orbit with 118-mi (189.9-kra) apogee and 115.0-mi (185.0-km) perigee. After postlaunch checkout CSM. separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and LM, code-named Intrepid, Onboard TV initiated after separation clearly showed csm transposing and docking with lm at 3:27 GET and ice on windows from rain frozen during liftoff. Crew ejected CSm/lm from S—IYB and conducted first SPS burn for translunar insertion. Slingshot maneuver placed S—IVB into earth orbit with 515,549.4-	to 560,429.9-mi {829,519.0- to 901,731.7-km) apogee and 93,213.2-	to 109,324.1-mi (149,980.0- to 175,902.5-km) perigee and period of 39 to 45 days, instead of heliocentric orbit planned, because of error in instrument unit. To ensure that electrical transients during launch had not affected lm systems, Conrad and Bean entered LM at 7:20 GET for housekeeping and systems checks. All checks indicated systems were satisfactory, Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse maneuver No. 1 was not necessary. Midcourse correction No. 2, at 30:53 GET, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 69.1 mi; third and fourth maneuvers were not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 47 min. Conrad and Bean began transfer to LM during translunar coast Y2 hr earlier than planned to obtain full TV coverage through Goldstone tracking station. The 56-min transmission, beginning at 62:52 get, showed excellent color pictures of GSM, intravehicular transfer, LM interior, earth, and moon. Gordon reported crew was in good condition. TV broadcast scheduled for 81:30 GET before lunar orbit insertion was canceled because of sun angle and glare on spacecraft windows. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 72.0-mi (115.9-km) perilune at 83:25 GET (10:47 pm est Nov. 17) after first sps burn. During first lunar orbit good quality TV coverage of lunar surface was transmitted for 33 min. Crew provided excellent descriptions of lunar features. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 76.1-mi (122.5-km) apolune and 62.5-mi (100.6-km) perilune at 87:47 get. Conrad and Bean transferred to lm for l^g-hr housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check and then returned to CM. CM Yankee Clipper, reported sighting Surveyor III and Intrepid on moon. Conrad opened lm hatch at 115:11 GET, descended LM ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Conrad reported seeing Surveyor HI spacecraft and said lm had landed 25 ft down-range from lip of crater. Conrad, inches shorter than Neil A. Armstrong, who had stepped onto moon July 21, had difficulty taking last step from ladder. When he touched lunar surface at 115.22 get (6:44 am est Nov. 19) Conrad said, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small step for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” He said lunar surface was soft and loosely packed, causing his boots to dig in as he walked, and sun was bright like a spotlight, lm had landed so gently its shock-absorbing legs were barely telescoped by gentle impact. Conrad recorded Bean’s descent to lunar surface at 115:52 get (7:14 am EST Nov. 19). Shortly after color TV camera was removed from mesa bracket, transmission was lost and was not regained for remainder of eva. Crew collected 40- to 50-lb contingency sample and reported mounds resembling volcanoes. Mounds were 4 ft high with flattened tops 5 ft wide and sides sloping out to 15- to 20-ft dia. Conrad said he saw neither breccia nor vesicular rocks, only basalts. Lithium hydroxide canisters and contingency sample were transferred to lm ; S-band antenna, solar wind composition experiment, and American flag were deployed as planned, alsep with SNAP—27 atomic generator was deployed 600—700 ft from lm. Shortly after deployment passive seismometer transmitted to earth signals from astronauts’ footsteps as they returned to lm. During deployment astronauts kicked up dust and some adhered to instruments. Overall effect would be determined through long-term measurements of system’s engineering parameters. Conrad and Bean dusted each other off and entered Intrepid after 3 hrs 56 min walking on lunar surface. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:33 get (10:55 pm est Nov. 19), 1 hr 40 min ahead of schedule. Astronauts stored lm TV camera in equipment transfer bag for return to earth for failure analysis. Conrad walked to alsep site to check leveling of lunar atmosphere detector. Astronaut movement on surface was recorded on passive seismometer and lunar surface magnetometer, eva traverse took crew to alsep deployment site, Head Crater, Bench Crater, Sharp Crater, Halo Crater, Surveyor III site, Block Crater, and back to lm. Astronauts walked 1,500—2,000 ft from lm, covering about 6,000-ft distance, their confidence and speed increasing with experience. After walk Conrad reported he had fallen once but Bean had picked him up without difficulty. Conrad rolled grapefruit-sized rock down wall of Head Crater about 300—400 ft from passive seismometer, but no significant response was detected. Crew obtained desired photographic panoramas, core samples, trench sample, lunar environment sample, and assorted rock, dirt, bedrock, and molten samples. They reported fine dust buildup on all sides of larger rocks and said soil color lightened as depth increased. Crew reported Surveyor footpad marks were still visible and entire spacecraft looked brown, as if something had rained on it. Glass parts were not broken. Crew retrieved parts of Surveyor III, including TV camera and soil scoop. They then retrieved solar wind composition experiment and stowed it in equipment bag, took stereo pictures near lm, and transferred all collected samples, parts, and equipment to lm. They dusted off, reentered LM, and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by 134:82,get (2:44 am EST Nov. 20), after 3 hrs 49 min walking on lunar surface in second eva period. While lm was on moon Gordon, orbiting moon in csm, completed lunar multispectral photography experiment and photographed Wall of Theophilus and future landing sites, Fra Mauro and Descartes. Film would be analyzed to aid scientists in planning for future sample collection and in extrapolating known compositions from returned samples to parts of moon that would not be visited. At 142:04 get (9:26 am est Nov. 20) lm successfully lifted off moon after 31 hrs 31 min on lunar surface, leaving lm descent stage. Astronauts brought back 95 lbs of lunar surface samples, parts of Surveyor III, films, and miniature flags of 136 nations, 50 U.S. states, and 4 U.S. possessions. A 1.2-sec overburn of lm ascent propulsion system caused by incorrect manual switching sequence prevented automatic shutdown of engine and resulted in insertion velocity 32 fps greater than planned, placing lm in orbit with 71.4-mi (114.9-km) apolune and 10.6-mi (17.1-km) perilune. Crew quickly recognized discrepancy, manually shut down engine, and used RSC trim maneuver to enter planned orbit with 53.3-mi (85.8-km) apolune and 10.1-mi (16.3-km) perilune. Rendezvous maneuvers occurred as planned and lm docked with csm at 145:36 get (12:58 pm est Nov. 20). TV was transmitted from csm for last 24 min of rendezvous sequence. Crew transferred with samples, equipment, and film to CSM; lm ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 5:17 pm est Nov. 20 about 44.9 mi (72.2 km) southeast of Surveyor III. Crash was detected by seismometer left on moon and produced reverberations lasting for more than 30 min. Crew made csm plane-change maneuver at 159:05 GET and took high-resolution and stereo-strip photos and tracked landmarks, to conclude planned photography of Fra Mauro, Descartes, and Lalande. antine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. cm was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and cm was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Pago Pago and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 12 mission objectives—to perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of mare area, deploy and activate ALSEP, develop techniques for point landing capability, develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment, and obtain photos of candidate exploration sites—were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor and corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding. All three crew members remained in excellent health and good spirits. Accomplishments included first use of hybrid trajectory, largest U.S. payload placed into lunar orbit (72,335 ibs after lunar orbit insertion), first demonstration of point landing capability, first use of two EVA periods, first recharge of portable life-support system, first double-core-tube sample, first return of samples from vehicle previously landed on moon, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, first multispectral photography from lunar orbit, and longest lunar mission to date. Apollo 12 was ninth Apollo mission to date, sixth manned Apollo mission, and second manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16—24, 1969) had proved capability to perform manned landing on moon and return and to retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; Mission Commentary; NASA Release 69—148; FonF; NYT, 11/15—26/69; W Post, 11/15-26/69; W Star, 11/15-26/69; B Sun, 11/15-26/69) November 14: President Nixon became first President to witness space launch while in office when he, Mrs. Nixon, and daughter Tricia viewed Apollo 12 launch at ksc. President called liftoff “spectacular.” Later he addressed NASA personnel in Launch Control: “. . . I know there has been a lot of discussion as to what the future of the space program is. ... I do think you can be assured that in Dr. Paine and his colleagues you have men who are dedicated to this program, who are making the case for it ... as against other national priorities and making it very effectively. I leaned in the direction of the program before. After hearing what they have had to say with re'gard to our future plans, I must say that I lean even more in that direction. ... I realize that in those within the program . . . there are different attitudes as to what the emphasis should be, whether we should emphasize more exploration or more in taking the knowledge we have already acquired and making practical applications of it. . . . We want to have a balanced program, but most important, we are going forward. America ... is first in space.” (Carroll, B Sun, 11/15/69, Al; PD, 11/17/69, 1601-2)
Soviet Embassy praised Apollo 10 mission as event that “inspires into us pride for man.” Message, written by academician Boniface Kedrov, called astronauts “20th Century Columbuses” and said mission was an “immeasurably more complex, dangerous and almost unrealizable aim compared with that Columbus set before himself at the dawn of the new era.” Moscow TV showed splashdown. (W Post, 5/27/69, A9)
American Academy of Achievement presented 1969 Gold Plate “Man of Achievement” Awards to Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and to Apollo 8 Astronauts William A. Anders and Frank Borman. (LA Her-Exam, 6/19/69; AFJ, 6/21/69, 30)
In message transmitting to Congress nasa’s Twentieth Semiannual Report, President Nixon said: “During this decade, we have successfully met many challenges and have achieved significant progress in our ability to utilize space for practical applications, scientific exploration, and expansion of man’s frontiers. We have subsequently landed astronauts upon the Moon, explored its surface, and returned these men to Earth. This historic event was made possible because of the solid foundation of a broad range of earlier activities, and through the skill and dedication of the many contributors to our space program.” (PD, 11/17/69, 1603; CR, 11/13/69, S14274)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman ended four-day visit to Czechoslovakia —first visit by U.S. astronaut to any Communist country, (upi, W Post, 5/24/69, A3)
In interview published by This Week, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman said many things could be learned from moon: “One ... I hope will be international cooperation, such as now exists in Antarctica. Even though the moon struck me as a very desolate, forbidding expanse, it will be very beneficial for men to work together to unlock its many mysteries and secrets. I hope that both the moon and the large permanent space stations from earth will be citadels for international cooperation and that the people who visit them will really be internationalists in the truest sense.” (This Week, 4/6/69)
During visit to West Berlin, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman drove past U.S.S.R.’s war memorial near Berlin wall and looked across wall into East Berlin. At Tempelhof airport Borman told press, “I was here before [during 1949 Berlin airlift] amid many bags of coal. There have been many space advances in the last two decades, yet we have so many troubles here on earth.” (C Trib, 2/13/69)
NASA’s Apollo 10 lunar orbital mission was proceeding well toward launch readiness for 11:49 am EST May 18, Deputy Apollo Program Director George H. Hage told NASA Hq. briefing. Flight readiness test had been successfully completed April 9. Countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin April 27, completing cryogenic propellant flow May 2; crew participation in cddt would begin May 3. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot) would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad B—being used for first time—on eight-day mission in which crew would enter lunar orbit, separate lm from CSM, and pilot lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface. Mission would include 11 different crew operations on TV and Westinghouse Electric Corp.-developed “experiment involving color TV if we can develop it and get it prepared to fly in time to support this mission. If we are able to ... we would do most of the pictures with color TV rather than black and white. . . .” (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins visited Canadian Parliament in Ottawa. Canadian Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau said astronauts’ contributions to science and humanity “will live as long as mankind lives.” Astronauts would conclude two-day Canadian visit with Dec. 2 visit to Montreal and tour of nearby factory where lm landing pads were made, (upi, W Post, 12/4/69, B3)
NASA announced appointment of Astronaut James A. McDivitt as Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. McDivitt, who would remain in USAF, would be responsible for planning lunar landing missions subsequent to first landing and would no longer be candidate for space flight crew assignments, (nasa Release 69—96)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family departed on usaf jet for 18-day Presidential goodwill mission to Europe. Itinerary: London, Feb. 2—5; Paris, Feb. 5—7; Brussels, Feb. 7—10; The Hague, Feb. 10—11; Bonn, Feb. 11—12; West Berlin, Feb. 12—13; Rome, Feb. 13—17; Madrid, Feb. 17—19; and Lisbon, Feb. 19—21. (nasa Int Aff; W Star, 2/2/69, A3)
During telephone call from White House to U.S.S. Hornet, shortly after Apollo 12 splashdown and recovery, President Nixon told Apollo 12 astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan F. Bean of their promotions to captain, usn. (PD, 12/1/69, 1659)
Inaugural parade following President Nixon’s address included NASA float carrying mockup of lunar module to be used for moon landing and Apollo 7 capsule. Apollo 7 Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham rode in convertible automobile in front of NASA float. (NASA Pio)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, with wives, were welcomed by President Nixon at White House ceremony on their return from 44,650-mi around-the-world goodwill journey. President called 38-day, 29-stop tour of 22 countries “most successful goodwill trip in the history of the United States.” First men on the moon had demonstrated they were “the best possible ambassadors America could have on this earth.” Armstrong said astronauts had been receive'd everywhere, “not just as individuals, but as representatives of the United States” and of “scientific and technological accomplishment . . . that serves as a symbol ... of a willing and talented nation assembling its resources and firm in its will ... to share for the benefits of all mankind.” During journey, astronauts had given 22 news conferences, been received by 20 heads of state, and received decorations on nine occasions. (PD, 11/10/69, 1563; Robertson, NYT, 11/6/69, 22)
Commemorative stamp to be issued May 5 in honor of Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission would include phrase “In the beginning God . . .” on photo of earth as seen from moon, taken by Apollo 8 crew. Postmaster General Winton M. Blount said phrase, read from Genesis by Astronaut William A. Anders during lunar orbit Christmas Eve 1968, would be included in response to many requests. Stamp would be first U.S. stamp with religious wording since 1961. (upi, W Post, 2/28/69)
Cancellation of mol program had left usaf with $1 billion in space hardware and 14 highly trained astronauts, Ralph Dighton of Associated Press wrote. Most of $1 billion already spent on program had been for undisclosed number of Titan HIM boosters and satellites built or on order, usaf had said launch facilities would be finished on schedule in September because they would have to be paid for anyway. They could be used for unmanned spacecraft. The $1.3-million mol administration building at Vandenberg afb, Calif., and $1.6-million medical and training structure could be adapted for office space, mol astronauts had been offered to NASA but no decision had yet been reached. Aerospace workers in seven firms had been hit by mol cancellation, with McDonnell Douglas Corp. most affected. It had 7,200 employees on project. (AP, W Star, 6/21/69, A5)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director of Flight Operations, told press at msc he wanted full report on piloting difficulties in landing on moon before committing Apollo 13 to landing attempt on moon’s rugged central highlands. Full discussion of lunar landing—described by Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., as “no easy task”—was important aspect of what must be learned during crew debriefing, Kraft said. (Wilford, NYT, 11/25/69, 33)
Estimated 250,000 persons watched Apollo 11 astronauts parade in Houston, Tex. Crowd threw confetti, ticker tape, and “moon certificates”— fake $100 and $1,000 paper money—until streets were two to three feet deep in litter. Later, 55,000 persons attended gala in Houston’s Astrodome coliseum, which was filled to capacity. Total of 31 astronauts and families rode through cheering throngs, (upi, W Post, 8/17/69, A12)
President Nixon arrived at Lahore, Pakistan, during round-the-world journey. Pakistan President Yahya Khan said at airport, “The City of Lahore is happy to receive you on its historic soil and to share your joy at the most recent and the most memorable triumph of human courage, determination, and scientific skill which was achieved by your astronauts when they were first to land on the moon.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1060)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, told preflight press conference Apollo 9 astronauts were “in a real fine state of health” for March 3 launch. Although two astronauts still had some minor throat infection, it would not interfere with planned launch time. Three-day postponement of launch from original Feb. 28 date had made possibility of inflight illness “exceedingly slim.” Only addition to spacecraft’s standard medical kit—which already included nasal emolient—might be throat lozenges. (Transcript)
Press commented on personal qualities of Apollo 10 astronauts during crises and technological marvels. New York Times: “Their courage and high technical skill were evident. There was total absence of posturing or pomposity. Notable, too, was the absence of false patriotism or of any attempt to use the space feat as the basis for claims of national or ideological superiority. The astronauts’ personal behavior added a warm human luster to the superb scientific and technological feats they were and are performing.” (NYT, 5/23/69) Washington Evening Star:	. . the flight of Apollo 10 has shown something . . . about the durability of human nature. . . . However rigorous the training, however unworldly and unreal the surroundings, man is still capable of awe, error, fright, outrage and—when the occasion calls for it—profanity. It’s good to know.” (W Star, 5/23/69, A16)
Tass announced that Luna XV was still functioning normally in lunar orbit with 109.4-km (68-mi) apolune, 16.1-km (10-mi) perilune, 1-hr 54-min period, and 127° inclination. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Luna XV had conducted two midcourse corrections and speculated that spacecraft was preparing either to land or to observe Apollo 11 landing. (AP, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al) Harlem, many of 50,000 attending soul music festival booed lunar landing announcement. At massive “Moon In” at Central Park, enthusiastic crowd of young people watched landing on huge outdoor TV screen in steady downpour and bought “lunar dogs,” “Apollo rock candy,” and “moon picnic” boxes. Composer and band leader Duke Ellington made singing debut with “Moon Maiden,” song he wrote to celebrate Apollo 11 success, taped for ABC. New York Times sold out 950,000 copies of July 21 issue announcing lunar landing and announced it would reprint entire edition July 24 as souvenir. Special Florida Times-Union edition datelined “Moonday, July 21” sold out in Jacksonville within two hours. Estimated 8,000 Western Electric Co. employees left work or failed to show up in protest against being denied access to TV or radios on job during lunar landing. Des Moines, Iowa, TV stations received some complaints from viewers over absence of regular programs.	, Crime rate fell in Los Angeles, while in Savannah, Ga., 17 prisoners sawed their way out of Chatham County prison branch while guards watched Apollo 11 on TV. At msc, Houston Welfare Rights Organization members demonstrated around display of lm, calling on U.S. to set new goal—elimination of poverty. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21/69; 7/22/69; Apollo 11 Mission Commentary, 7/21/69; NYT, 7/17/69, 7/27/69) • Millions around world hailed Apollo 11 landing: Soviet Premier Alexsey Kosygin complimented U.S. on lunar landing and expressed interest in widening U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation during July 21 Moscow discussion with former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, who was ending Soviet visit. Soviet TV did not carry live coverage of Apollo 11 lunar landing July 20; Tass announcement was read by newscaster and carried in two-paragraph item on Pravdals front page. Evening paper, Izvestia, accorded story more space and featured photo of astronauts on moon. On TV, Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov described landing as “major landmark” and said crew had coped “brilliantly” with mission. Georgy Petrov, Director of Soviet Institute for Cosmic Research, called Apollo 11 “outstanding achievement” but said more data per ruble could have been gathered by unmanned probes. Statue dedicated to Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled July 21 in sports stadium at Cracow, Poland. In U.K., Queen Elizabeth watched lunar landing on TV, then cabled President Nixon “warmest congratulations.” Prime Minister Harold Wilson expressed “heartfelt relief.” At Jodrell Bank Experimental Station astronomers applauded and director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said that “the future has been revolutionized.” David Threlfall collected $24,000 on five-year-old bet that man would land on celestial body before 1971. Betting shop had given him thousand-to-one odds [see May 29]. In Wollongong, Australia, local judge heard cases while watching Apollo 11 lunar landing on portable TV set. Czechoslovakia issued two postage stamps July 21 commemorating lunar landing, while record crowds at U.S. Embassy exhibition tapered off after exhausting supply of Apollo giveaway materials. Five thousand Hungarians walked through American Embassy in Budapest July 21, picking up USIA pamphlet Man on the Moon. In Romania, bouquets were tossed through U.S. Embassy fence to foot of flagpole and several Romanians reported large numbers of Bulgarians were crossing border to watch live TV coverage of Apollo 11. Cuban government decided not to jam Voice of America broadcast of Apollo 11 lunar landing. In Algiers news was ignored except for announcement in government-controlled newspaper that “the man is on the moon.” In Ghana, village chief listening to voa broadcast feared astronauts might fall off moon if not careful. In Bangkok, freedom for 622 pardoned prisoners was delayed because guards refused to leave TV sets showing Apollo 11. Lunar landing stole top play in Israel and Egypt, from accounts of their fierce fighting at Suez Canal. In Singapore, girl born half hour after lunar landing was named Luna. In Pakistan, boy baby was named Apollo. Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, and Indian Parliament gave standing ovation to Apollo 11 astronauts at opening of day’s business in New Delhi July 21. In Japan, Emperor Hirohito called off customary daily stroll and interrupted lunch to watch Apollo 11 on TV. Iroquois Indians in Brantford, Ontario, Canada, feared lunar landing might plunge earth into darkness and release monsters from earth’s core. Their medicine man and chief, Joseph Logan, Jr., had said moon was sacred to his people and “we are not supposed to disturb her.” In Taipei, Formosa, Nationalist China Parliament member Hsieh Jen-chao invited Apollo 11 astronauts to attend Moon Festival honoring rabbit which Chinese legend said lived on moon and could provide eternal life. Some devout Moslems in Somalia refused to believe Apollo 11 lunar landing was reality. Following radio, press, and word-of-mouth announcement, fist fights broke out July 21 in Mogadiscio streets between believers and disbelievers. Parents of baby boy born on lunar landing day broke with Muslim tradition and named child Armstrong Abdurahman Osman. In Brussels workers in radio and TV studios suspended strike during transmission of Apollo 11 mission film. In Brazil several thousand persons cheered as they witnessed televised lunar landing at Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro while church bells rang outside. In Santiago de Chile people rushed out of restaurants to look at moon, forgetting it was midafternoon when they learned of lunar landing. While rest of world focused on lunar landing, one quarter of world’s population labored through sixth moon of Chinese lunar year unaware of event. Approximately 800 million people in Communist China had heard no news of lunar landing. Only deviation from “total blackout on space exploration” was July 17 story of Astronaut Frank Borman’s visit to Moscow, reported by New China News Agency. (C Trib, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21-22/69; W Star, 7/22/69; NYT, 7/22/69; B Sun, 7/21—22/69; Am Embassy, Prague, Bucharest, Brussels, Budapest, Mogadiscio)
House passed H.J.R. 775, to authorize President “to award appropriate medals honoring those astronauts whose particular efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind have been exceptionally meritorious.” (CR, 9/15/69, H7870—2)
Look published interview in which former astronaut M. Scott Carpenter announced that infarcts in lower thigh bones, indicating calcification, would terminate his career as active deep-sea diver. He would remain senior aquanaut on Sealab III project as deputy on-scene commander of Sealab III command ship Elk River. (Look, 1/21/69, 68-74)
Apollo 11 astronauts would leave three items on lunar surface to commemorate landing, NASA announced. Silicon disc, 1%-in-dia, would carry statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon; messages of goodwill from leaders of 73 countries; list of leaders of Congress and members of four congressional committees responsible for NASA legislation; and names of NASA’s top management, past and present. Statements, messages, and names had been etched on disc by process used to make microminiature electronic circuits. Each message had been reduced 200 times, to barely visible dot. Three- by five-foot nylon American flag with tubing along top edge would be erected on eight-foot aluminum staff on airless moon. Two other U.S. flags and flags from 136 nations and 50 U.S. states would be carried to moon and returned to earth. Plaque left on lm descent stage would bear images of two hemispheres of earth and inscription “Here men from the planet earth first set foot upon the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.” It would bear names of Apollo 11 crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins—and President Nixon, (nasa Releases 69—83E, 69-83F, 69-83H)
Economist commented on perils of prolonged space voyages: “When astronauts begin to do tours of duty that could run from three months to a year at a time on the moon, or on orbiting earth platforms— still more when they embark on 2% year trips to Mars—the problems will be much greater. Their bodies may adapt themselves to conditions of weightlessness or low gravity, and to living in atmospheres of rather less density than on earth, and then find it hard to re-adapt back to earth conditions again. If, over time, the changes become irreversible, we could witness the evolution of a new race of space hominoids with whom we could communicate but not cohabit.” (Economist, 11/22/69)
NASA announced that 8 of 14 aerospace research pilots trained for USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program terminated June 10 would join NASA. One, l/c Albert H. Crews (usaf), would be assigned to Flight Crew Operations Directorate at MSC. Seven would be astronauts, bringing total number of active NASA astronauts to 54: Maj. Karol H. Bobko (usaf), l/cdr Robert L. Crippen (usn), Maj. Charles G. Fullerton (usaf), Maj. Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr. (usaf), Maj. Robert F. Over-myer (usmc), Maj. Donald H. Peterson (usaf), and l/cdr Richard H. Truly (usn). Effective date for new assignments had not been set. Maj. Bobko, Maj. Hartsfield, and Maj. Peterson would complete studies for graduate degrees before assuming astronaut duty, (nasa Release 69-120)
NASA had raised limit on amount of samples Apollo 11 crew could bring back from moon, Washington Post writer Thomas O’Toole reported in Los Angeles Times. Instead of 50 lbs of samples originally set as maximum, astronauts would be permitted to collect as much as they could carry—probably up to about 100 lbs. (LA Times, 6/22/69)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory scientists issued first comprehensive report on preliminary study of lunar samples collected by Apollo 11 astronauts. Experiments indicated there was no life in sample and traces of organic material reported earlier were probably from astronauts’ space-suits and containers, rubber gloves, and tools used to handle material. (Traces of hydrocarbons in two samples of lunar dust had been reported Aug. 6.) Autopsies performed on 48 mice injected with lunar dust and then killed had shown no signs of germs or illness. Detailed analyses of samples would begin in late September when material would be released from quarantine and distributed to 146 principal investigators in 9 countries. (AP, W Star, 8/8/69, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 8/7/69, 1)
Associated Press said Austin, Tex., Judge John R. Brown had granted request of atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair for three-judge Federal court to hear her suit against NASA seeking to prevent astronauts on duty from practicing religion [see Aug. 6]. (AP, W Post, 8/16/69, A3)
iaf announced official endorsement of absolute world’s records for Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission’s 10 lunar orbits: altitude, 234,672.5 mi; greatest mass lifted into earth orbit, 282,197 lbs; total time in space for an astronaut, James A. Lovell, Jr., 572 hrs 10 min 16 secs. Apollo 8 world class records: duration of lunar mission, 146 hrs 59 min 49 secs; duration in lunar orbit, 20 hrs 14 min 13.2 secs. To obtain iaf certification of Apollo 11, crew would be given torn halves of four $1 bills for comparison with other halves on return as proof same men returned as took off. naa would submit claim for absolute world record for extravehicular activity (eva) for successful Apollo 11 mission. (AP, NYT, 7/15/69, 20)
Countdown for NASA’s Apollo 10 mission, scheduled for launch May 18, began at ksc. Astronauts completed three-hour physical examinations and were reported to be in good health and good spirits. {W Post, 5/13/69, A7; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/14/69, A3)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean and 25 other persons quarantined in Lunar Receiving Laboratory were released one day ahead of schedule. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, said astronauts were in good physical condition. (B Sun, 12/11/69, Al)
Reaction to Apollo 12 lunar landing was “almost a ho-hum,” Associated Press reported. “It seemed to indicate they are now taking moon voyages for granted.” At White House, President and Mrs. Nixon arose before dawn to watch moon walk on TV. President had commented it was “first time anybody has sung from the moon,” as Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., hummed while conducting lunar tasks. In Philadelphia’s Franklin Institute, where thousands had gathered in July to watch Apollo 11 lunar landing, only 45 persons showed up to watch Apollo 12, Of 12 New Yorkers interviewed by New York Times, only Bernard Granite of the Bronx had watched lunar landing. He said, “The first one was more exciting. This one was anticlimaetic, but I still think they are justified in spending the money.” Portland, Ore., secretary Jeanne Paulson said, “I’m at the point where I think the money should go to the poverty program. There are too many starving people in the slum ghettos.” Des Moines, Iowa, secretary Eileen Brown said, “The biggest concern seemed to be that they couldn’t make the TV work rather than whether they could perform their assignments. What do we think they are up there for, anyway, to put a show on for us?” Police in Los Angeles, Calif., attributed sharp drop in reported crime to Apollo 12 moon landing and walk. In Washington, D.C., McKinley High School teacher said, “This doesn’t concern us at all. There are far more important things going on here.” Question for his pupils was “whether we will survive to the year 2000.” (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 31; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
At small White House dinner, Apollo 10 Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan presented President Nixon and Vice President Agnew with four wrinkled flags which had been carried aboard spacecraft during mission. Stafford told President, “. . . these flags have been to the moon and 31 times around it, so we thought you’d like to have them just the way we brought them back. That’s why we didn’t press out the wrinkles when we had them framed.” (Dean, W Star, 7/1/69, Dl)
In American Scholar architect R. Buckminster Fuller said: “It seems eminently clear that we not only must put our space programs on highest priority of attention and resource investment but that all humanity must be accredited and financed to enter into a new re-educational system that is geared to develop our most prominent awareness, that we indeed are in space and that all of our concern is with the fact that our space-vehicle Earth and its life-energy-giving Sun, and the tide-pumping Moon can provide ample sustenance and power for all humanity’s needs to be derived from our direct energy income without further robbing our fossil fuels energy savings account. In reality, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon are nothing else than a most fantastically well-designed and space-programmed team of vehicles. All of us are, always have been, and so long as we exist, always will be—nothing else but—astronauts. Let’s pull our heads out of the brain benumbing, mind frustrating, misinformedly conditioned reflexes. If it is going to be ‘All ashore who’s going ashore,’ once more intent to return to nonspace down here ON earth, humanity is doomed.” (American Scholar, Winter 1969-70, 27-47) During 1969: In 1969—the year man first set foot on another celestial body —U.S. orbited 54 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 70. U.S. total included 31 orbited by DOD. NASA’s 23 included 2 satellites orbited for dod as secondary payloads. Highlight of 1969 was achievement of major goal in NASA’s Apollo program—to land man on the moon and return him safely to earth. Lunar landing system completed final phases of test and demonstration when Apollo 9 demonstrated operation of LM in earth orbit and Apollo 10 demonstrated operation of complete Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit, with LM making two passes within 47,000 ft of lunar surface. Apollo program climaxed with Apollo 11, July 16—24, when LM Eagle landed on moon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. —first men on the moon—performed tasks on lunar surface, redocked with csm in lunar orbit, and returned safely to earth with lunar samples. Apollo 12 successfully accomplished second manned lunar landing with pinpoint accuracy, touching down close to Surveyor 111, which had landed on moon April 19, 1967. Crew set up first alsep on lunar surface and returned safely to earth with lunar samples and parts of Surveyor III. Unmanned Mariner VI and Mariner VII passed within 2,000 mi of Mars, transmitting more than 200 times more data about Mars than were obtained by Mariner IV in 1964. Spacecraft measured chemical composition and temperature of atmosphere and surface and took 198 high-quality pictures, providing new insight into Mars surface characteristics. Other scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso V, Oso VI, Ogo VI, and Explorer XL1. Applications satellites included Intelsat-Ill F—3, Intelsat-III F—4, and Intelsat-III F—5 for ComSat-Corp; Essa IX meteorological satellite for essa; Nimbus III; and Ats V. Biosatellite 111 provided significant biological data on instrumented monkey on board, but mission was terminated early after monkey’s physiological condition deteriorated, and monkey died shortly after recovery. Pioneer E, scheduled to enter solar orbit, and its secondary payload tetr—c were destroyed shortly after launch when Delta booster malfunctioned. Some 189 meteorological sounding rockets, 85 scientific sounding rockets, and 60 high-altitude balloons were launched. NASA—usaf XB—70 and X—15 programs were concluded and new joint program was initiated to continue aeronautical R&d, using YF—12 supersonic aircraft. First operational C—5A, military cargo transport and world’s largest aircraft, was delivered to usaf and by November seven C—5As had accumulated 1,320 hrs flying time. Aeronautical R&d continued to improve quality and quantity of options available in aircraft technology, and aircraft industry made first flights of several wide-bodied jumbo jet transports for civil use, including Boeing 747. New SST design with delta wing was approved by faa and prototype construction was recommended by President Nixon. NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 3 successful glide flights and 15 powered flights included first supersonic flight at mach 1.1 and 54,000-ft altitude, usaf’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle completed 7 flights. dod space program included orbiting of 2 Vela nuclear-detection satellites, 7 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, Tacsat I tactical comsat, Egrs XIII (Secor XIII) geodetic satellite (launched by NASA), and U.K.’s Skynet A comsat (launched by NASA). Titan HIM development was terminated and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program was canceled because of budget cutbacks. NASA and aec completed ground tests of xe experimental rocket engine with 28 successful startups and 2.8 hrs of operation, including 3.5	min at full thrust, and validated test stand No. 1 in Jackass Flats, Nev. SNAP—27 generator was used as electrical power source for Apollo 12 experiments left on moon and SNAP—19 was auxiliary power system for Nimbus III. SNAP—29 program was terminated. New liquid-propellant rocket engine was developed and new triprapellant system produced record performance for chemically powered engines. U.S.S.R.’s 70 payloads included 55 Cosmos satellites and 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 1 Luna, 1 Zond, 5 Soyuz, and 2 Venus spacecraft, and 2 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz IV docked with manned Soyuz V and two cosmonauts transferred from Soyuz V to Soyuz IV before returning to earth. Manned Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII, launched on three successive days, rendezvoused in orbit and performed experiments including photography, communications, and welding. Luna XV, apparent unmanned challenger to NASA’s Apollo 11 for first lunar landing and return, crashed onto lunar surface in July. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully reached speeds up to 900 mph and was demonstrated publicly in 90-min test flight. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; nasa Release 69—161; gsfc SSR, 12/31/69)
Izvestia gave first U.S.S.R. report of President Nixon’s July 17 announcement that medals of two dead Soviet cosmonauts would be placed on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. Factual account of mission carried no comment. {W Post, 7/19/69, A10)
Briefing on Apollo 9’s earth resources survey experiment [see March 3— 13]	was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Leonard Jaffe, Director of Space Applications Programs, stressed importance of satellite photos for earth resources program: “. . . we have taken advantage of the Apollo and Gemini, as we did with Mercury, opportunities to get pictures of the earth and its environment with cameras, largely held by hand, by the astronauts. These pictures have been a very large source of experimental data for our Earth Resources Survey Program.” Advantage of using space for earth resources survey was twofold. One was “large view that it gives you of the earth.” Second was “ability to see the same phenomenon, or the same area of the earth time and time again, to be able to arrive over this particular spot on the earth periodically and observe temporal changes.” Apollo 9 experiment had obtained some 120 or 130 useful frames of multispectral data, all of which had been distributed to principal investigators for analysis. (Transcript)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., orbiting moon in csm, set new world record for solo space flight. Gordon piloted csm alone for 37 hrs 41 min, breaking 30-hr 20-min record set by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., in Faith 7 May 15—16, 1963. (upi, W Star, 11/21/69, A7)
Senate confirmed nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders as Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council. (CR, 6/19/69, S6736)
White House announced President Nixon had canceled plans to dine with Apollo 11 astronauts July 15, eve of launch, msc Director of Research and Medical Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, had expressed concern that crew might catch earthly illness from President, which could complicate lunar landing mission. (AP, B Sun, 7/8/69)
Die proof of 1.05- by 1.80-in 10-cent airmail stamp commemorating “First Man on the Moon,” attached to envelope, would be carried by Apollo 11 and canceled on Moon by Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount announced. On return to earth, die would be used to produce commemorative stamps for August issue. Hand-canceled “Moon Letter” would undergo 21-day decontamination period at lrl and be returned to Post Office Dept, for display in Washington, D.C., and later throughout U.S. and abroad. Stamp was designed by Paul Calle, modeled by Robert J. Jones, and engraved by Edward R. Felver and Albert Saavedra. It depicted astronaut stepping from spacecraft onto lunar surface. (PO Dept Releases 107, P—37; W Post, 7/10/69, A13)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean held press conference at msc and showed movies and slides of mission. Explaining failure of color TV camera, Conrad said: “What apparently happened ... is that I took the thing off mesa and set it down. The MESA was in the sun at the time and ... I apparently either pointed it at the sun or pointed it at the mesa, which was in the sun and a pretty bright reflector . . . and just that few seconds . . . was enough to sunburn the camera. ... I didn’t realize it was as sensitive to light as it is.” Dust on surface was a major problem, Conrad said. Ground was soft and astronauts sank in significantly. It was difficult to keep experiment package clean. “It was almost impossible for us to walk around those packages without our little dust cloud and at any time the dust hit the surface of the package it stuck and the worst thing you could do was try to rub it off because you just smeared it over them even worse. . . .” To question about difficulty in landing LM on moon, Conrad replied he had misinterpreted correct gage reading and underestimated accuracy of LM’s descent. “. . . I felt that that gage was not . . . giving me the proper information. I found it quite hard to believe that I could have gotten the velocity killed quite as well as I did . . . and so I was continually going out the window to get roll information and a general idea of my lateral and horizontal velocities.” Although Conrad felt landing on moon was not “an amateur’s game,” he felt satisfactory landings under completely instrumented flight rule conditions could be made. Crew had suggested adding instrument that would provide automatic nulling of horizontal and lateral velocities but would leave pilot with rate of descent command. Conrad said he did not think dust during descent would be problem on future missions “as long as you get a look at your landing site before you get into the dust, and ascertain that it’s all right—it’s perfectly all right to go in and land, IFR. ... I don’t recommend any change from the procedures that we’re using right now.” Bean said photos of moon were realistic, but photos of earth were not. “As we view the Moon from the Earth, it’s white and flat; it’s quite pretty. When you get up at the Moon . . . it’s much the same; it’s either white or concrete colored or grey. . . . But when you look at the Earth ... it kind of sparkles, and . . . you can’t capture it on the film. It’s sort of like taking a picture of an emerald . . . and hoping to get it.” Gordon said he had mixture of emotions, “a mixture of thoughts, as to why is it all here? And . . . what the function that each person, each part, each molecule, each body performs, in the overall scheme of why is it, what is it, and from where did it come.” (Transcript)
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory’s Dr. Gary Latham said in Houston his team had detected 14 “unusual seismic events” from seismometers left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. They believed walls of lunar craters had been falling in as different parts became hotter than others during highest lunar temperatures and felt they might be observing “initial stages of the process by which fresh new craters are transformed to old.” (W Post, 7/28/69, A6)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial: “The public ceremonies honoring the astronauts underscore identity in a larger and much more responsible sense—a feeling of community, rooted in a family and expanding to embrace the nation, perhaps ultimately the world. There are other words for it—awareness of a common purpose, a sense of decency both public and private, a common standard of behavior and a common sense of service and loyalty to country. This is what made Apollo succeed, and this is what the nation is recognizing as the celebration begins today.” (P Bull, 8/12/69)
Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev told Soviet gathering in honor of four Soyuz IV and Soyuz V cosmonauts U.S.S.R. was “fully justified in saying that the successful flight . . . [see Jan. 14-18] is a great achievement of Soviet science and engineering, and a new triumph of the courage, boldness, intellect and labour of the Soviet people. The recent outstanding flight made by the American astronauts round the Moon, the confident start made by the Soviet automatic interplanetary stations ‘Venus-5’ and ‘Venus-6’ towards their distant target, and the successful flight made by the . . . [Soyuz] spaceships—all this constitutes man’s new, major steps along the road to conquering the mysterious world of outer space. . . .” (Moscow News, 2/8—15/69, Supplement, 3—5)
At U.S. Embassy Independence Day Party in Moscow Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman signed autographs with Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Georgy T. Beregovoy, and Konstantin P. Feoktistov. Among 1,000 persons attending reception given by U.S. Ambassador Jacob D. Beam were Vasily V. Kuznetsov, U.S.S.R. First Deputy Foreign Minister, and Mikhail P. Georgadze, Secretary of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. They were highest ranking Soviet officials to attend annual July 4 reception since 1964 attendance of Nikita S. Khrushchev as head of government and Communist Party. (Clarity, NYT, 7/5/69, 28; AP, B Sun, 7/5/69, A2)
Spain awarded its Grand Cross of Aeronautic Merit to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. (upi, NYT, 10/4/69, 23)
NASA announced revised plans for first orbital workshop, with 1972 launch using first two stages of Saturn V to launch workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount together. Workshop would be outfitted on ground and would arrive in 253-mi circular orbit equipped for immediate occupancy by astronauts and with atm attached. Program objectives remained same as when NASA intended to use Saturn IB 2nd stage as 1971 workshop: to provide environment in which man could live and work for extended periods in space and to study man’s physiological and psychological responses and capabilities in space, atm would permit man to operate high-resolution astronomical telescopes in space, free from earth’s atmosphere. Saturn V hardware from Apollo program was available for revised plan, (nasa Release 69—105; Simons, W Post, 7/22/69, Al)
Wendell F. Moore, assistant chief engineer at Bell Aerosystems Co. and developer of rocket belt which could lift man and carry him length of football field, died in Niagara Falls, N.Y., at age 51. He had won John Price Wetherill Medal of Franklin Institute of Philadelphia in 1964 for his invention, first flight-tested in 1961. (upi, NYT, 5/30/69) May 29—June 8: 28th Salon Internationale de l’Aeronautique et de l’Espace —Paris Air Show—featured nearly 550 exhibitors representing 14 nations. U.S., with largest pavilion, emphasized space achievements, taking “Countdown Apollo” as theme. On opening day biggest display attraction, said United Press International, was Apollo 8 spacecraft, which Apollo 9 Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart unveiled in ceremony attended by U.S. Ambassador to France, R. Sargent Shriver. U.S. exhibit also included F—1 and J—2 engines of 1st and 2nd stages of Saturn V rocket and full-scale model of Apollo 11 lm. French prototype of Concorde 001 supersonic transport was flown over Paris for first time and later took its place on apron at Le Bourget Airport among 150 aircraft, helicopters, and gliders. Opening day also marked signing of agreement for joint development of short-haul airbus by French Transport Minister Jean Chamant and West German Economics Minister Karl Schiller. Spokesman for U.K. manufacturer Hawker Siddeley said firm was still negotiating on building wings for 250-seat airbus. U.S. exhibited 490-passenger Boeing 747 but did not show Lockheed C—5A, world’s largest aircraft. U.K. exhibits at Air Show included Concorde 002, British prototype; Hawker Siddeley Harrier vtol jet fighter; and Hawker Siddeley Nimrod, maritime reconnaissance version of Comet. French exhibits included Dassault Mirage fighters and Dassault Hirondelle turboprop. U.S.S.R.’s chief entry was 500-passenger An-22 turboprop airliner. (Amer Av, 5/26/69, 33-6; upi, W Star, 5/29/69, A10; Reuters, NYT, 5/30/69, 40)
Soviet youth newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda praised NASA’s Apollo 9 mission: “A thorough check of the entire equipment necessary for a lunar landing has been attained, thanks to the courage and gallantry of the three American astronauts. At the same time the Apollo 9 flight showed that it is impossible in terrestrial conditions to envisage all difficulties astronauts are encountering in real flight.” Soviet Academician Prof. Anatoly Blagonravov complimented NASA’s planning for lunar landing: “The fact that the Americans earlier made a flight around the moon and now conducted the Apollo 9 experiment, in my opinion, is evidence of a rather complete solution of the problem of dependability,” though some risk always remained, (upi, W Star, 3/14/69, A6)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
The supersonic Soviet airliner Tu-144 following its landing at Sheremetyevo Airport, Moscow, after a public-demonstration test flight. {AP wirephoto) will be executed with the same precision that marked the early stages of this trip.” ( W Post, 5/22/69, A24) John Lannan in Washington Evening Star; “Where manned space flight once was fraught with fright and peril, it seems to have moved into an era of fun and games. . . . The astronauts have learned to fly their spacecraft, the ground crews to launch them and the Defense Department to recover them. What remains is to use this accumulated knowledge, and that’s what NASA is attempting to do.” It all pointed to fact that “space flight has come of age.” (W Star, 5/21/69, A4) Marquis Childs in Washington Post: “When the moon landing . . . is completed the cost to the government will be just under $24 billion. The achievement represents an unprecedented orchestration of the resources of science and technology. The contrast with the failures here on earth to begin to try to cure rudimentary ills could hardly at this moment of grave uncertainty be sharper.” (W Post, 5/21/69, A25) Christian Science Monitor editorial: Apollo 10 mission “has again posed the old, old question: If mankind can achieve so spectacularly in space, why cannot we improve matters faster here on earth? The answer, surely, is that it is simpler to mobilize the complex electronics and space-science gadgetry to rocket a spacecraft to the moon than it is to coordinate the manifold and conflicting human emotions, ambitions, and processes necessary for cleaning up the cities, thrusting the black revolution forward with a minimum of friction, and banishing earth’s pollutants. The earth problem is moTe complex than the moon problem. Yet success in the moon venture will offer assurance that the earth challenge can be met. “So let no one call the moon venture a waste of ambition, treasure, achievement. The whole brilliant enterprise is immensely horizon-widening, thought-expanding.” (csm, 5/21/69)
Apollo 11 astronauts were received at Buckingham Palace by Queen Elizabeth during their visit to U.K. on 22-nation tour. (Reuters, B Sun, 10/15/69)
Apollo 12 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility, arrived at Ellington afb, Tex., where they were greeted by 500 cheering persons, including their families and NASA officials, mqf was moved in motorcade to Lunar Receiving Laboratory, where astronauts would remain until Dec. 10. (DeLone, W Post, 11/30/69, A3)
Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post observed similarities among astronauts. Of 23 who already had flown in space, 21 were either only sons or eldest sons. Pattern tied in, he said, with psychologists’ beliefs that only and eldest children tended to achieve more in life because they were disciplined more and trained and treated better by parents. Astronauts also were athletic, showed academic excellence, and had intense love of flying, O’Toole said. (W Post, 3/2/69) Primary objectives were to demonstrate crew, space vehicle, and mission support facilities performance during manned Saturn V mission with CSM and LM; demonstrate LM and crew performance, demonstrate performance of nominal and selected backup lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) mission activities; and assess CSm/lm consumables. Multispectral photography experiment was carried for first time to provide photos of earth resources using several different film-filter combinations. Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft, carrying Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), entered initial orbit with 119.5-mi (192.3-km) apogee and 117.6-rai (189,3-km) perigee. After post-insertion checkout csm, code-named “Gumdrop,” separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, code-named “Spider.” Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm, and docked spacecraft was separated from 3rd stage with rcs burn. Two S—IVB burns placed stage on earth-escape trajectory. Crew conducted first docked SPS burn. On second day crew tracked landmarks, conducted pitch and yaw roll maneuvers, and increased apogee by firing sps engine three times. On third day, McDivitt and Schweickart entered lm through docking tunnel, evaluated lm systems, transmitted first telecast, and conducted first manned firing of lm descent propulsion system (dps). They then returned to csm and conducted fifth sps burn to circularize orbit. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fourth day and transmitted second telecast. Schweickart, recovered from earlier nausea, spent 37 min outside spacecraft, walking between lm and csm hatches, maneuvering on handrails, and standing in “golden slipper” foot restraints. He commented on sun’s brightness, photographed spacecraft and earth, and described rain squalls over ksc before he and McDivitt returned to csm. Scott opened cm hatch and retrieved thermal samples from csm exterior. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fifth day to perform csm—lm rendezvous. Scott separated csm from lm and fired csm reaction control system thrusters to place spacecraft about 3.4 mi (5.5 km) apart, lm dps was ignited twice to set up rendezvous, lm descent stage was jettisoned and LM ascent propulsion system (aps) was fired to set up conditions for circularization. Although problems were encountered with crewman optical alignment sight (coas) because of extremely bright reflections, radar and optical sightings backed up by earth tracking enabled spacecraft to dock successfully after being up to 114 mi (183.5 km) apart during 6%-hr separation. After McDivitt and Schweickart returned to csm, crew jettisoned lm ascent stage and maneuvered to safe distance while stage burned to propellant depletion and entered orbit with 4,309-mi (6,934.5-km) apogee and 142.2-mi (228.8-km) perigee. By end of fifth day 97% of Apollo 9 objectives had been successfully accomplished. On sixth through ninth days crew conducted sixth and seventh SPS burns to alter apogee, tracked NASA’s Pegasus III meteoroid detection satellite (launched July 30, 1965), took multispectral photos of earth, tracked landmarks, exercised spacecraft systems, and prepared for reentry. Final sps burn for deorbit on 10th day was delayed one revolution because of unfavorable weather in planned landing area, cm—sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal; spacecraft reentered during 152nd revolution and splashed down in Atlantic 180 mi east of Bahamas at 12:53 pm est March 13, 241 hrs 53 secs after launch, within sight of recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. Astronauts were welcomed by Guadalcanal crew and received congratulatory telegram message from President Nixon which said: “The epic flight of Apollo Nine will be recorded in history as ten days that thrilled the world. You have by your courage and your skill helped to shape the future of man in space. The three of you and the great team which enabled you to complete your successful mission have shown the world that the spirit of man and his technological genius are eager to begin an age of adventure, an age which will benefit all the people on this good earth.” All primary Apollo 9 objectives were achieved and anomalies were not serious enough to alter mission operations or flight plan significantly. First manned flight of lm qualified last major component for lunar landing mission. Apollo 9 was sixth Apollo mission to date and third manned Apollo mission. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4, 1968), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Second manned mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), proved capability of Apollo hardware and systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 69-29, 69-33; PD, 3/17/69, 400)
Apollo 11 had opened vast market for medals, tokens, and pins to collectors who specialized in commemorative pieces, New York Times said. Medals issued by several countries after Apollo 8 were “few compared to the meteoric shower of commemoratives for the moon landing.” Medal by Ralph J. Menconi portrayed Apollo 11 astronauts on face side; reverse showed Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., with lm on lunar surface and earth in background. Medal designed in U.K. by Paul Vincze depicted astronaut on lunar surface with names of Apollo 11 astronauts. Reverse showed figure of Hermes holding winged staff of flight and olive branch with Saturn V in background. (Haney, NYT, 8/10/69)
House adopted H.R. 765, authorizing Smithsonian Institution to display U.S. flag presented to House by Apollo 11 astronauts. (CR, 12/23/69, H13090)
Safe landing of Apollo 11 in Pacific made “splash applauded around the world,” New York Times said. In U.S.S.R. TV viewers had live coverage for first time during mission as Moscow TV station hooked into Eastern Europe’s Intervision network for live transmission of astronauts being deposited on carrier Hornet. Later, station devoted first two-thirds of final newscast to Apollo 11 and announced that Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny had sent telegram to President Nixon offering “our congratulations and best wishes to the space pilots.” Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh called voyage “a big contribution to space exploration and further progress of world science.” Cosmonauts sent message to Apollo 11 crew: “We . . . closely followed your flight. We wholeheartedly congratulate you on the completion of your wonderful journey to the moon and safe return to earth.” In London Lloyd’s of London’s Lutine Bell tolled twice for good news of splashdown of Apollo 11. Sir Bernard Lovell, Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, said, “The successful conclusion of this immense project marks the beginning of a new phase when man must concern himself with the greatest issues of peaceful coexistence in extraterrestrial space.” Thunderstorm in Paris drove many people off streets at time of splashdown. On Riviera, bells tolled for five minutes and ancient cannon boomed. Mayor Pascal Rossini of Ajaccio, Corsica, sent invitation to astronauts to visit Corsica during 1969 bicentennial of Napoleon’s birth. In Warsaw crowd of 300 Poles broke into applause at U.S. Embassy. Over Pacific on Qantas airliner flying under Apollo reentry point, crew and 80 passengers saw space capsule reenter. In Canberra Prime Minister John Gorton invited astronauts to visit Australia. Pope Paul VI sent telegram to President Nixon with prayer “that this immense achievement may foster peace and prosperity and scientific and moral progress for all mankind.” Congratulatory messages were sent by President Giuseppe Saragat of Italy, President Yahya Khan of Pakistan, Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan, President Chung Hee Park of South Korea, U.N. Secretary General U Thant, President Gustav Heinemann of West Germany, and Prime Minister John Gorton of Australia. (Collier, NYT, 7/25/69, 31; Mills, B Sun, 7/25/69, A6; AP, B Sun, 7/25/69, A6)
White House confirmed President Nixon would talk with Apollo 11 astronauts over two-way TV hookup as they first set foot on moon. Nixon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., would be visible on split screen to earth TV viewers. President could watch on White House TV, but astronauts would have no view of him. President Nixon planned to spend evening of July 20 watching Apollo 11 progress on TV with former Astronaut Frank Borman, White House liaison with NASA. (Lyons, W Post, 7/19/69, A9)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were debriefed on Apollo 13 mission at msc, tape-recording details for almost eight hours. NASA released 6Vi-min 15-mm movie of mission, including scenes of astronauts after SM explosion. Film showed Lovell rubbing his hands vigorously as if trying to warm them, Haise sleeping with his hands folded inside his spacesuit to keep them from floating free in weightlessness, and Swigert studying flight plan. (AP, WPost, 4/21/ 70, A4)
With Apollo 13 proceeding “in almost textbook fashion,” newsmen at MSC were discussing “minor ‘glitches’ ” because “there had been nothing of major nature to talk about,” Los Angeles Herald-Examiner, said. Houston TV had failed to carry launch live and only 295 U.S. and 55 foreign journalists were covering MSC. Apollo 13 astronauts had prompted complaints from newsmen for being “too quiet.” Reason might be “that few newsmen have listened to find out whether the crewmen are talking or not.” (Bane, LA Her-Exam, 4/13/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research, described Soviet Tu-144 as “striking” supersonic aircraft “every bit as attractive” as Anglo-French Concorde, during luncheon meeting of Aero Club of Washington and Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C. Armstrong said visit to Tu-144 hangar had been highlight of Moscow visit. He said Tu-144’s four engines were similar to those on U.S. B-70 bomber and interior resembled McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Tu-144 pilots had told him aircraft had flown at twice speed of sound and handled well at all speeds. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/11/70, A3)
New York Times editorial appeared before Apollo 13 splashdown: “Here on earth the drama in space has done more than shatter any complacency that may have begun to surround lunar flight. It has drawn men and nations together in common concern over astronauts who are envoys of mankind even before they are nationals of a particular state .... Lovell, Swigert and Haise have already written an epic of heroism and skill that assures them immortality in the annals of space exploration.” (NYT, 4/17/70)
Buddy secondary life support system (bslss) to be carried by Apollo 14 astronauts during surface EVA was described by MSC Roundup. If water cooling system in one of backpacks failed, astronauts could retrieve bslss from met cart and attach the 21/£-m (814-ft) hoses to their portable life support systems (plss). Tether snapped to waist restraint straps of astronauts’ spacesuits would prevent damage to hoses or spacesuits during return to lm. By sharing water supply between two crewmen, BLSS stretched time that emergency oxygen would last from 30 min to 60 min. (msc Roundup, 12/4/70,1; NASA Release, 12/13/70)
City council of Roermond, the Netherlands, had announced it would name street after Apollo 13 and include names of Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., in street signs, AP reported. (WPost, 4/20/70, A8)
Time magazine named “the Middle Americans” its Men and Women of the Year: “They sent Richard Nixon to the White House and two teams of astronauts to the moon. They were both exalted and afraid. The mysteries of space were nothing. . .compared with the menacing confusions of their own society.” Middle Americans admired “men like Neil Armstrong and, to some extent, Spiro Agnew.” Apollo 11 and 12 were “a quintessential adventure of American technology and daring.” Astronauts were “paragons of Middle American aspiration. Redolent of charcoal cookouts, their vocabularies an engaging mix of space jargon and ‘gee whiz,’ the space explorers gave back to Middle America a victory of its own values. It was little noted, except in Middle America where such things still matter, that among Neil Armstrong’s extraterrestrial baggage was a special badge of his college fraternity, Phi Delta Theta. He used it symbolically to establish Moon Alpha Chapter.” Some liberals had “grumbled that the Apollo program’s $26 billion would have been better spent on curing hunger or the urban malaise.” Yet Middle Americans “reveled in the lunar landings precisely because they were victories purely accomplished; in Vietnam, in the carious slums, in the polluted environment, no clear victories seemed possible any longer.” (Time, 1/5/70, 10-2)
NASA released two black-and-white photos taken by Apollo 13 crew, showing damage to SM from oxygen tank explosion. Former Astronaut James A. McDivitt, Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, said primary information revealed by pictures was that entire 4- by PA-m (13- by 5Vi-ft) panel held by 250 bolts had been blown off and that fuel cells above tanks had remained intact. (Auerbach, WPost, 4/20/70, A1)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., told news conference at Coast Guard Academy in New London, Conn.: “In the past it has taken a war to force technology to advance at an abnormal rate. The space program did it in peacetime, and to me this makes much more sense.” Swigert defended proposals for Mars exploration: “If we can learn more about our solar system and have those benefits accrue to the economy, I would say it is worthwhile.” (AP, W Post, 9/10/70)
Dr. Wernher von Braun (feff), former msfc Director, was sworn in as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning by Dr, Thomas O. Paine, Administrator. lifting-body vehicle and to Apo//o 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, William A, Anders, and James A. Lovell, Jr., for first manned Right to moon. (Program; afsc Newsreview, 4/70)
On first anniversary of Apollo IVs first manned lunar landing, Apollo 11	Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, visited Apollo 11 spacecraft exhibit at state capitol in Jefferson City, Mo., and received plaque from Missouri Gov. Warren E. Hearnes. Later they flew to New York, where they presented 113 g (4 oz) lunar sample to U.N. Secretary General U Thant. Sample would remain on exhibit at U.N. Presenting sample, Dr. Paine said: “What the full significance of Apollo will be to the world of the future, no one can yet predict. We must await the verdict of history. But as we continue to learn and to explore, I am inclined to think that our first moon landing may some day be thought of as the turning point when man first demonstrated that he can open new worlds, where eventually exciting new extraterrestrial societies will be founded. Mankind will move onward to settle and colonize other worlds, and the United Nations will encompass new territories, if not new dimensions.” NASA centers and tracking stations around world celebrated anniversary throughout week. (NASA Release 70-125; upi, NYT, 7/21/70; Text)
Firemen in Evendale, Ohio, had worked two years to perfect new firefighting uniform of aluminum-beta glass, material used in astronauts space suits, UPI said. (W News, 4/20/70, 4)
Boom ‘‘was busted” at Cape Kennedy, New York Times article said. Engineers and technicians ‘‘who helped put American astronauts on the moon” had moved away by thousands, leaving “a sagging economy and perhaps the best house buys in the United States.” Employment in Cape Kennedy area had dropped from 26 000 to 18 900, and was still falling. Business in Brevard County had dropped 15%; total bank deposits were down by $1.7 million from $241 million on Dec. 31, 1968; and unemployment rate had risen to almost 4%. Motel business was off estimated $400 000 per month, with half of county’s 1500 units vacant most of time. In December 1969 county had become eligible for Federal food commodities and 1327 families had qualified. Real estate was only business booming, with local residents buying homes sold by engineers at low prices and interest rates. (Waldron, NYT, 2/8/70,80)
Astronaut Donn F. Eisele would leave msc in mid-June to become Technical Assistant (Manned Flight) in LaRC’s Space Systems Research Div., NASA announced. Eisele had been astronaut since October 1963 and was CM pilot on Apollo 7 mission Oct. 16-22, 1968. i(NASA Release 70-81)
Former President Lyndon B. Johnson was briefed on Apollo 12 mission by Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr.; at lbj ranch near Stonewall,Tex. (P Bull, 1/15/70)
msc Roundup described Skylab food system being developed “to compensate partially for astronauts’ long absence from the usual fare of Earthlings and the warmth and delight of home-cooked meals...Skylab food system would maintain caloric level between 2000 and 2800 calories per day and provide at least minimum dietary allowances recommended by nas. Meals would be selected from a variety of foods and cooked by each crewman on special food tray. Four kinds of food would be prepared: dehydrated, including scrambled eggs, beverages, and desserts; intermediate moisture, including peanuts and coohies; wetpack, including turkey with gravy and meatballs with sauce; and frozen, including filet mignon and lobster Newburg. (msc Roundup, 11/6/70, 1)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., one of seven original Mercury astronauts, was resigning effective July 31 to become President of National Exhibits, Inc., and member of Board and engineering consultant to Intersales, Inc., in Washington, D.C., NASA announced. Cooper had participated in Faith 7 mission launched May 15, 1963, and eight-day Gemini V mission launched Aug. 21, 1965. (NASA Release 70-103)
Univ. of Southern California conferred degree of M.S. in aerospace engineering on Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Astronaut had pursued graduate studies under usc-Edwards afb program from 1955 to 1960 and had nearly completed degree requirements when he was transferred. Lecture delivered Jan. 22 by Armstrong on “Lunar Landing: Techniques and Procedures” completed requirements. (AP, W Star, 1/23/70)
Senate received President Nixon’s nomination of Col. James A. McDivitt (usaf), Apollo 9 astronaut and Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager at msc, to be brigadier general. (CR, 12/14/70, S20137)
U.S. reaction to Apollo 13's successful splashdown: Sign at msc was changed from “Our hearts are with the Apollo 13 crew,” to “Sigh of relief party here tonight.” Mission Control broke into applause before whipping out traditional cigars to fill huge room with blue smoke. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, observed that mission had not been complete failure. Spacecraft had gone around moon—feat that would have caused sensation two years before. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said later in day, “I’m a little tired and bedraggled but I’m feeling 10 or 20 years younger than I did yesterday.” In New York, thousands watched recovery on giant TV screen at Grand Central Terminal. Loud applause sounded when capsule appeared in sky, at splashdown, and when astronauts appeared. Hot dog stand operator at Vanderbilt Ave. and 47th Street assured pas-sersby, “It’s all right.” Long strands of multicolored ticker tape and bushels of confetti poured from skyscraper windows. At City Hall, Mayor John V. Lindsay said, “Now they are safely back and New Yorkers join with men everywhere in saying’welcome home.’” Church bells pealed throughout Nation. Traffic came to standstill in Indianapolis, Los Angeles reported no crime for brief period, and dice stopped rolling in Las Vegas briefly. Richmond, Va., department store manager, watching crowd before store TV set, said everybody “had a quiet smile, but it was curious the way they stood iooking at all that good news—silently and almost as if they were still praying.” (WPost, 4/18/70, Al, All; NYT, 4/18/70, 1, 13)
Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as CM pilot on Apollo 13 mission April 11, Dr, Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced. Mattingly, exposed to German measles, had not developed immunity and was expected to show symptoms of disease next week. “The recommendation of ApriMO: nasa announced that Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as cm pilot on Apollo 13 mission. Cancellation of the mission had been considered following Mattingly's exposure to German measles. Below, Dr. George M, Low (left). Deputy Administrator, conferred with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at April 10 launch status meeting at Kennedy Space Center. everyone. . .was unanimous that Apollo 13 be launched tomorrow,” Dr. Paine told press at ksc. Decision was made after Swigert demonstrated in intensive training that he could replace Mattingly on short notice. “When it comes to the problems you can get into in the command module. . Jack [Swigert] literally wrote the book on the malfunctions and how to overcome them,” Dr. Paine said. Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said Swigert had performed critical maneuvers flawlessly in training. “Our simulator people said it couldn’t be done. . .but we anticipated more problems than we had. We were all surprised. It went very smoothly.” (Wilford, NYT, 4/11/70, 1; O’Toole, WPost, 4/11/70, Al)
President Nixon sent message to Ambassador Gerard C. Smith, chief of U.S. delegation to U.S.-U.S.S.R. strategic arms limitations talks (salt) in Vienna: “I express. . .the hope that an agreement can be reached on the limitation and eventual reduction of strategic arsenals with proper recognition of the legitimate security interests of the United States and the Soviet Union and of third countries.” (PD, 4/20/70, 531) April 17:	President Nixon issued statement following safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts: “From the beginning, man’s ventures into space have been accompanied by danger. Apollo 13 reminds us how real those dangers are. . .of the special qualities of the men who dare to brave the perils of space. It testifies, also, to the extraordinary concert of skills, in space and on the ground, that goes into a moon mission. To the astronauts, a relieved Nation says ‘Welcome home.’ To them and to those on the ground who did so magnificent a job of guiding Apollo 13 safely back from the edge of eternity, a grateful Nation says ‘Well done.’ ” In proclamation designating April 19 as national day of prayer and thanksgiving for safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts, President said: “The imperiled flight and safe return of the crew of Apollo 13 were events that humbled and inspired people all over the world. We were humbled by the knowledge that in this stage of man’s exploration of space, a safe splashdown of an imperiled mission is in its way as successful as a landing on and safe return from the Moon. We were inspired by the courage of the crew, the devotion and skill of the members of the NASA team on the ground and by the offers of assistance from nations around the world.” President spoke with Apollo 13 astronauts by telephone from White House to U.S.S. Iwo Jima in Pacific. He told them he would like to present them the Presidential Medal of Freedom in Hawaii on following day. President then announced intentions at White House press briefing. He would go “first to Houston, where we will pick up the two wives, and then go on to Hawaii. .. .what these men have done has been a great inspiration to all of us. I think also what the men on the ground have done is an inspiration to us. How men react in adversity determines their true greatness, and these men have demonstrated that the American character is sound and strong and capable of taking a very difficult situation and turning it into a very successful venture. .. in recognition, also, of the men on the ground, I am going to present the Medal of Freedom tomorrow in Houston. . . to the Apollo 13 crew on the ground who have made these very difficult decisions on the spot, decisions that had to be right.” (PD, 4/20/70, 538-40; Text)
Abolition of 21-day quarantine for astronauts returning from moon was recommended to NAS panel by NASA officials and representatives of Interagency Committee on Back Contamination. Panel Chairman, Dr. Allan H. Brown of Univ. of Pennsylvania, said his. group would relay decision to NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. (UPI, NYT, 2/18/70, C17)
Heart-rate tachometer invented by msfc engineers James R. Currie and Ralph R. Kissel to monitor astronauts’ heart beat in space might have medical application on earth, msfc said. Device, which could measure heart rates between 40 and 200 beats per minute and furnish almost instantaneous rate after measuring only two heart beats, might be used to monitor heart rates of cardiac patients, (msfc Release 70-226)
Apollo 12 astronauts began goodwill tour of Europe with one-day visit to Lisbon, Portugal. (NYT, 2/24/70)
Washington Post quoted German police as saying Astronaut Joseph H. Engle had escaped uninjured from head-on automobile collision in Southern Bavaria. Engle was in Germany to visit Noerdlingen Crater with Apollo 14 crew on mission to familiarize crew with rocks similar to moon rocks expected to be encountered. (W Post, 8/16/70, A30)
Modularized equipment transport system (mets) to be used by lunar explorers starting with October 1971 Apollo 14 mission was described by MSC Chief of Crew Systems Div. Robert E. Smylie in interview at aiaa’s annual Aerospace Sciences meeting in New York. Two-wheel, rickshaw-like cart would double walking range on moon and increase sample collection. Other plans to improve astronauts’ mobility included more flexible spacesuits, modified lm that could stay more than two days on moon, and improved backpack to allow astronauts to work outside spacecraft for more than six hours at a time. Cart, 7.6 cm (30 in) high, weighing 9 kg (20 lbs), had been designed with attachments for cameras, tools, and scientific equipment. It would be carried to moon folded in compartment outside LM. (Wilford, NYT, 1/20/70,46)
Nine astronauts, headed by Richard H. Truly, began walk-through of Skylab Workshop tasks in week-long Saturn Workshop crew-station review at msfc. (MSFC Release 70-189)
MSFC engineer Hans F. Wuenscher was awarded U.S. patent 3 534 926 for machine to manufacture materials and articles in space. Cylindrical tank would be used in space station to produce new metal alloys and glasses, metal membranes, metal foam, high-precision ball bearings of hollow steel, and optical components in zero-g condition, where heavy materials did not settle out because of lack of buoyancy. Astronaut outside tank would control admission of liquid metal, gases, and other materials, and regulate heat, ventilation pressure, spinning, and agitation. (Jones, NYT, 10/23/70,43)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird discussed “basic asymmetry” between U.S. and U.S.S.R. efforts in nuclear weapons field at AP annual luncheon in New York: From 1965 to 1967 U.S.S.R. had more than tripled its inventory of strategic offensive nuclear weapon launchers—from 500 to 1700, including 200 heavy bombers—and quadrupled total megatonnage in its strategic offensive force. U.S. in same period had not increased established level of 1710 strategic nuclear missile launchers, had reduced heavy bomber strength of 780 by over 200, and had reduced megatonnage by more than 40%. “Except for the minimum ‘hedge’ that safeguard will provide, we have not responded to the Soviet strategic offensive buildup with new deployment programs. We did not respond in past years because the United States deliberately chose to assume that the Soviet buildup was aimed at achieving a deterrent posture comparable to that of the United States. We have not responded this year because. . .we fervently hope that salt can render such a response unnecessary.” (Text) Cal Tech physicist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg said detailed studies of Apollo 12 moon rocks had shown preliminary estimates of their age to be off by some 800 million yrs. Evidence from Apollo 11 and 12 lunar sample studies indicated moon—and possibly earth and some major planets—had at least one period of sustained turbulence, lasting about 300 million yrs and beginning some billion years after moon and rest of solar system originated. Solar system was estimated to be 4.6 billion yrs old. At news conference following meeting, Dr. Wasserburg said he uid collaborator, Cal Tech physicist Dr. D. A. Papanastassiou, had found age of lava-born Apollo 12 rocks to be 3.4billion yrs, rather than preliminary estimate of 2.6 billion yrs. Apollo 11 rocks were found to be 3.65 billion yrs old. Evidence indicated both areas of moon had been formed from same sustained process lasting some 300 million yrs. There was “widespread outpouring” of lava over sea regions of moon about 3.5 billion yrs ago. Evidence suggested Sea of Storms, where Apollo 12 rocks were found, had almost same age as Sea of Tranquility, Apollo 11 lunar site. (AP, LA Times, 4/23/70) Dr. Rhodes W. Fairbridge, Columbia Univ. geologist, reported finding territory which was earth’s south polar region in Upper Ordovician period, about 450 million yrs ago, in middle of Sahara desert. Finding supported belief that phenomenon of sliding land masses known as continental drift had occurred. (Blakeslee, NYT, 4/21/ 70, 1) At closing session scientists, with exception of ESSA’s Dr. S. Fred Singer, maintained earth and moon had simultaneous and similar origin despite differences between lunar rocks and those of earth. Dr. Singer agreed moon had most likely been captured in earth’s gravitational field “very shortly” after earth’s formation about 4.6 billion yrs. ago. Dr. John A. O’Keefe of GSFC thought earth and moon were once single planet that broke apart. Dr. A. G. W. Cameron of Yeshiva Univ. felt earth and moon had formed in same gaseous cloud, (upi, NYT, 4/27/70) April21: Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr., described their initial reaction to Apollo 13 accident to press at msc. Lovell explained: “Fred was still in the lunar module, Jack was back in the command module in the left-hand seat, and I was halfway in between the lower equipment bay.. .when all three of us heard a rather large bang, just one bang. Now, before that, Fred. . .had actuated a valve which nominally gives us the same sound. . .so when this bang came we really didn’t get concerned right away, but I looked up at Fred and Fred had that expression like it wasn’t his fault, and we suddenly realized that something else had occurred, but exactly what we didn’t know.” Swigert said he had felt vibration accompanying bang and then noticed master alarm and main bus B undervolt light. “I transmitted to Houston that we had a problem and proceeded to. . .look at the voltage. . .[which] at that time was completely normal. . ..” Swigert thought bang had occurred in LM and Haise, in lm, thought it had occurred in cm. Lovell said his first impression was “that we had had an electrical problem that caused this bang.... That quickly went away and then I looked out the window and saw this venting and my concern was increasing all the time. It went from I wonder what this is going to do to the landing to I wonder if we can get back home again. It was apparent.. .that the only way to survive the situation was to transfer to the lm. ...” Lovell said decision on date, crew, and destination of Apollo 14 would be made after debriefings and investigation by Apollo 13 Review Board. If NASA “wants this crew to go back to Fra Mauro, we’ll be glad to go. If they decide to send another crew or not to go to Fra Mauro, that’s their decision.” (Transcript)
NASA held series of three Apollo 13 post-recovery press conferences at msc hosted by NASA Administrator, manned space flight officials,' and technical specialists. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said although mission “must be recorded as a failure, there’s never been a more prideful moment in the space program.” Most impressive aspect of mission was “tremendous effectiveness in team work of our ground support operation .... From every state . . . we’ve had people. . . working to backstop the many different system decisions that had to be systematically and methodically faced up to and made. . . . The Flight Operations Directors . . . certainly demonstrated that flight controllers can operate under these very adverse conditions. They’ve been able to do things in a far shorter period of time than we’d ever thought possible be-1 fore.”	’ Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said basic procedures used for every phase of mission were predetermined. “For example, the burn made behind the moon . . . was a standard emergency burn that would be used in case the service propulsion system would not work on a normal lunar mission going into lunar orbit. Each one of these steps had been predetermined and also simulated. But putting them all together into a sequence of steps . . . and working out some of the detailed procedures on how to save power and how to save batteries; how to save water; those things were determined during the course of the flight, both by the men ... on the ground and by the astronauts.” (Transcript)
America’s “sanguine attitude about manned space flight” had been shattered by Apollo IJ’s technical problems, Howard Simons said in Washington Post. “As the first words came that the three astronauts were in peril, earthbound fears began to race along with the moonbound craft. The astronauts seemed remarkably calm, most other persons desperate.” As tension heightened, “inevitable questions began to intrude on one’s innate fears. Would they get back? Could they get back?” It seemed certain situation would revive debate over rescue capability. “Mysterious ‘bang’ in space is bound to further slow an already slowed effort to stretch man’s reach beyond his immediate horizon.” (WPost, 4/14/70, Al)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford attended dedication ceremony of Stafford Field, small airfield in Stafford’s hometown, Weatherford, Okla. Airfield was Weatherford’s memorial to Stafford who had piloted two Gemini missions. At dedication Vice President said: “While Stafford Field may not be equivalent in size to the giant airports of this country and the world, it. . .symbolizes the best of American traditions. . .harnessing that pioneering spirit of old.” (WPost, 4/27/70, A4; Text)
Second volume of third edition of new Soviet encyclopedia Bolshaya Sovetskaya Entsklopediya—to go on sale in October— displayed “factual approach” to U.S. space program, AP said. Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong received half-column biography and small photo as first man to walk on moon. Apollo missions were given nearly two pages, including two-column photo of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., on moon and diagram of lunar landing. (AP, LA Times, 911110)
Safely home, the Apollo 13 crew stepped aboard the U.S.S. Iwo Jima recovery ship after splashdown in the South Pacific. Leaving the helicopter (at top, from left) are Astronauts Fred W. Raise, Jr., James A. Lovell, Jr., and JohnL. Swigert, Jr. Li the once-tense Mission Operations Control Hoorn at msc (at bottom), Dr. Donald K. Slayton (left of center), Director of Flight Crew Operations, shook hands with Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee as arriving Astronaut Lovell appeared on the TV monitor. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Dkector, stands behind Lee, with Flight Control Division Chief' Eugene F. Kfanz sitting at the console in front. (July 16-24, 1969) manned missions had successfully landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (NASA Proj Off; FonF, 4/16-22/70, 253-5; W Star, 4/12-14/70; NYT, 4/15/70; 4/18/70; 4/19/70; W Post, 4/15/70; 4/18/70, Al; msc Hist Off; Off NASA Administrator)
Apollo 13 astronauts and families were greeted by crowd of 5000 at Ellington afb on return to Houston from Hawaii. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., said: “Jack and Fred and I are very proud and glad to be back in Texas because there were times when we weren’t sure we would make it back here. We would not have been here today if it were not for the people on the ground. The people in Mission Control guided us all the way, day and night.” (Pasadena Star-News. 4/ 20/70; Lannan, W Star, 4/20/70, Al)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Michael Collins attended unveiling of painting “Crew of Apollo 11” by Ronald Anderson of Dallas, Tex., at National Portrait Galley in Washington, D.C. Oil painting would be presented to Smithsonian Institution. (AP, W Star, 7/27/70, B4)	.
NASA’s Apollo 14 spacecraft was moved from assembly building to launch pad at KSC in preparation for launch toward moon Jan. 31. Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa told press at briefing that launch preparations had “gone quite smoothly” so far. Apollo 14 crew, he said, was “the only crew that’s been six months from launch four times. I personally will have close to 1000 hours in the command module simulator by the 31st of January.” In response to press query Roosa said he would attempt to photograph evidence of moonquakes detected by seismometers: “.. .the current consensus is that these quakes are coming from around the Rima Parry Five Rille and the southern edge of crater Fra Mauro. So this will be a specific photo target. Both with the Hy-con and with the Hasselblad to see if we can see anything new.” (Transcript; upi, NYT, 11/10/70,33)
Apollo 12 astronauts arrived in Djakarta, Indonesia, during world tour. They were welcomed by several thousand persons. (AP, W Post, 3/19/70)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Alan L. Bean received special citation from aec, commemorating first anniversary of deployment of nuclear-powered generator on moon Nov. 19, 1969, during Apollo 12 mission. Bean accepted similar citations for fellow Apollo 12 crewmen Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during ceremonies at aec Hq. in Germantown, Md. (aec Release N-203)
New mineral found in Apollo 11 samples had been named “armalcolite,” incorporating letters of Apollo 11 astronauts’ names, Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, msc announced. Name had been included in Proceedings of Apollo 11 Lunar Science Conference of Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta (cq.), dedicated to Apollo 11 crew, and had been approved by Nomenclature Committee of International Mineralogical Assn, (msc Release 70-82)
The city of Chicago welcomed the Apollo 13 astronauts anti flight controllers with ticker tape, confetti, and cheers during a parade around the Loop. Honorary citizenship awards were given John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (absent), and the city’s Medal of Merit was given to flight commander James A. Lovell. Jr, nated into a growing number of more precise disciplines—each becoming more productive the narrower its focus became.” But "in recent years this process has been reversed and we are now seeing the growth of interdisciplinary sciences and a striving for a more ali-encompassing grasp of the physical world and even broader relationships. . . . This type of growth is essential if science is to be the guiding force—as it must be—behind our evolving mankind.” (Text)
X-15 rocket research aircraft, holder of 7274-km per hr (4520-mph) speed record for manned aircraft, went on display at Alabama Space and Rocket Center near msfc. Once piloted by Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and one of three manufactured for NASA, the 22 700-kg (50 000-lb) $50-million X-15 was on loan from Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. Second X-15 was on display at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. Third had been destroyed in 1967 crash. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 3/28/70)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received Robert J. Collier Trophy for “their high courage and stunning success in accomplishing man’s highest adventure in recorded history—the first moon landing.” Award was presented at Washington, D.C., luncheon given by National Aeronautic Assn, and National Aviation Club, (naa Release; NR News, 5/15/70, 1)
Apollo //lunar landing had been voted biggest news story of 1969 in poll of Associated Press member newspapers and radio and TV stations, AP announced. Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Apollo 11 commander, had been voted top newsmaker of year. AP poll ranked Vietnam war second biggest story and “story of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy’s political fortunes” third. (Rock, AP, W Star, 1/1/70, A3)
International reaction to Apollo 13 crisis: In Moscow, many persons relied on foreign radio broadcasts for information on Apollo 13 progress; Soviet news media continued to give only brief reports. At U.N. in New York, Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov, Soviet delegate to Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, said people of world were hoping for safe return of “courageous astronauts.” Pope Paul VI told audience of 10 000 Romans and tourists in St. Peter’s Basilica, “We cannot forget at this moment the lot of the astronauts of Apollo 13. We hope that at least their lives can be saved.” Japanese businessman said in Tokyo: “How could it happen? Why, they almost shuttled to the moon as safely as we ride commuter trains.” In Paris, radio stations interrupted regular programs with news bulletins and interviews with space experts. La Monde said, “The whole human race is participating with them in the agony of their return.” Thousands flocked to churches in Georgetown, Guyana. They were saying mission should have been called Apollo 12B or Apollo 14, rather than Apollo 13. In Australia, Sydney TV station superimposed Apollo 13 bulletins over film of “Lost in Space.” BBC continued newscasts until 4 am local time to report critical maneuver of spacecraft. Budapest woman said, “Oh God, I hope they return safely.” Hers was “common theme,” Washington Post said; “around the world people, whether lowly or mighty, paused to participate in the first life-and-death drama in deep space.” (Johnson, W Post, 4/15/ 70, Al; Arnold, NYT,4/15/70, 1)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., told press at ksc that Apollo 13 mission would be his last space flight. “There are a lot of people standing in line for flights. I’ve had more than my share. So I’ll step aside after this one.” Apollo 13 would be Lovell’s fourth space flight. (AP, W Star, 2/5/70, A2)	.
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman would leave active duty with NASA
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., received award of excellence from Governor’s Committee of 100 000 Pennsylvanians at ceremonies in Pittsburgh. Conrad, cited for excellence in science and technology, was born in Philadelphia. Ceremony climaxed day during which Conrad and Apollo 12 Astronauts Alan L. Bean ana Richard F. Gordon, Jr., toured Pennsylvania. (P Bull, 1/19/70, 1/20/ 70)
Alabama Space and Rocket Center at Huntsville opened with $10million exhibit of hardware from MSFC, Army Missile Command, and U.S. aerospace-missile companies. Speakers at dedication ceremonies included Dr. Wernher von Braun—NASA Deputy Associate Administrator and former MSFC Director—and Astronaut Frank Borman. Center, managed by Alabama Space Science Exhibit Commission, was financed by $1.9-million state bond issue and built on 14 hectares (35 acres) transferred by USA from Redstone Arsenal property. (Marshall Star, 3/11/70,1)
Many Turkish peasants were convinced that flu that had been ravaging Turkey came from germs brought to earth by Apollo astronauts, San Francisco Chronicle said. Peasants thought astronauts had been imprisoned in room for bringing microbes back from the moon and that wind had carried microbes from space capsule to Europe and Turkey. Charges were appearing in Turkish press. (Arnow, SF Chron, 1/20/70)
Only medical side effect to astronauts found thus far from long periods spent in space was “some cardiovascular deterioration,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, told Los Angeles press conference. This was “normal response of the body to a less demanding environment.” But medical
Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell described planned eva and equipment for Apollo 14 mission at Washington, D.C., press briefing. After landing LM on moon’s Fra Mauro, Mitchell and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would leave LM and explore lunar surface with equipment stored on 9-kg (20-lb) mobile equipment transporter (met). On previous lunar landing missions astronauts had ended up with more equipment than they could carry, met would carry cameras, special sample containers, work table, lunar portable magnetometer, trenching tools, hand tool carrier, extension handles, tether, and other tools, thus freeing astronauts’ hands, met would be pulled over lunar surface by special handle that could be held with pressurized glove without being gripped. (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/17/70, A5)
World’s first female aquanaut team received special awards from Walter J. Hickel, Secretary of the Interior, during Washington, D.C., ceremony. Later Richard H. Sprince of NASA, who was project manager for team, said test of women’s ability to function in hostile environment was one reason NASA had joined Tektite program. Asked if NASA would consider bringing women into astronaut program, Sprince said, “We’ve got to start looking in that direction.” (AP, B Sun, 7/28/70, A3)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., was named “SwedishAmerican of the Year” and presented Vasa Medal during Swedish-American Day ceremony in Stockholm. Aldrin and his family were . beginning 10-day visit to Sweden, (upi, P Inq, 8/3/70; AP, W Star, . 8/3/70)
faa announced publication of new taxiway system design standards to increase airport capacity by speeding ground movements of large aircraft, including Boeing 747, McDonnell Douglas DC-10, and Lockheed L-1011. (faa Release 70-100) November 16-20; eva critical design review was held at Skylab mock-up area and Neutral Buoyancy Simulator (NBS)at msfc. Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart headed 10-astronaut team performing under normal earth gravity in Saturn Workshop mockup and nbs. (msfc Release 70-235)
Agreement under which 50 astronauts and wives would rhare $100000 for each program in series of TV documentaries on U.S. space program had been announced by David L. Wolper, President of Wolper Productions Inc., and Louis Nizer, New York attorney for astronauts, AP reported. (W Post, 9/23/70, B4)
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., on behalf of Apollo 12 crew, received special Emmy Award from National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences in New York for TV photography during Apollo 12 lunar landing. (AP, W Star, 6/8/70, B9) Reusability requirement might be most difficult of all. “One can speculate that if we can do it in aircraft engines, why not rocket engines? But we are talking about heat fluxes and turbomachinery characteristics in the shuttle engine that extend well beyond those experienced in the engines of the [Boeing] 707, 747, or even the military high performance aircraft. It is yet to be shown if we can fly 100 missions (or even 10 or 20) with this high performance engine, and achieve the confidence and maintainability which the airline operations have in hand. .. .reusability adds a new dimension to rocket engine development.” (Text) Prof. Yu. K. Khodarev, Deputy Director of Institute for Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Valery Yevdokimov, head of Academy’s data processing dept., called for studies of what U.S. and U.S.S.R. could do to establish and operate scientific base on moon. Prof. Khodarev said: “We would like to see concrete lists from American scientists of instruments that we could place on the moon for research. Then we can explore further avenues for cooperation in space. We can’t decide how to transport things there until we first decide what we want to take.” There was general acceptance of U.S.S.R. space efforts among Soviet people “but people are looking for a direct payoff—they want something for their money.” Khodarev said U.S. and U.S.S.R. could “cooperate in a Martian program as well as in intense investigations on the moon.” He suggested area for primary investigation from lunar station would have to be decided. “Do we want to look at the moon, or do we want to look into the cosmos from the surface?” During panel discussion Robert L. Lohman of NASA’s Space Station Task Force invited Prof. Khodarev to attend NASA meeting on advanced space programs at ARC later in year. Dr. Takao Ueda of Japan said Japan was working on comsats, TV satellites, and geosynchronous weather spacecraft. (AAS Paper No. 70-044; Bane, LA Her-Exam, 6/11/70; NASA Sci and Tech Info Div)
Researchers at Ohio State Univ. headed by physiologist Dr. Harold S. Weiss had received grants totaling $452 975 to study artificial atmospheres inside space vehicles, upi reported. They were trying to eliminate undesirable side effects on astronauts from breathing pure oxygen. (NYT, 4/16/70, 30)
Atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair carried her suit to ban broadcast and telecast of prayers by astronauts in space to U.S. Supreme Court. She appealed Dec. 2, 1969, decision of U.S. District Court that prayers were individual decisions of astronauts. (AP, NYT, 2/ 17/70, C3)	.
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean were presented Distinguished Service Medals by Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations, in Pentagon ceremony. Conrad also received Navy Command Insignia for his role as Apollo 12 commander. Bean, for whom Apollo 12 was first space flight, received usn astronaut wings, (dod Release 97-70)
Motorized wheelchair controlled by sight-switch perfected by space engineers was delivered to Texas Medical Center in Houston by msfc for evaluation. Second wheelchair would be delivered to Ron-cho Los Amigos Hospital in Downey, Calif., in November. Switch, worn on head, enabled user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movement with his eyes and move easily without assistance. Switch had been developed to help astronauts in training operate essential equipment under extreme flight conditions. Manufacturer, Hayes International Corp., was extending application of switch as control device for handicapped, (msfc Release 70-218)
NASA announced appointment of Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Apollo 11 commander, as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, effective July 1. He would succeed Charles W. Harper. Harper had been appointed Special Assistant to the Director for Interagency Affairs at arc, nasa announced June 25. Armstrong had served as Naval aviator 1949-1952 and after 1955 as aeronautical research pilot for NACA and NASA. Flight testing included piloting X-15 and X-brocket aircraft, F-100, F-101, F-102, F-104, F-5D, and B-47. He became NASA astronaut in 1962, was command pilot for Gemini VIII mission’s first space docking of two vehicles March 16, 1966, and was first man to step onto moon July 20, 1969. Harper had left ARC in 1964 to become NASA Director of Aeronautical Research and had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics in 1967. He had first joined arc staff in 1941. (NASAReleases 70-72,70-105)
Tass announced Soviet efforts to aid recovery of Apollo 13 astronauts: fishing trauler Chumikan and two cargo ships were being sent to recovery area, several whaling ships in South Pacific were being diverted to Samoa, and Soviet ships throughout world had been alerted. President Nixon sent message to Soviet Premier Aleksey Kosygin expressing “deep gratitude” and said, “I will let you know fast if we need your government’s help.” Later, New York Times quoted “informed sources” as saying Chumikan was missile instrumentation ship which had already been deployed in area to gather data on Apollo 13 mission with electronic sensing devices. Times said 13 countries had offered to make ships available for recovery, at least six said they would permit U.S. aircraft to fly over their territory during recovery operations, and more than 70 countries had responded to U.S. request not to use radio frequencies used by recovery forces to avoid possible conflicts on airways. (Lindsey, NYT, 4/18/70,12)
Arthur S. Flemming Award was presented by Downtown Jaycees of Washington, D.C., to 10 young men for outstanding and meritorious service in Federal Government, including Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and Eugene F. Kranz, Chief of MSC’s Flight Control Div. (WPost, 2/16/70, B6)	.
Assistant Under Secretary of State for Public Affairs and former astronaut Michael Collins addressed meeting of Foreign Service Wives Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “By the year 2000 or 2100, people will look back on the 1970s and find it incredible that cancellation of the space program was proposed______It is inevitable there will be colonization of other planets, despite the risks.” Collins told group he hadn’t been sure oi success of first manned lunar landing until he and colleagues were safely enroute home; “that was the first time I felt any certainty about it. ’ (W Star, 4/28/70, B7)
SoyuzIXCosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov arrived in Los Angeles with Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to tour Cal Tech and visit Disneyland. They would leave for San Francisco Oct. 26, after touring arc. (LA Times, 10/25/70; ARC Astro-gram, 10/22/70,1)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received award for first lunar landing at second international congress of World Wildlife Fund in London. He said earth was oasis of life that must be protected “from its own population.” Wielders of modern technology were not deliberately destructive of earthly environment, but they were as apathetic as most humans about consequences of their actions. Time had come for them to be concerned. (Lewis, NYT, 11/19/70,4)
F-5D “Skylancer” aircraft used by Apollo II Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in training was being retired by FRC and eventually would be turned over by NASA to Ohio Historical Society for display in future Armstrong Museum at Wapakoneta, FRC announced. Until completion of museum in Armstrong’s hometown, aircraft, which he flew in 1960s to practice spacecraft emergency maneuvers, would be displayed at usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. (FRC Release 7/70)
AP quoted Soviet geophysicist Sergey Timofeyev as saying Europe had entered period of colder summers and winters because moon was closer to earth than usual. Situation created “atmosphere tide” that disturbed normal movements of warm and cool air. (NYT, 5/20/ 70) Among 32 NASA officials and scientists attending meeting were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Armstrong received tumultuous welcome from predominantly Russian audience, AP reported. During question-and-answer period before his report, Armstrong said that when he viewed earth from moon, “I thought it was impossible that a little island like that in the sky could have so many problems on it.” He had found it “more pleasant on the moon than on earth as far as gravity is concerned.” In report on experiences on moon, Armstrong said, “Since the sky is black the impression is somewhat like being on a sandy athletic field at night that is very well illuminated with flood lights.” Further improvement in mobility of pressure garments would improve ability of astronauts to carry out lunar experiments. At later session when Armstrong attended as observer, guards had difficulty restraining cheers of audience, which included 800 Soviet delegates and 420 representatives of 30 countries. AP said it was “dramatic and unusual” tribute to foreign visitors in U.S.S.R. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL scientist, reported to COSPAR meeting on study and comparison of 60 Surveyor photos taken in April 1967 and 20 Apollo 12 photos that showed moon’s extreme stillness. Photos indicated only one small pebble had moved during 31 mos at Surveyor III site. Rate of meteoroid impact or surface movement was low in area of Ocean of Storms where Apollo 12 and Surveyor III had landed. Camera and several portions of Surveyor spacecraft had coating of One dust stirred from lunar surface as Apollo 12 LM descended nearby. Only other change observed in Surveyor was that its white paint had turned to tan, “partly due to deposition of material on the spacecraft.” nas-nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1969: “Popular interest in the space program, which reached a high point with the first successful lunar landing, has diminished somewhat. Furthermore, a reassessment of national priorities has resulted in reduced financial support for space research and technology during the past year, and the support will probably be even more limited this year and next. It is our intention, despite these limitations, to try to maintain a reasonably balanced program, with continuing effort in all areas of space research in which we are currently engaged and to support mutually advantageous international cooperation in space research wherever possible.” (Text) Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov told meeting U.S.S.R. would launch two French sret earth resources satellites as part of 1966 French-Soviet agreement on scientific cooperation. French Roseau (Radio Observation par Satellite Excentrique a Automatisme Unique) program, with multisatellite payload to be launched in 1971-1972, had been postponed because of budgetary restrictions and sret (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique) had been retained. Joint French-Soviet space program also included plans for emplacement of French laser reflector on lunar surface by Soviet Luna spacecraft; stero, launching of French experiments for measurement of solar radio emission; and arcade, study of solar energy particles with French and Soviet equipment on board Soviet spacecraft. (NASA Release 70-73; upi. NYT, 5/24/70; Reuters, NY News, 5/24/70; AP, NYT, 5/26/70, 31; Reuters, B Sun, 5/26/70; AP, W Star, 5/27/70, All; SBD, 5/27/70, 125; jpl, Release 554)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent brief medical examination, donned spacesuits, and practiced countdown procedures at KSC for 2 1/2 hrs in preparation for launch toward moon April 11. (AP, NYT, 3/27/70, 23)
Apollo 13 astronauts, on European goodwill tour, arrived in Dublin for three-day visit that would include meeting with clergyman who had held all-night vigil for them during Apollo 13 mission abort. (Reuters, NYT, 10/14/70)
President Nixon presented Presidential Medal of Freedom to Apollo Mission Operations team at MSC. Citation read: “We often speak of scientific ‘miracles’—forgetting.. .that these are the product of hard work, long hours and disciplined intelligence. The men and women of the Apollo mission operations team performed such a miracle, transforming potential tragedy into one of the most dramatic rescues of all time. Years of intense preparation made this rescue possible. The skill, coordination and performance under pressure of the mission operations team made it happen. Three brave astronauts are alive and on Earth because of their dedication, and because at the critical moments the people of that team were wise enough and selffiossessed enough to make the right decisions. This extraordinary eat is a tribute to man’s ingenuity, to his resourcefulness and to his courage.” Award was accepted by Sigurd A. Sjoberg, Director of Flight Operations, on behalf of himself, Glynn S. Lunney, Milton L. Windier, Gerald D. Griffin, and Eugene F. Kranz. Following award cereriiony President and Mrs. Nixon left Houston for Honolulu with Apollo 13 astronauts’ wives, Mrs. James A. Lovell, Jr., Mrs. Fred W. Haise, Jr., and parents of bachelor astronaut, John L. Swigert, Jr. In Honolulu, President Nixon presented Presidential Medal of Freedom to Apollo 13 astronauts. He said in part: “we have received over 100 messages from foreign governments—from the Soviet Union, from Poland, other countries behind the Iron Curtain, from countries in the free world. This is truly a welcome from all the people of the world to three very brave men.” Citation on each medal read: “Adversity brings out the character of a man. Confronted suddenly and unexpectedly with grave peril in the far reaches of space, he demonstrated a calm courage and quiet heroism that stand as an example to men everywhere. His safe return is a triumph of the human spirit—of those special qualities of man himself we rely on when machines fail, and that we rely on also for those things that machines cannot do. “From the start, the exploration of space has been hazardous adventure. The voyage of Apollo 13 dramatized its risks. The men of Apollo 13, by their poise and skill under the most intense kind of pressure, epitomized the character that accepts danger and surmounts it. Theirs is the spirit that built America. With gratitude and admiration, America salutes their spirit and their achievement.” (PD, 4/27/70,548-50)
Aviatrix Ruth Law Oliver, exhibition flyer who set speed record in 1916 by flying Curtiss biplane 1094 km (680 mi) from Chicago to Binghamton, N.Y., in 6 hrs 7 min, died at age 85. Mrs. Oliver had been co-owner of Ruth Law’s Flying Circus and had become known for being first woman to loop-the-loop and fly at night and for piloting aircraft over Washington, D.C., in 1917 as part df Liberty Loan campaign during World War I. (Hoffman, W Post, 12/4/70, B18) December 1-2:	Principal investigators of candidate experiments for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) met with NASA officials and study contractors at msfc. Meetings were part of preliminary design and definition study phase of program to prepare scientific carrier for astronomy experiments that would study universe from earth orbit after 1974 launch, (msfc Release 70-248) December 1-3:	Third annual Earth Resources Survey Program Review was held at msc. A.M. Woll of Bureau of Indian Affairs said Indians looked to NASA for help in management of their natural resources. He described project in which geologists had located possible water or mineral source by examining feature 6.4 km (4 mi) in diameter on photo taken by Apollo 9 astronauts to assist Indians at San Carlos Reservation in eastern Arizona to plan water and mineral resources. Photo had shown strange circular formation. Indians also hoped to locate minerals from photos taken from NASA aircraft. nrl scientist N.W. Guinard described use of radar to detect and map oil spills. Tests could be accurate in seas experiencing high winds in which photos would not show oil traces. Radar also was more effective than photography at higher altitudes and could be used in all weather. During meeting LaRC scientists proposed that Army Corps of Engineers, Federal Water Quality Administration, and NASA combine forces in technological assault on pollution in James River in Virginia. Wallops officials described plans for regional workshop in March with Smithsonian Institution and states of Maryland and Virginia to discuss need for regionalized environmental information system. (H Chron, 12/3/70; H Post, 12/4/70; Lannan, W Star, 12/20/70, 2; MSC PAO) December 2:	U.S.SR. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCCLXXXI, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 1013-km (629.5-mi) apogee, 967-km (600.9-mi) perigee, 104.8-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos CCCLXXXII, launched from Baykonur, entered orbit with 5040-km (3132-mi) apogee, 320-km (199-mi) perigee, 143-min period, and 51.5° inclination. By Dec. 7 spacecraft had changed orbit to 5072-km (3152-mi) apogee, 1615-km (1004-mi) perigee, 158.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Orbit changed again Dec. 8. By Dec. 31 it had stabilized at 5071-km (3151-mi) apogee, 2584-km (1605.6-mi) perigee, 171-min period, and 55.8° inclination. (Space-warn, 12/15/70; SF, 6/71,213-4; GSFC SSR, 12/31/70; SBD, 12/17/70, 190-1; 12/18/70,203)
Editorials on Apollo program cutback: New York Times: “Throughout the last decade this newspaper opposed the top priority then accorded Project Apollo on the ground that too much money was being diverted from urgent social needs. But now that these huge sums have been spent the need is to obtain the maximum yield, scientifically and otherwise, from that investment. Surely, NASA, which has been able to reach the moon, can find a better solution than the one now offered for adjusting to austerity in space research. One desirable alternative would be to enlist foreign resources in the exploitation of Apollo technology, perhaps by offering to send teams of British, French or Soviet astronauts on the journey pioneered by Apollo 11.” (NYT, 9/4/70)
Former Astronaut Michael Collins was sworn in as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs in Washington, D.C. He would be responsible for State Dept, relations with U.S. public, particularly youth. (State Dept Release 3)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew completed 12-nation Asiatic goodwill tour which began Dec. 26, 1969. On return to Washington, D.C., he was accompanied by Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and wife, who had joined tour at Bangkok, Thailand, Jan. 3. Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan and wife had accompanied Agnew party as far as Afghanistan and had returned to U.S. Jan. 9. During tour Vice President distributed chips from Apollo 11 moon rock to government representatives and passed out foreign flags that had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (Off of VP; Naughton, NYT, 1/13/70, C3)
At Washington Heart Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C., Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, received Spacemedic Award “for outstanding contributions to the study of hearts in space.” He also reported evidence from Apollo 12 mission that prolonged space flight might intensify action of some bacteria normally found on human skin. Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Charles Conrad, Jr., had sustained temporary post-flight infections from staphylococcus bacteria carried from earth, which had increased in virulence during flight. (AP, HPost, 2/3/70; W Post, 2/3/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and wife, Janet, participated in ceremonies in Rome, Italy, during which Mrs. Armstrong christened Alitalia Boeing 747 named for her husband. Later Armstrong and wife flew in 747 Neil A. Armstrong from Rome to New York. (C Trib, 6/6/70)
President Nixon announced reorganization of Council on Physical Fitness and appointment of members. Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., President’s Consultant on Physical Fitness, would serve as Council Chairman. (PD, 9/28/70, 1264)
msc announced selection of Singer-General Precision, Inc., Link Div. to receive $4-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to design, develop, install, and support Skylab simulator for astronaut and ground crew training at msc. (msc Release 70-101)
Apollo II Astronauts Michael Collins (left) and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (right), were presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Dr. Robert C, Seamans, Jr. (center (eft), Secretary of the Air Force. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, represented Astronaut Nei! A. Armstrong, who was unable to be present. veloping itpr for use by NASA on Nimbus-E, scheduled for launch in 1972. (essa Release 70-28)
Interview on Apollo 13 cuisine with msc chief of food and nutrition Dr. Malcolm Smith, Jr., was published by New York Times. Increased use of spoons, use of bowls, and facilities for spreading sandwich fillings on slices of fresh bread would provide Apollo 13 astronauts more nearly normal eating procedures than on previous missions. Freeze-dried pork and scalloped potatoes would contain chunks rather than be of baby food consistency but meal would still be lukewarm. Wider variety of fresh bread had been baked for Apollo 13 mission, in lidded pans to provide uniform crust as insurance against loose crumbs which had been problem with former freeze-dried cracker sandwiches. Loaves were passed through 1900 K (3000°F) flame to destroy all mold-producing spores. Two slices of bread made from irradiated flour would be carried to test potential alternate method of preserving food without refrigeration. Apollo 13’s food was 70% freeze-dried, mainly because of space limitation; bread was treated with nitrogen gas to retard staling. Other “firsts” in foods to be carried were pecans to stimulate astronauts’ appetites, dehydrated orange crystals modified to prevent caking, and instant rice product to be reconstituted by hot tap water. Dr. Smith was already planning for 120-day Skylab missions, when hot food would be welcomed. Major obstacle was difficulty in heating food at zero g. He hoped to place test heating device aboard Apollo 14. (Hewitt, NYT, 4/8/70, 51)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received British Interplanetary Society awards commemorating man’s first lunar landing at special meeting of Society in London. Awards were silver replica of Apollo 11LM presented to NASA and gold medals for Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (Spaceflight, 5/70, 191)
msc announced rca had received $3-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification for final development and production of lunar communications relay units (LCRU), bringing total contract to $10 million. LCRU would be carried on Apollo missions beginning with Apollo 15 to transmit astronaut voice, TV, and telemetry communications directly from moon to earth. On earlier Apollo lunar landing missions astronauts communicated with earth via lm on moon. (MSC Release 70-106)
aiaa announced selection of 29 new fellows who would be honored at annual meeting in Houston Oct. 19-22. Fellows included Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, cited for Apollo 11 mission; m/g Lee V. Gos-sick, usaf Aeronautical Systems Div. Commander, for military-aeronautical leadership; and I. Irving Pinkel, LeRC, for design and implementation of aircraft safety systems, (aiaa Release)
White House announced in Key Biscayne, Fla., that President Nixon had asked Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L.Bean to visit Latin America, Europe, Africa, and Asia as his personal representatives. Tour, to take 40 days, would begin Feb. 16. Astronauts would be accompanied by wives. (PD, 2/16/70, 178-9)
Responding to question on astronaut pay, Washington Daily News columnist Hy Gardner quoted NASA as saying astronauts received no supplemental allowance for flying space missions. During last weeks before mission launch, they were on temporary duty assignment at KSC where they resided at Government expense. Status continued until they returned home to Houston after mission. During temporary duty period, military astronauts received allotment of $2 per day and civilian astronauts, $3.20 per day. (W News, 3/26/70, 40)
msc had accepted delivery of three of eight new supersonic Northrop T-38 trainers for astronauts, purchased at $800 000 each, Washington Post reported. Two-engine aircraft would replace 10 Lockheed subsonic, single-engine T-33s in NASA service for past 10 yrs. (O’Toole, WPost, 10/29/70)
Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at National Press Club Luncheon in Washington, D.C., denied interest in running for office of Senator from Wisconsin: “I’m a public servant and I intend to be that way.” He hoped to devote “next two years at least” to helping develop strong, well-balanced space program. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/30/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., received gold medal from Federation Aeronautique Internationale in New Delhi for promoting peaceful space exploration. (AP, HPost, 11/22/70)
Washington Post editorial commented on launch of Project Tektite II: “As the astronauts get ready to soar to the heights, it is worth mentioning that a group of aquanauts have sunk to the bottoms—in this case, the crew of Tektite II.... The drama of undersea exploration is considerably less than probes into outer space; but, in many ways, the world on the floor of the sea is more mysterious, more demanding—and potentially richer in what it offers mankind—than anything on the craterscape of the moon.” (WPost, 4/10/70, A18) April 11-17: NASA’s Apollo 13 (AS-508)—carrying three-man crew, LM-7 Aquarius and CSM-I090dyssey—was launched on lunar landing mission, but 56 hrs into flight toward moon mission was aborted because of SM oxygen tank rupture. In most serious inflight situation experienced in manned space program, crew foljowed lm “lifeboat” emergency plan, transferring to lm and using its systems and supplies to swing around moon and back to earth on fastest feasible course. Emergency procedures were used to make electrical power, water, and oxygen last to end of journey. Crew returned to CM and jettisoned lm before reentry and splashed down safely in Pacific April 17. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 185.5-km (115.3-mi) apogee and 181.5-km (112.8-mi) perigee. During 2nd-stage boost S-II center engine cut off 132 secs early and remaining four engines burned 34 secs longer than predicted. Space vehicle velocity after boost was 68 m per sec (223 fps) lower than planned, causing S-IVB orbital insertion burn to be 9 secs longer than predicted, but sufficient propellants remained for translunar insertion. Onboard TV was initiated at 1:35 GET for 5 1/2 min. Second S-IVB burn, on schedule at 2:41 get, injected spacecraft on translunar trajectory. csm separated from S-IVB and lm Aquarius. Onboard TV initiated after separation for 72 min clearly showed csm “hard-docking” with lm, ejection of csm/lm from S-IVB/IU at 4:01 get, S-IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) evasive maneuver, and spacecraft exterior and interior. First S-IVB APS burn, lasting 217 secs beginning at 6:00 GET, aimed stage for lunar target point so accurately that second burn was not required. S-IVB/IU hit lunar surface at 77:57 GET (8:10 pm est April 14) at 259 m per sec (8465 fps) and energy equivalent to 11.5 tons of tnt at 2.4° south latitude and 27.9° west longitude— 137.1 km (85.2 mi) from Apollo 12 seismometer that detected impact. Seismic signal for S-IVB/IU was similar to signal from Apollo 12 lm Intrepid that had impacted moon Nov. 20, 1969, but was 20-30 times larger and lasted 3 hrs 20 mins—four times longer. Signal was so large that ground command had to reduce seismometer gain to keep recording on scale. Suprathermal ion detector experiment (side) deployed by Apollo 12 crew recorded jump in the number of ion counts after S-IVB/IU impact. Instrument, in lunar shadow, recorded no ions at time of impact; count increased from few ions 22 secs after impact to 250 and up to 2500 before decreasing to few ions and back to none. Scientists speculated ionization had been produced by 6300 K to 10 300 K (6000°C to 10 000°C) temperatures generated by impact or that particles that reached up to 60 km (37 mi) had been ionized by sunlight. Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse correction No. 1 (MCC-1) was not necessary. MCC-2, for 3.4 secs at 30:14 get, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 114.9 km (71.4 mi). MCC-3 was not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 49 min, beginning at 30:03 GET, including dumping waste water from spacecraft fuel cells with moon visible in background. While joking with Mission Control, Swigert suddenly remembered that he had failed to file his Federal income tax return, but was assured that he could be granted an extension. “Hey, we’ve got a problem here,” Swigert told ground controllers. “This is Houston, say again please.” “Houston, we’ve had a problem,” Lovell replied. And Haise reported “a pretty large bang associated with the caution and warning. A few minutes later crew reported spacecraft was venting something—later determined to be oxygen—out into space. Astronauts could see blizzard of particles flying out of sm, presumably from ruptured tank. Despite desperate efforts improvised on board and suggested by Mission Control, nothing seemed to halt drop in oxygen pressure. Spacecraft dipped repeatedly, apparently because of venting gas. By 57:24 get, Mission Control reported tank No. 2 pressure was “slowly going to zero and we’re starting to think about the lm lifeboat.” Swigert replied, “Yes, that’s something we’re thinking about, too. We’ve been talking it over. ...” Decision was made to abort mission. Astronauts hurriedly had to salvage enough oxygen to supply CM during reentry and keep gyros operating until lm navigation equipment could be powered up. With only minutes of power remaining, crew fed oxygen into reserve tank and hooked up emergency batteries to csm navigation gyros until lm was powered up. Crew activated lm, powered down csm, and used lm systems for power and life support. Astronauts remained calm as they wrestled with procedures to stabilize spacecraft and stretch consumables. All information on April l !-17: Officials conferred at the flight directors' consote in the MSC Mission Operations Control Room as Apollo 13 astronauts attempted to bring (heir crippled spacecraft safely back to earth. Dr. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, leans an elbow on the console at far left. Circling to the right in front of him are Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager fames A. McDivitl; Deputy Director of Flight Operations Howard W. Tindall, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director at NASA Headquarters; and Dr, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations. Apollo Mission Director Chester M, Tee stands in front of Dr. Kraft. Sealed at the console (center, left to right) are Flight Directors Gera id D. Griffin and Glynn S. Lunney. Behind the console (left to right) are Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin and Vance D. Brand. Flight Dynamics Officer Philip C. Shaffer, Retro Officer fohn S. Llewellyn, Flight Dynamics Officer Charles F. Dreferich, and Lawrence S. Can/u, guidance navigation and control engineer at MSC. mission—including details of accident and emergency procedures— were made public immediately as data were received, Public’s apparent boredom at beginning of mission was transformed into deep concern for astronauts’ safety. Messages and offers of aid were sent to U.S, from world leaders and prayers were offered by religious leaders on every continent. MCC-4 was conducted with lm’s descent propulsion system (dps) at 61:30 GET, placing Apolio 13 on free-return trajectory around moon on which CM Otfyssey would splash down in Indian Ocean at 152:00 GET. Both lm guidance systems were powered up and primary system used for 263.4-sec dps burn at 79:28 get as spacecraft swung out from behind moon, two hours after closest approach. Bum produced 262-m-per-sec (860 fps) differential velocity, shortened predicted return time to 143:53 GET, and moved predicted landing point to mid-Pacific. After maneuver, passive thermal control was established and lm was powered down to conserve consumables. “Aquarius has really been quite a winner,” Haise said to Mission Control about three hours later. “When this flight’s all over we’li really be able to figure out what a LM can do.” During remainder of transearth coast crew continued emergency procedures to deal with shortage of water to cool LM electronic systems, decreasing temperatures in both cabins, and buildup of carbon dioxide in lm. Fearing that CM instruments needed for reentry might freeze, crew kept spacecraft in passive thermal control—“barbecue mode” of rotation to let sun uniformly heat all sides, Astronauts met cooling water shortage by filling every plastic bag they could with water from CM and carrying it to lm. Shortage of air-cleaning lithium hydroxide in LM was met by rigging combination of cm and lm cartridges; following instructions worked out on ground, crew built adapter and ran lunar spacesuit air hoses from LM fans through tunnel to connect to cm air-scrubbing canisters. Transmission of health data was eliminated and communications held to minimum to conserve electricity. Crew tried to keep warm by wearing boots carried for walking on moon, sleeping in narrow tunnel between LM and CSM that seemed warmer, and wearing extra clothing. Apr// 75-/7; MCC-5 at 105:19 get, by 15-sec LM DPS burn, decreased velocity by 2.3 m per sec (7.5 fps) and raised entry-flight-path angle to -6.52°. Crew partially powered up csm to check thermal conditions. Because of unusual spacecraft configuration (with LM still attached) and LM’s inability to survive reentry heat, officials on ground developed new reentry procedures and verified them in ground-based simulations. A 30-man team at MIT’s Charles S. Draper Laboratory worked throughout night studying stressed Apollo 13 guidance system and working out new trajectories. Simulations and programming of emergency problems were conducted by NR engineers in Downey, Calif., by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., in LM at KSC, and by Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and David R. Scott at msc, so that almost every move Apollo 13 crew made had first been proved out on ground. MCC-7 was successfully accomplished at 137:40 get with 22.4-sec LM RCSburn, resulting in predicted -6.49° entry-flight-path angle. Crew viewed and photographed SM when it was jettisoned at 138:02 get, reporting that one entire panel was missing near S-band high-gain antenna and that great deal of debris was hanging out. CM was powered up and lm was jettisoned at 141:30 get. SNAP-27 nuclear generator carrying 3.9 kg (8.6 lbs) of radioactive plutonium fell from lm into Pacific northeast of New Zealand. “Farewell, Aquarius, and we thank you,” Mission Control responded to spacecraft’s report “lm jettison.” “She sure was a good ship,” Swigert added later. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Odyssey splashed down in mid-Pacific southeast of American Samoa at 142:54 get (1:07 pm est April 17), 6.4 km (4 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Iwo Jima. Astronauts—exhausted but in good health—were picked up by recovery helicopter and were safely aboard recovery ship less than one hour after splashdown. Primary Apollo 13 mission objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected Fra Mauro area; deploy and activate ALSEP; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were not achieved. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced April 17 that Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, would be established to determine cause of accident. Apollo 13 flight crew performance was outstanding throughout mission; calm, precise reaction to emergency and diligence in configuring and maintaining lm was noteworthy. Despite lack of adequate sleep and low temperature in spacecraft, neither performance nor spirits faltered. Similarly, performance of flight operations team was outstanding in planning and aiding crew to safe return. Apollo 13 was 10th Apollo mission and third manned lunar landing attempt. Accident was first inflight failure in 22 manned flights in U.S. space program. Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) and Apollo 11
Visiting Soviet SoyuzlX Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov took turns with Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., flying Boeing 747. They were accompanied by Boeing test pilot during flight from Boeing facility near Seattle, Wash. (AP, B Sun, 10/28/70)
Ivory Coast President Felix Houphouet-Boigny presented gold plaques to Apollo 12 astronauts, who had arrived in Abidjan March 6. They would leave for Tanzania March 8 during world tour. (Reuters, WPost, 3/8/70, A7)
Newspaper editorials marked lunar landing anniversary: New York Times: “. . .the Eagle’s landing was one of mankind’s finest hours. The scientific dividends from the new era of lunar exploration have already been very rich, and they will be even more abundant in the future when numerous astronauts from many nations will work on the lunar surface. Men now inhabit the earth-moon system, not earth alone, and much in tomorrow’s history will be shaped by the developments that will follow the Eagle’s triumph.” {NYT, 7/20/70,26) Washington Post: “The basic issue involved in NASA’s appropriations this year, as it will be in the next year and for many years to come, is whether this country should give up something it has done and which is going well, something that has brought it great international prestige and internal pride, and something that we believe may well hold the key to man’s future.” (WPost, 7/20/70)
Christian Science Monitor editorial on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space discussions: “While not wishing to minimize the long road which still lies ahead before America and Russia have peacefully resolved all their major disagreements, we see the new space pact as an extraordinarily heartening development. It has created a new bond, a new mutual interest, a new feeling of joint participation. It is from the multiplication of such ties that international peace and friendship grow. And from such a vision of space togetherness there can come a stronger desire for greater brotherliness on earth.’’ (CSM, 10/31/ 70) During October: Scientists at Boeing Space Center in Kent, Wash., were studying piece of Surveyor III, 5 cm (2 in) long, returned from moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, to determine why original white paint had discolored, Boeing Co. said. White paint reflected intense solar rays in space and helped prevent heat buildup inside spacecraft. Boeing researchers thought paint degraded in space because of contaminating film from rocket exhaust, constant proton bombardment, or other radiation from sun. If discoloring came from contamination, paint could be restored to whiteness through oxygen plasma process. If paint had changed through radiation damage, Boeing could replenish depleted atoms. Results of study would enable Boeing to renew reflective paint of future spacecraft which might need to function for 10 to 20 yrs. (Boeing Release S-0788)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, NASA oart, at Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and NASA officials. (Daily Appointments Calendar)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
Science article commented oh suggestions of President’s Science Advisory Committee panel that NASA devote more time to biomedical research: “There appear to be practical limits other than the budgetary ones on the expansion of basic studies in the manned space program. It will be a long time before astronauts on missions operate in conditions anything like those of the laboratory.” msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, and his staff “have been responsible for establishing medical protocols for the missions, in a way that balances the need for biomedical data with operational demands and the willingness and ability of the astronauts to cooperate. Some medical procedures are tedious, unpleasant, and even humiliating, and when the work load on astronauts is heavy, data gathering has to be limited. For this reason in part, then, tension between biomedical insiders and outsiders is likely to continue. At the same time the interests of the two groups are nearer to converging than ever before.” (Walsh, Science, 3/13/70, 1469-71)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., visited Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan, during world tour. They climbed out of mock spaceship in U.S. Pavilion and onto simulated lunar surface. (AP, W Star, 3/24/70, A2)
Importance of studying asteroids was cited in Science by Dr. Hannes O. Alfven of Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm and Univ. of California at San Diego and Dr. Gustaf O. S. Arrhenius of Scripps Institution of Oceanography: “There are now good reasons to believe that the asteroidal belt represents an intermediate stage in the formation of the planets. This links the present conditions in the asteroidal region with the epoch in which the earth and the other planets were accreting from interplanetary grains. Hence, in order to understand how the solar system originated it may be essential to explore the asteroids.” Since manned Mars landing would take place after 1980, “it is of interest to discuss whether a sample of an asteroid may be obtained in an easier way, at an earlier time, and as a technologically intermediate step.” Asteroid sample could be obtained by landing spacecraft on asteroid or by capturing small asteroid and landing it on earth’s surface or storing it in earth orbit for later investigation. (Science, 1 /9/70, 139-41) Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received honorary Doctor of Engineering degree from Purdue Univ. Later he told students and press he had no political ambitions but did not criticize astronauts who did. “After all, politics should have something more than lawyers representing the people.” (AP, W Post, 1/10/70; KC Times, 1/10/70).
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell tested Apollo lm in vacuum chamber at ksc in preparation for Apollo 14 lunar landing mission. Mission was scheduled for Dec. 3 pending evaluation of Apollo 13 Review Board Report. (UPi. NYT, 6/18/70,9) June /6-J7: Final critical-design review of manned lunar roving vehicle was held at MSFC to decide on final design configuration leading to hardware manufacture and testing. First of four flight-mode] lunar rovers was scheduled to fly aboard Apollo 16 lm, set for 1971 launch, (msfc Release 70-112; MSFC PAO) June /7:U.S.S,R. launched Cosmos CCCXLI^from Plesetsk into orbit with 350-km (217.5-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 64.4° inclination. Satellite reentered June 25. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; SBD, 6/18/70,224)
Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., described plans for EVA on lunar surface at KSC news conference. Haise said he and Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., would explore hilly region, collect samples, and climb 180-220 m (250-400 ft) up Cone Crater. “We hope to get back to at least the base. . . . From a sampling standpoint there really is a very definite ejecta blanket of rock fragments that’s thrown out of the hole at the base of the cone and it would certainly be of interest to get up to the rim, . .and even if you just got pictures of that it would be of extreme interest. Another benefit. . .high ground would give you a magnificient panorama. You could see a good deal more of the countryside that you can see from. . .walking around. ...” Haise would drill three holes 3 m (10 ft) deep in lunar surface— two to hold heat sensors and one for sample collection—using battery-powered, rotary-percussion drill. Depth of 3 m (10 ft) “compared to the center of the moon may not be very deep, but it does give a look-see through the surface structure at least in place that in time represents several million years.” (Transcript)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell took fourhour walk-through of planned eva activity in ksc training area in preparation for Apollo 14 lunar landing mission Jan. 31, 1971. (Marshall Star, 12/9/70,1)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins at ceremonies in Washington, D.C. Medal honored exceptional research, exploration, and discovery. (Program; upi, WNews, 2/16/70)
U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IX (launched June 2) set new manned flight endurance record at 6:35 pm Baykonur time, when it surpassed 13-day 8-hr 35-min record set by NASA’s Gemini VII(Dec. 4-18, 1965). Apollo Astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., sent congratulatory telegram to SoyuzIXcrew: “Your accomplishments are adding new evidence supporting the capability of men to live and work in extended periods in space. We wish you continued success in this important mission and a safe return to earth.” Lovell told press in Houston that mission suggested U.S.S.R. would develop permanent earth-orbiting space station: “Soyuz now seems to be purely an aeromedical flight, pushing men to their limits to see how weightlessness and the pure oxygen environment affects their work in space. It all fits very naturally with the space station concept.” (Astrachan, WPost, 6/16/70, Al; SBD, 6/16/70,211)
Apollo 12 astronauts and wives arrived in Bucharest, Romania, only Communist capital on their world tour itinerary. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said it was “warmest welcome we’ve had yet,” as crowd of estimated 15 000 persons braved icy winds along 16-km (10-mi) motorcade route from airport. In rare exception to strict rules, Romanian authorities allowed vehicles in motorcade to fly U.S. flag, practice usually reserved for official or state occasions. After stopover in Vienna, astronauts and wives would continue to Africa. (UPl, W Star, 3/1/70, A17)
President and Mrs. Nixon and party of Apollo 13 astronauts and families attended services at Kawaiahao Church in Honolulu commemorating National Day of Prayer and Thanksgiving [see April 17]. President said: “There are very deep ideological differences that divide the world today. But when it was learned that these men were in danger, there poured into the White House from all over the world messages from the Communist countries, from people of various religions, saying that they wished their best, offering their assistance. When they learned they were back, there was an outpouring of relief and rejoicing from people, regardless of their political or religious differences .... If only we could think in that way about every individual on this earth, we could truly have world peace.” Following service Presidential party flew from Hawaii to San Clemente, Calif. (PD, 4/27/70, 550-3)
Senate confirmed nomination of Col. James A, McDivitt (usaf), Apollo 9 astronaut and Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager at MSC, to be brigadier general. (CR, 1/2/71, S21852)
Apollo 15 prime and backup crews were among 14 astronauts who observed explosion by Canadian Defence Research Establishment of 453 500 kg (500 tons) of TNT in international test near Suffield, Alberta. Blast produced 70-m-dia (230-ft-dia) crater 4.6 m (15 ft) deep, with central uplift similar to that observed in many lunar craters. Astronauts had been invited to view processes in crater formation. Explosion was second 453 500-kg detonation in series to determine effects on military equipment and civilian shelters of blast forces and ground shock equivalent to those from small tactical nuclear weapon, (msc Roundup, 7/31/70,1)
Nomination by President Nixon of Apollo 10 astronauts Cdr. John W. Young and Cdr. Eugene A. Cernan, both USN, for permanent promotion to captain was announced by White House. President and Mrs. Nixon honored Apollo 13 astronauts and wives at White House dinner. (PD, 6/15/70,756)
Astronauts Alan L. Bean, R. Walter Cunningham, and Joseph P. Kerwin, grounded Dec. 23, 1969, for minor infractions of aircraft flight rules, resumed training in T-38 jet aircraft at msc. (upi. W Star, 1/21/70, A7)
News conference on results of Apollo 12 lunar surface experiment’s was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, said first anniversary of alsep was “scientific and technological triumph. The design specification was for one lunar day and night. Our design goal was for one calendar year.” Year after deployment alsep had received and processed over 6500 commands, had undergone 2600 533-K (500°F) swings of temperature, and was still being operated remotely 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said unmanned vehicle, such as U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I, could not explore surface as well as men could because men could deploy more equipment more effectively, perform more experiments, and collect more samples. He noted that Apollo 11 had collected 22.7 kg (50 lbs) of samples; Apollo 12, 34 kg (75 lbs); and Luna XVI, 90 g (0.2 lb). Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory said seismic events were being recorded at rate of about one per day; some were impacts from grapefruit-size meteoroids and some appeared to be small moonquakes. In region of Apollo 12 station there were at least nine places at which moon-quakes occurred “every month at or near the time when the moon comes closest to earth in its monthly orbital cycle.” Most active zone for moonquakes was about 193 km (120 mi) southeast of al-SEP, near rilles in Fra Mauro crater, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Charles P. Sonett of arc said data indicated moon’s temperature increased very slowly with depth below surface, probably rising no higher than 1273 K (1332°F)—too cool for molten core characteristic of volcanic body. Dr. Conway M. Snyder of jpl described behavior of thin cloud of ionized gas detected after ascent stage was crashed into moon. Solar wind of ionized particles should have blown the gas downwind; it traveled upwind and was detected by alsep instruments. Cause of acceleration of the particles was unknown. (Transcript; Schmeck, NYT, 11/19/70,32; O’Toole, WPost, 11/19/70, A14)
International reaction to Apollo 13 spashdown: European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that TV audience at splashdown might well have been biggest TV audience of all time. In American Samoa, girls were limbering up for siva-siva dance to greet astronauts. Pilgrims prayed their thanks in India. Press item from Johannesburg, South Africa, said witch doctor named Mago-mezulu had tossed bones which told him Apollo 13 astronauts would return safely but that “these men have interfered with God and he has turned them back. This is a warning that the Americans should stop landing on the moon.” Thousands in Lima, Peru, received permission to take early lunch to watch final moments of splashdown. In Canada, Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau expressed “great relief.” Queen Elizabeth wired congratulations from England to President Nixon. Roman Catholic Archbishop of Westminster John Cardinal Heenan said, “Thank God.” Telephone operator at U.S. Embassy in London was inundated with calls. She said, “People were sobbing with obvious relief and happiness. I just don’t know what to say to them” (Johnson, WPost, 4/18/70, Al; Arnold, NYT, 4/18/70, 1; Waldron, NYT, 4/18/70, 13)
Photos of central Alabama taken by Apollo 9 astronauts had been of major significance for geological exploration in the state, AP reported. Alabama State Geologist Philip LaMoreaux had said photos were “new aid and approach in locating stable areas for construction, exploration for minerals and studying geologic structures as an aid in oil and gas exploration.” (Huntsville Times, 2/3/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s May 24-June 5 visit to U.S.S.R. was reviewed in Christian Science Monitor: “To those few Russians who saw him, the first man to walk on the moon was unquestionably a big hit. But overall, his 12-day goodwill visit was an unobtrusive affair that stayed very much in the realm of Soviet officialdom.” Armstrong had arrived in Leningrad May 24 to attend May 20-29 cospar Conference. “Although he was in Leningrad for five days, only one Leningrad newspaper made any mention of him and Russians for a long time were not aware he was even in the country.” It was only after his arrival in Leningrad that Armstrong was invited by Soviet government to stay longer in U.S.S.R. He had “no exposure to Soviet public” during Novosibirsk visit. In Moscow, press had given more coverage. Armstrong had told press he had been “most emotionally moved” by meeting with Mrs. Yuri Gagarin and Mrs. Vladimir Komarov, widows of Soviet cosmonauts. (Saikow-ski, CSM, 6/5/70)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were given ticker-tape parade welcome in Chicago, where they addressed 800 at luncheon and later spoke to 2500 high school students. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., third Apollo 13 astronaut, was indisposed, (upi, HPost, 5/2/70)
Instruments placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts recorded 306 K (91°F) drop in temperature and 40% decline in light intensity as moon went through partial eclipse, msc scientists said no other significant readings were recorded. (AP, W Post, 2/21/70, A3; WPost, 2/22/70, A2)
NASA named flight and support crews for Apollo 15 lunar landing mission scheduled for autumn of 1970. Prime crewmen were Astronauts David R. Scott, commander; Alfred M. Worden, cm pilot; and James B. Irwin, lm pilot. Backup crew consisted of Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., Vance D. Brand, and Harrison H. Schmitt. Support crewmen were Scientist-Astronauts Karl G. Henize and Robert A. Parker. (NASA Release 70-46)
Apollo 13 astronauts were taken in three helicopters from U.S.S. Iwo Jima to Tafunda Airport in American Samoa, to set foot on solid ground for first time since mission launch. They were greeted by Samoan Governor John M. Haydon. Governor presented IRS form 1040A to Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., who had forgoten to file his income tax before departing on mission. Colorfully dressed crowd of more than 3000 cheered astronauts during half-hour reception before their departure in usaf C-141 jet aircraft for Hawaii to meet President Nixon. (Trumbull, NYT, 4/19/70,1)
Senate unanimously passed S.R. 388 “that the Senate of the United States commends the Apollo 13 astronauts ... for their fortitude and courage; extends its support to their families, their friends and all who are involved in their mission; and urges all businesses, commercial operations, communications media, and others who wish to and can comply to pause at 9 p.m. today, April 14, 1970, in order that all persons who so desire may join in asking the help of Almighty God in assuring the safe return of the astronauts.” (CR, 4/14/70,85644-5)
Walker G. Bennett, newly appointed President of Augustana Hospital in Chicago, said at Chicago dinner that he hoped to reduce patient costs by 5% to 10% by equipment and techniques for space industry. Bennett was formally introduced by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, who later said sensors developed to monitor astronauts were being used to monitor patients at Augustana and other hospitals. (C Trib, 12/6/70)
Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail D. Millionshchikov said at second national Convocation on Challenge of Building Peace in New York that exchange of experience in space between U.S. and U.S.S.R. would be “very fruitful.” It was “very dangerous to make a race ... because the lives of human beings are at stake.” Astronaut Frank Borman, chairman of panel discussion, suggested “Soviet-American committee to chart the exploration of the solar system, a group to develop and formulate policy and interchange of ideas, both in the manned and unmanned fields.” (Wil-ford, NYT, 4/30/70)
Ninth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight, by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in Freedom 7Mercury spacecraft. Apollo 13 astronauts visited Grumman Aerospace Corp. plant at Bethpage, N.Y., where lm Aquarius was built. Astronauts received rousing cheer from 15 000 workers. Aquarius received rousing cheer from astronauts. (UPI, W Star, 5/6/70, A2; MSC Hist Off)
Apollo 12 astronauts arrived in Luxembourg and met with Grand Duke during 40-day, 21-nation tour. (AP, W Star, 2/25/70, A5)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., Apollo 13 commander, received insignia of Chevalier of French Legion of Honor from French Ambassador Charles Lucet during ceremonies at French Embassy in Washington, D.C. (CR, 7/31/70, S12536-7; Dixon, W Star, 7/30/70, Cl)
At White House press conference former astronauts Michael Collins, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, and William A. Anders, NASC Executive Secretary, described arrangements that had kept President Nixon informed on Apollo 13 crisis. President had had access to direct TV, radio, and telephone contact with MSC Mission Control. He had talked with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, and Astronaut Frank Borman there. Collins and Anders had set up “squawk box” into Mission Control outside President’s office and briefed President and his staff on developments. President’s chief concerns had been CM-SM separation, and crew’s safety and physical condition. Collins said, “The fact that we had this incident really changes very little. We have always known that such a situation could develop and he [President] does not feel that it should unduly cloud the future when it comes to space exploration.” (Transcript)
Four-man LaRC team emerged from space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, Calif., after successful completion of 90-day test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft [see June 13]. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong greeted crewmen John H. Hall, Terry Donlon, Stephen G. Dennis, and Wilson Wong. Project chief engineer Karl Houghton said test could have continued beyond scheduled 90 days. (AP, NYT, 9/12/70, 8; Langley Researcher, 9118/70, 1)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were honored by City of New York at luncheon in Philharmonic Hall. Astronauts were greeted by Mayor John V. Lindsay and serenaded by N.Y. Police Dept. band. (AP, B Sun, 6/4/70, A3)
Apollo 13 editorials: Washington Post: “The footprints are still imperishably graven on the lunar dust and the flag still flies on the surface of the moon, but it all seems more distant, unreal and unattainable now. The loud bang that rocked Apollo 13 and echoed back to us from outer space last week did more than challenge our comfortable assumptions about manned space flight. It reminded us how much we have taken for granted, how much has been achieved and how far man has yet to go.” (WPost, 4/19/70, Bl) Washington Sunday Star: “. . .men, the world over, instinctively recognize the metaphysical importance of the reach into space. Lovell, Haise, and Swigert were not just three Americans on a dangerous mission. They, and those who will follow, are ambassadors of life to new, unknown regions. The success of these first halting steps into space has brought a new vision to a slightly weary world and given mankind a new pride in its humanity. It is a gift without price. It is an offering that must not be withdrawn because of a momentary setback and a dramatic demonstration of the dangers that have always been present.” (W Star, 4/19/70) Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin: “Of all the machines man has made to plumb the depths of space, surely none has served him better or more faithfully in desperate circumstances [than the LM]. So Aquarius and the men who designed and manufactured her earned the plaque in Smithsonian, just as the astronauts and the Apollo 13 ground crew earned the Freedom Medals President Nixon has awarded them.” (P Bull, 4/19/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, spoke during 10-day “Emphasis Space” program at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. on “very basic question” of why U.S. should be spending “all of this money out in space when we have so many problems here on earth.” He said answer was “indeed that human values have the highest priority. I would submit that the American space program is indeed a program that has tremendous human values. ... we in the space agency who are effecting technical change feel that history shows that the interaction between technical change and social change is extremely close. We believe that the activities that we are carrying out will have a tremendous impact on the way our children and our children’s children will live. We are in the business of creating new wealth and new power that can be used by all men.” Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said that lunar flights were “enhancing man’s knowledge of the environment in which he lives. .. .space has proven to date that it is something that man can use that is of benefit to man. . . . The question is do you want it used.” Space program was at point “where it is up to the people to decide through the government what uses we will put space to.” (Neb Wes Univ’s New Dimensions, 9/70; AP, San Diego Union, 5/3/70)
MSC announced award of $3 000000 NASA contract to Garrett Corp. AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. for portable astronaut life support assembly (alsa) to support extravehicular and intravehicular activity in Skylab program. (MSCRelease 70-43)
Cancellation of 8 743 070 first day covers of moon landing postage stamp—nearly trebling previous top of three million covers canceled—was announced by Postmaster General Winton M. Blount. Requests for souvenir envelope commemorating July 20, 1969, Apollo 11 lunar landing had been received from 100 different countries and reached 60 000-80 000 daily within days after stamp was announced July 9, 1969. Stamp sales totaled 9 614 685, with value of $961 468.50. Previous record had been set in 1962 for stamp commemorating first U.S. earth-orbiting flight by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (PO Dept Philatelic Release 3)
SoyuzlXCosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, on 10-day U.S. visit, toured Washington, D.C., and placed wreaths on graves of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee in Arlington National Cemetry. At NASA Hq. press conference they said U.S.S.R. did not plan to put man on moon and had disbanded training program for female cosmonauts. (Valentine, W Post, 10/20/70, A2)
Apollo 13 editorials: National Observer: “At a time when Americans were becoming bored with successful flights to the moon, the ordeal of Apollo 13 reminded the nation of the dangers and difficulties of space. But because of courage, care, and uncommon resourcefulness—because, in fact, of history’s most dramatic field expedient—the astronauts made their way safely back to earth. The first walk on the moon was a wonder of wonders, but the return of Apollo 13 was the gladdest moment of them all.” (National Observer, 4/20/70) Wall Street Journal: “Assuming all feasible precautions are taken, then, the issue of death potential should not really be a major factor in assessing the space program, and particularly the very costly moon program. That program should be judged on whether any gains from it are proportionate to the totality of its costs. Some scientists and laymen believe the costs are disproportionate. At any rate, that is the proper criterion for weighing the future of space exploration, not the admitted and awesome danger of death in eternal orbit.” (WSJ, 4/20/70)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said in Memphis, Tenn., that U.S. could probably explore Mars or other planets in 13 to 15 yrs but “it will be terribly expensive.” Following speech at annual Navy League convention, he told press: “I don’t believe we will ever see one nation do it. I look for a multiple-nation group..,. Some have as good or better technology and such a combination would not impose abnormal costs on any one.” (AP, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/22/70)
Dynalectron Corp. announced it had been awarded $3 805 000 NASA contract for maintaining and servicing lunar landing training vehicles and aircraft used by astronauts and management at msc. Contract was one-year renewal of agreement under which Dynalectron had carried out management, maintenance, engineering, technical, and logistic functions in support of aircraft at MSC. (Dynalectron Release)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, in invited testimony on space benefits and potential, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that during first 12 yrs in space U.S. orbital payloads had increased 10 000 times, from Explorer I’s 14-kg (30.8 lbs) to Apollo 13’s planned 136 000 kg (300 000 lbs); speed record 13 times, from 3000 km per hr (1900 mph) to 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph); and flight altitude 10 000 times, from 38 400 m (126 000 ft) to 377 400 km (234 500 mi). Astronauts had logged 5843 hrs in space, safely flying 113 400 000 km (70 472 000 mi). Twelve Americans had orbited moon and four had walked on its surface. NASA had launched 155 unmanned spacecraft to return scientific and practical data, 23 in cooperative international programs. “Today we live in a different world because in 1958 America recognized the challenge of space and boldly made the required national investment to meet it. Since then over a billion children have been born all around the world, the first space age generation. Because of the space program they will learn a new science, a new cosmology, and a new view of man and his destiny in the universe. . .. Today’s children can look ahead confidently to new opportunities and to great new strides that man will make in the twenty-first century.. . . Their generation will view the earth as a whole for the first time, and be able to deal with technology, with science, and with philosophy as a unified experience, common to all men of the blue planet earth.” Appendixes to prepared statement described NASA’s technology utilization program: 1.6 million scientific and technical publications distributed in 1969, including 3 211 500 microfiche copies; contribution to U.S. schools including spacemobile project, which had reached 3 306 410 students live and 20 391 500 via TV in 1969; and space research laboratories built at 34 institutions of higher learning during 1960s, in which more than 1000 students had worked towards doctorates. NASA had received 968 830 letters in 1969; its exhibits were viewed by 37.6 million persons and its films, by 9.8 million directly and by 248 million on TV. News media coverage of NASA activities in 1969 included 3497 newsmen from 57 countries accredited to Apollo 11. (Testimony; Schlstedt,B Sun, 4/7/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, on goodwill trip to U.S.S.R., watched TV broadcast of Soyuz IX launch during party in his honor in Moscow and was told by Cosmonaut Georgy Beregovoy that mission was “especially in honor of your trip here.” Armstrong later presented moon fragment and small Soviet flag carried on Apollo 11 mission to Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin. Kosygin said he would “always cherish this gift as a symbol of a great achievement.” He told Armstrong, “The Soviet peoples are second to none in admiring your courage and knowledge.” (upi, W Star, 6/2/70, Al; AP WPost, 6/3/70, A19)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman appeared as host on ABC TV program “Mission Possible—They Care for a City.” Program outlined attempts to improve environment of San Francisco. (W Star, 3/17/ 70)
NASA was reviewing policy of allowing astronauts to sell publications exclusive personal stories, John N. Wilford said in New York Times. Review had been initiated because current contract with Life magazine would expire July 24. Though magazine denied it had made decision to renew or to drop contract, astronauts’ attorney had said he would entertain contract discussion with other publications. NASA committee, which included three astronauts, was expected to announce policy decision within few weeks. While details of Life contract had not been made public, Wilford said it was understood magazine had paid astronauuts $200 000 a year and provided $100 000 worth of life insurance. (NYT, 3/4/70, C13)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on Communist Chinese satellite launch: “Of course Peking still runs far behind America and Russia in nuclear and space development... . But not nearly so far behind as only a few years ago. And apart from conjectures about progress in missilery, "Following Star' [satellite] is a reminder of the potential military dimensions of space which may acquire a new importance now that China has entered the extraterrestrial realm.” (B Sun, 4/28/70, A10)	_ April29: Members of Apollo 13 Review Board entered Apollo simulator alMSC and, using recorded data, reconstructed tense moments after explosion disabled spacecraft April 13. Board member Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said purpose of reconstruction was to give investigators better appreciation of accident from crewmen’s point of view. (W Post, 4/30/70, A27) *	Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, presented Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy to Apollo If crew—astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, since named Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs—in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award, established by National Geographic Society in 1961 for USAF members and units, honored crew for making most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress during 1969 by accomplishing first manned lunar landing, (dod Release 35970)	.	. *	essa announced award of $1.6-million contract to Gulton Industries Data Systems Div. to construct infrared temperature profile radiometer (ITPR), advanced satellite instrument for obtaining temperature sounding through atmosphere to earth’s surface, essa was de
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell completed testing of Apollo 14 lm in vacuum chamber at KSC, in preparation for launch to moon Jan. 31, 1971. (W Post, 9/19/70, A7; SBD, 9/21/70, 85)
Awards ceremony to observe successful completion of more than four years of Saturn V launch vehicle test firings was held at mtf. mtf employees, contractors, and groups of Government workers received special plaques and awards. Guests included local, state government, and NASA officials. Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., presented flag flown around moon on board Apollo 10 to mtf employees to express Apollo astronauts’ gratitude, as facility marked last day of space operations, (msfc Release 70-229)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, said chances were high that Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II would develop German measles next week and that, in his opinion, Mattingly’s lack of immunity would not permit him to fly on Apollo 13 April 11. NASA had not officially ruled out Mattingly for flight, but countdown was proceeding on schedule and backup cm pilot John L. Swigert, Jr., was undergoing intensive training in Apollo simulators at KSC. (O’Toole, WPost, 4/10/70, A2)
International reaction to Apollo 13 emergency continued: Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, General Secretary of World Council of Churches, said in Geneva that people of world were praying for astronauts. In Santa Ninfa, Sicily, devasted by earthquake in January, Mayor Vito Bellafore said, “After the first Apollo success people did lose interest; it seemed that it was only a mechanical exercise. Now we see again the human drama, and all of our worry is for those three lonely men.” London Times said Apollo 13 would leave “scar on the American space program.” Best outcome of accident would be “greater sense of deliberation in the exploration of space.” (Lyons, NYT, 4/16/70, 1)
Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin sent message to President Nixon: “We follow with concern the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 13 in which failure developed. I want to inform you the Soviet government has given orders to all citizens and members of the armed forces to use all necessary means to render assistance in the rescue of the American astronauts.” Italian Defense Ministry ordered Italian armed forces to be ready to give immediate help as needed if Apollo 13 splashed down in Mediterranean. Reuters reported that U.K. Prime Minister Harold Wilson pledged help of Royal Navy ships for possible recovery work and that French President Georges J. Pompidou made similar offer of his navy, (upi, W Star, 4/15/70; Reuters, WPost, 4/16/70)
nas released Infectious Disease in Manned Spaceflight: Probabilities and Countermeasures. Report of nas-nrc Space Science Board recommended biological precautions taken after lunar flights be taken before flights as well. Preflight quarantine period should be instituted to permit acute disease to express itself, prevent contact and infection of astronauts by general population, and permit crosscontact of flora and exchange of microorganisms among spacecraft crew. During last two weeks before launch, astronauts’ contacts should be limited to essential technical crew held under same isolation regulations.	. Report called for extensive and periodic screening of astronauts by immunological tests and “microbiological surveillance” of astronauts’ families and close associates before and after missions. Astronauts with even minor respiratory infections should be barred from mission because they might “result in greatly accelerated clinical responses under space-cabin conditions if transmitted to other astronauts.” (Text)
Apollo II Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Dr. Thomas D. Barrow, President of Humble Oil & Refining Co., had been named cochairmen of Goals for Texas in the Coastal Zone Conference to be held in Houston, Sept. 10-11, Houston Chroicle said. (H Chron, 8/28/70)
Edward H. White II Memorial Museum was dedicated at Hangar 9 of Brooks AFB, Tex., in honor of Astronaut White, who died in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire. Museum, near White’s home town of San Antonio, Tex., would be devoted largely to aerospace medicine. In dedication address, l/g John W. O’Neill, afsc Vice Commander, said: “Space is our new world, a final frontier. ... it is also a medium through which attack is possible, which means that we must learn everything we can about it for the defense and security of the nation.” Space science and technology had spawned “new generations of materials, systems and processes, for both military and consumer goods.” Of 12 000 new products and techniques developed during last decade, “very large percentage derives directly from space and missile development.” Most “satisfying and gratifying” space spinoffs were in health and medical field—“new type of wheel chair adapted from the moon walker. . .or chemicals used in the treatment of tuberculosis and mental illness that were originally derived from missile fuels. Or spray-on instrumentation for remotely monitoring the condition of heart patients. Or the numerous new materials and techniques being applied to. . .health care.” (Text)
Seismic data from impacts of Apollo 12 lm and 3rd stage of Apollo 13 booster (S-IVB), relayed by seismic station installed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts, were described in Science. Team of lunar scientists headed by Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal seismic investigator for Apollo program, made report. Unusually long reverberations suggested “that the lunar mare in the region of the Apollo 12 landing site consists of material with very low seismic velocities near the surface with velocity increasing with depth to 5 to 6 kilometers per second [3.1-3.7 mps] (for compression waves) at a depth of 20 kilometers [12.4 mi]. Absorption of seismic waves in this structure is extremely low relative to typical continental crustal materials on earth. It is unlikely that a major boundary similar to the crust-mantle interface on earth exists in the outer 20 kilometers [12.4 mi] of the moon. A combination of dispersion and scattering of surface waves iqiplies the presence of heterogeneity within the outer zone of the mare on a scale of from several hundred meters (or less) to several kilometers. Seismic signals from 160 events of natural origin have been recorded during the first 7 months of operation of the Apollo 12 seismic station. At least 26.. .are small moonquakes. Many.. .are thought to be meteroid impacts.” (Science, 11/6/70, 620-6)
White House announced that President Nixon had asked Apollo 13 astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr., to visit Iceland, Switzerland, Greece, Malta, and Ireland as his personal representatives. Mission would include visit to 21st International Astronautical Congress in Constance, Germany, where astronauts would address session in October. They would be accompanied on tour by Mrs. Lovell and Mrs. Haise; Swigert was bachelor. Group would depart Oct. 1 and return Oct. 15. (PD, 9/28/ 70,1258)
Appointment of Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman as Senior Vice President-Operations Group was announced by Eastern Airlines Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Floyd D. Hall. (EA Release)
Series of reviews to select flight design of Saturn Workshop, part of Skylab program, was announced by msfc. Government engineers, astronauts, and industry representatives would determine any changes necessary before final approval of Workshop scheduled for 1972 launch into earth orbit. In Sept. 9-10 review at msfc, astronauts would study Workshop procedures in mockup. Sept. 14-18 critical design review at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Huntington Beach, Calif., facility would be attended by more than 200. At Workshop crew station review Sept. 21-24 at msfc, astronaut crewmen would “walk through” Skylab tests. Results of reviews would be considered during preliminary review at Huntington Beach Sept. 28-29 and at Workshop Critical Review Board meeting at Huntington Beach Oct. 2. (msfc Release 70-181)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Fred W. Haise, Jr., held press conference at msc. Lovell announced final code names for lm and cm had been selected according to theme of mythology, lm would be called “Aquarius” after mythical Egyptian water carrier who brought fertility and knowledge to Nile Valley. Code name originally selected for CM— “Auriga,” for constellation Auriga—had been dropped in favor of “Odyssey,” epic Greek poem about long adventures and wanderings of Odysseus in Greek mythology. Lovell said Apollo 13 crew had “already had quite an odyssey just getting trained” for mission. Landing of Aquarius on moon would be different from previous landings, Lovell said. Key to landing was Cone Crater on Fra Mau-ro. LM was “being targeted for a spot that we don’t want to land at,” uprange about 1/2 km from desired site; “we’re not sure of the actual height of this ridge [of Cone Crater]. . .so we’re targeting uprange to make sure we get over it.” Reason for going to Fra Mauro was “its peculiar geologic formations there and.. .a place called the Mare Imbrium. . .a large circular basin that was formed early in the moon’s history.. .by a large impact. In the formation of this impact it made hummocky ridges, radiating outward from the center of the impact down into. . .Fra Mauro. ... Now, by going to Fra Mauro, we hope to. . .bring back some of the basin type material that was thrown out by this catastrophe.” (Transcript; upi, C Trib, 3/15/70)
Impact of space requirements on U.S. computer industry was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, at ARCS (Achievement Rewards for College Scientists) Foundation Annual Scholarship Awards Banquet in Houston, Tex.: “In Project Mercury, ground-based computers were only required to determine quickly and accurately booster cut-off conditions. In Apollo, however, computers are used throughout the mission in real time, to calculate the trajectory to the moon and back, to compare three separate solutions for the lunar descent, to record and analyze thousands of bits of telemetered spacecraft information, to compare these to predicted values to detect trouble, and . .. to monitor the well-being of the crew. For Mercury, the computer program contained 40 000 computer words; for Apollo, a 1 500 000-word program was needed, while at the same time, the speed of the computers has increased sevenfold.” U.S. computer industry was doing $8 billion worth of business annually, paid highest average wages of any U.S. industry, and was “one of the most rapidly growing.” In 1960, U.S. exported $48 million worth of computers; in 1969, $728 million dollars worth. “U.S. computer exports have increased by over 1400 percent in the first decade of the space age. This impressive record was built on excellence of performance through continuing technological superiority. In a large measure it was the stimulus of NASA’s requirements that brought about these technological advances in the computer industry.” (Text) May 3; With exception of Mission Control, msc buildings normally open to public had remained open during Apollo 13 crisis, New York Times commented. Visitors could watch—from overhead catwalk in Building 5'—scientists and astronauts devising techniques for Apollo 13's return to earth. (Gordon, NYT, 5/3/70,7)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations, described medical phenomena encountered by Apollo 12 astronauts in keynote address at Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine seminar in San Antonio, Tex. Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean had observed brilliant flashes of light on closing eyes in darkened portions of spacecraft. They were believed to be caused by charged particles or rays from sun or from space. Astronauts also experienced sensitivity to lunar dust, body changes including face fullness, reddened eyes, and flushed faces during early part of flight, and increase in skin bacteria beyond amount normal on earth. Dr. Berry blamed body changes on pooling of fluids in head from lack of gravity. Behavior of bacteria might make doctors consider altering normal skin surface bacteria content by special baths for astronauts before flight. Dr. Berry also said that woman might share in planetary exploration but tests were needed to ensure “she doesn’t create more problems than she solves. I think it would definitely be more comfortable if we took women along.” (Huntsville Times, 2/10/70; Huntsville News, 2/10/70)
Families of Apollo 13 astronauts monitored flight communications on NASA squawk boxes and watched TV in their homes. Mrs. Marilyn Lovell and Mrs. Mary Haise kept older children home from school. Parents of unmarried Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., remained at home in Denver, Colo. (AP, NYT, 4/15/70,29)
Timing of Apollo 13 could upstage U.S.S.R. ’s plans for “biggest ideological event in Soviet history, the Lenin centennial,” New York Times reported. Mission had been launched on 1970 Leninist Subbotnik—day when loyal citizens donated full day’s work to their country. Second day of Apollo 13 mission was Cosmonauts Day, anniversary of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin’s triumph as first man to orbit earth. Apollo 13 astronauts were scheduled to return to earth the day before the Lenin anniversary, “almost exactly at the hour that Secretary General Leonid I. Brezhnev is scheduled to crown his career by delivering the major address commemorating the founder of the Soviet system.” (Schwartz, NYT, 4/13/70)
Editorial comment as damaged Apollo 13 attempted safe return to New York Times: “An emergency in a space craft on the voyage between earth and moon was bound to occur sometime. The enormous hazards of the long journey through the most hostile of environments, the ever present possibility of failure by one or more of the millions of components contained in an Apollo vehicle, the ubiquitous threat of human error, all these combine in lunar flights to make them the most dangerous expeditions human beings have ever undertaken. In retrospect, the remarkable fact is not that such ominous peril has arisen in the now-aborted trip of Apollo 13, but that the actually hazardous trips to the moon and back by Apollos 8, 10, 11, and 12 were accomplished in safety.” (NYT, 4/15/70) Washington Post: “Lindbergh gave up a continent, as the astronauts gave up a planet, because he had measured the risks and found them reasonable, for all the possibility of disaster lurking around the corner—it does so every day for men and nations. So if we are going to apply the glories, we must confront the dangers along the way. All we can do now, as that unlikely looking craft limps back from the moon, is to hope that the men who ride in it and the men in Houston who guide it can find what Lindbergh found. ‘Somewhere in an unknown recess of my mind,’ he wrote T’ve discovered that my ability rises and falls with the essential problems that confront me. What I can do depends largely on what I have to do to stay alive and on course.’ ” (WPost, 4/15/70) Baltimore Sun: “The safety record of the Apollo program has, except for one hideous ground accident, been a perfect one. Perhaps we have too easily assumed that therefore all expeditions would begin and end without serious and unforseen breakdown, without the torments of suspense when the line between splendid accomplishment and bitter tragedy is drawn very fine. The truth is, of course, that exploration, especially in a realm new to man, can never be free of deadly hazards. But the astronauts and the men associated with them in their ventures have always known it.” It was clear astronauts were equal to emergency, “but they remain at the mercy of machinery which in some still unexplained way has failed them. The rest of us can only wait from desperate hour to hour, trusting that superlative skill, universal hope and fervent prayers will prevail over cruel chance.” (B Sun, 4/15/70)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
U.S. observed national day of prayer in gratitude for safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts. In New York 150 persons attended sunset service at Temple Emanuel. Invocation of gratitude was added to Sunday mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral, expressing hope that space exploration would contribute to peace and welfare of mankind. Greek Orthodox Primate of North and South America, Archbishop Iakovos, delivered special message for faith’s Palm Sunday observances. He said he believed “God permitted the agony of these last four days” to aid men in “overcoming the temporal with the spiritual, the temporary with the eternal.” Church and interfaith councils in St. Petersburg, Fla., made combined appeal for prayer in area churches and kept chapels open during day. In Marietta, Ohio, Jaycees completed petition containing 50 000 signatures, opposing efforts to ban prayers in broadcasts from space. Petition was later presented to space officials in Washington, D.C. Gov. Nelson D. Rockefeller proclaimed “day of prayer and thanksgiving” in New York State. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said crisis refuted claims that space exploration dealt fatal blow to religion. “The manner in which great numbers of Americans attended special prayer services. . . has been inspirational.” J. F. Meredith, treasurer of Central State Conference of the Seventh Day Adventists, said in Kansas City, “We feel that this points up the fact that despite all of man’s knowledge and ingenuity there is still a supreme being in control of things, and that we have to trust him.” (NYT, 4/20/70,28; 4/19/70, 54)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell visited Noerdlingen Crater near Tuebingen, West Germany, during field trip to familiarize themselves with kinds of rock they expected to find on moon. (AP, WPost, 8/12/70, A7) August 12: Development by MSFC scientists John W. Kaufman, Dennis W. Camp, and Robert E. Turner of “maxometer” that could record Seak hurricane velocities of more than 320 km per hr (200 mph), was escribed in Marshall Star. One version of maxometer was antispark severe-environment sensor that could withstand extreme temEeratures of Saturn rocket engine exhausts and acquire peak ex-aust-gas-flow speeds during launch. Other version was ambient environment sensor for recording peak wind speeds in thunderstorms, squall line activity, tornadoes, and hurricanes. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. had turned concept into dynamic pressure disc-spring device to measure 555-km-per-hr (345-mph) speeds to study air flow from launch of Saturn vehicles, essa had installed maxometer at National Hurricane Center at Miami and at Booth-ville, La., to gather hurricane data. (Marshall Star, 8/12/70, 1)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
NASA Hq. press briefing cited background events leading to scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. Moscow meeting on compatible space docking procedures and hardware [see Oct. 12]. Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said government-to-government discussions with U.S.S.R. had begun in 1962 “when some substantive possibilities were explored and. . .first agreements were reached.” These had included coordinated meteorological satellite projects, joint mapping of earth’s magnetic field in space for joint use of Echo satellites, and joint approach to publication of U.S. and U.S.S.R. achievements,in space medicine and biology. There had been “continuing overtures” since 1962, which “moved to a more accelerated pace beginning in.. .April 1970, when Dr. Paine took a personal interest in the problem and addressed a number of letters. . .to academician Keldysh.. .President of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union.” Compatible docking procedures had been discussed for first time by Dr. Paine and Soviet academician Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov in New York in April 1970. Subject had been discussed on subsequent Moscow visits by Dr. Philip Handler, NAS President; Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman. First formal proposal for exploration of subject had been made by Dr. Paine in letter to Keldysh July 31, 1970. Frutkin said U.S.S.R. had chosen compatible docking for discussion out of “long list of initiatives from the U.S. side.” Space rescue and joint experiments had not been discussed. Release of news of impending U.S.-U.S.S.R. discussions’ [at future iaf space rescue committee meeting] from iaf conference in Constance, Germany, Oct. 8 had been coincidence; NASA overtures had been direct, not through iaf. (Transcript)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.—in Lucerne, Switzerland, on European goodwill tour—visited Swiss Transport Museum and Longines Planetarium. They were shown representation of view of earth from Mars. (nasa Hist Off)
New Haven Register editorial commented on intention of Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., to end active participation in space after commanding Apollo 13 mission: “The space agency can ill afford to let go of Jim Lovell, whose 24 days in space give him a world’s record. When he concludes the Apollo 13 mission he will be, without doubt, the best qualified man in the agency. A top administrative post should be found for him.” (New Haven Register, 2/9/ 70)
Aircraft hijacking was discussed by David Hoffman in Washington Post: “That hijacking entails much more today than the Havana detour, a sidetrip costing passengers frayed nerves and the airline $3000, has begun to sink home in official Washington. It has now become an instrument of international policy, a play within a play about the cold war. Quite apart from whether a treaty might help, there exists no treaty. That testifies to the concern of governments, this one included.” {W Post, 9/9/70, A15) At meeting on future of Apollo, scientists proposed crater Tycho near moon’s south pole and Descartes, hilly region near Ocean of Storms, as sites for two of remaining four Apollo program lunar landings. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said, “If you had only two missions left to make, you’d send one of them to Tycho.” Tycho offered samples from area of one of last collisions of large meteor with lunar surface, samples from moon’s original southern hills, and samples from deep within moon that had come to surface after impact that had created Tycho. Flight path to and from Tycho would enable astronauts to photograph and examine almost half visible face of moon from lunar orbit. Astronauts could leave scientific instruments less than 1609 km (1000 mi) from moon’s south pole, to give earth-bound scientists listening post on lunar region that would otherwise go unexplored. Surveyor VII photos had shown Tycho landing to be strewn with many varieties of rocks. Difficulty with Tycho landing was that Apollo crew might have to use so much fuel getting to it that they would not have enough to return if they encountered difficulty on approach, Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., said. Donald K. Slayton, msc Chief of Flight Crew Operations, said NASA was studying possibility of Tycho landing: “Our position so far is that Tycho is a bad place. ... But, if we can figure the reasonable way to do it.. .and decide it’s a reasonable place to go, then Tycho becomes a candidate for landing.” Descartes, second site favored by scientists, contained relatively young volcanic material and also crust on surface away from volcanic highlands that might be as old as moon itself. It was thought to be one of two Apollo sites where tnoonquakes might be occurring; other was hills of Fra Mauro, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Alfred E. Ringwood of Australian National Univ. told seminar he had concluded from study of Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples that moon once had heat source 160-480 km (100-300 mi) beneath surface that was emitting 1500 K (2200°F) temperatures. Heat had emanated from abundance of radioactive minerals in moon’s depths, he proposed, and partially melted moon’s inner rock, which then flowed to lunar surface through pores or forced its way upward as it expanded where pores did not exist. Upswelling rock, Dr. Ringwood said, caused lunar features visible on moon’s face. He speculated that moon had lost most of its radioactivity and heat 2 billion yrs earlier. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, ARC scientist, said he had found “little bumps” of magnetism along lunar surface when studying signals from instruments left on moon. Bumps suggested that radioactive heat was coming to surface and causing parts of moon to behave as if they had magnetic field. Moon was “strong and rigid to depth of 200 mi [322 km],” Dr. Sonnett said, “but I believe that all you need is a porosity of about 10 per cent in that crust to have a warmer and more plastic material leak to the top.” Dr. Rolf Meisner of Univ. of Hawaii said analysis of data from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer led him to believe that moonquakes could not be caused by breaks in moon’s crust but were caused by warm gases escaping from beneath lunar surface in response to earth’s increased gravitational pull. He had recorded 14 moon-quakes, all of which seemed to come from about 240 km (150 mi) east-southeast of seismometer in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 was to land in February 1971. Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, argued that lunar maria contained dust and not lava. Lack of electrical activity of surface material and the way Apollo moonquake detectors had reacted to tremors and impacts could mean there was deep deposit of powder. Acoustical signal from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer was “compatible with a deep layer of a very homogenous nature in which the speed of sound is uniform.” (O’Toole, WPost, 9/12/70, A3; 9/13/70, A27; Hill, H Chron, 9/13/70)
Post-Apollo 13 poll showed U.S. public was opposed by 64% to 30% to major space funding over next decade, Louis Harris reported in Chicago Tribune. Of 1520 persons polled, 55% said they were very worried about fate of Apollo 13 astronauts following mission abort, 24% were somewhat worried, 20% were not very worried, and 1% were not sure. Total of 71% expected fatal accident would occur on future mission, 18% thought it would not occur, and 11% were unsure. (CTrib, 6/25/70, F12)
Cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19 had eliminated six more astronauts from chance at moon trip, NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said in MSC interview. Of 49 astronauts on flight status, 39 had not yet flown in space. Many would not have opportunity for at least five years because of NASA budget cutbacks. Five astronauts had resigned since Apollo 11 lunar landing and further resignations were “very possible.” Slayton said he would not deter astronauts from resigning. “The facts of life are, we don’t need them.” (upi, NYT, 9/10/70, 54)
President Nixon appointed Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman his Special Representative on Prisoners of War. Borman would immediately undertake special mission to seek help of third parties in countries around world in “securing the humane treatment and earliest possible release of all Americans held by the enemy forces in Southeast Asia.” Borman would be on leave of absence from his executive position with Eastern Air Lines. (PD, 8/10/70, 1031)
NASA released photo of emblem selected by Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Fred W. Haise, Jr., for Apollo 13 mission. Emblem, designed by Lumen Martin Winter of New York, depicted three horses pulling sun chariot from earth to moon, with Latin phrase “Ex luna scientia” (From the moon, knowledge), (nasapao; B News, 1/25/70)
Few people “really seem to care” that $375-million Apollo 13 mission “may never get off the ground tomorrow” because astronauts had been exposed to measles, Wall Street Journal said. Mission was inspiring “little excitement at ksc or elsewhere across the land.” Perhaps 100 000 tourists were on hand for event, “but that’s a small crowd compared with the million or so that came here for the first moon shot. . . .” There would be 700 newsmen, “far below the 2000 who covered the first shot.” (Tanner, WSJ, 4/10/70)
Max Lerner described reactions to Apollo 13 accident in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “What was I doing, glued to the TV screen like a zombie with the blood drained out me .. .? What was wrong with me—and with millions of others? ... we had all played the game of apathy up to that moment. . . confident that Apollo 13 was just one more sure-thing deployment of what man already proved he can do. The flight reports had to compete for newspaper space and, in some newspapers, were slipping into the inside pages.” After news of oxygen tank explosion “astronauts were no longer either three invincible heroes or three stooges for ‘the Establishment,’ but simply three human beings caught in space a quarter-million miles from home .... Through the plight of our proxies ... we caught a glimpse of how perilous man’s whole enterprise is, how tragic, in fact, his whole existence is in this shaky cosmos that runs by laws until you hit the unexplainable.” Apollo 13 was “a tiny, mobile version of the earth, with a power failure and the shortage of water and a danger of polluted air and the erratic fortunes of communicating and the image of three men having to read their instruments with a flashlight in the darkness of the cabin.” (P Bull, 4/20/70)
Hospital in Sydney, Australia, was using blankets coated with aluminum foil and lined with polyester film to keep infants warm, Chicago Tribune said. Both substances, used in astronauts’ spacesuits, had high-heat-retention properties. (CTrib, 3/16/70)
NASA announced selection of RCA Corp. Astro-Electronics Div. to receive $ 1.62-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for ground-command TV system for last four Apollo lunar exploration missions. System, which would permit color cameras to be operated either manually by astronauts on moon or remotely from earth, would be used with portable lunar communications relay unit (LCRU) being developed under separate RCA contract. (NASA Release 70-131)
Apollo 12 astronauts, on 40-day tour, arrived in Lima, Peru, from Caracas, Venezuela. They were greeted by about 5000 persons. (AP, WPost, 2/19/70, C7)
Testimony on Apollo 13 mission was given before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator; Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director; and Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was unable to attend. Dr. Paine said: “The Apollo 13 mission was a failure. We did not succeed in America’s third lunar landing attempt and we were therefore unable to explore the moon’s Fra Mauro formation. This hilly region remains a high priority objective in our lunar program. . .. We cannot yet say which of the remaining Apollo missions will be sent there. Although the Apollo 13 mission failed, we regard the recovery actions that followed.. .as a gratifying success which will contribute greatly to the nation’s space flight competence.” There was no reason “why this setback should be—or should be made to be—the occasion for a major change in the course of the nation’s space program. We have clearly demonstrated the basic soundness of the Apollo system and of our operational procedures. ... From a technical standpoint, there is no question but that we are prepared to move forward in the 1970’s with the space program we have outlined to you....” Dr. Paine said President Nixon “fully shares this view.” (Testimony) Dr. Petrone testified: “This long arduous voyage continuously presented the challenge to balance the spacecraft systems required to perform necessary functions against the availability of consumables, of water, electrical power, oxygen, and the lithium hydroxide to remove the carbon dioxide. The options available to flight and ground crews in every case permitted acceptable courses of action to be selected. During this emergency situation, the remaining systems performed in an outstanding manner meeting the unusual demands placed upon them. At the same time, the flight and ground crews demonstrated exceptional confidence in meeting these sets of unusual circumstances.” Mission ended with “set of consumables which were within about two percent of what we had predicted back at 63 hours or about seven hours after the problem occurred,” Lunney told Committee. “If the consumable posture. . .had worsened or if we had absorbed another failure. . .we would have had to resort to scheduling communication times with the crew.” Although probably within 12 hours to 24 of running out of most critical consumable, water, “had we proceeded into.. .duty cycling the communications gear onboard, we probably could have stretched that period.” Astronaut Lovell described crew’s feelings during crisis: “We soon realized that our only hope of survival was to go into Aquarius, power up its systems and use the systems and the consumables on board. . .for a return home. And it was here that we realized that it was now a case of survival.” Spacecraft was on trajectory that “would have entered us in a sort of permanent orbit, some . 230. . .thousand miles [370 000 km] in apogee, and maybe a thousand [1600 km] or so in perigee. ... Again, the ground came through, and gave us. . .the free trajectory burn, which was required to get us back to earth. My main concern at this point was to get this spacecraft back within the earth’s atmosphere.” (Transcript)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent comprehensive medical examination at ksc, including laboratory tests' to determine their immunity to German measles (rubella). Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, said crew was “in good physical condition and good shape to carry out the mission and the lunar surface activities,” but expressed concern that astronauts could develop German measles during mission. They had been exposed to rubella virus when Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., member of backup crew, developed disease April 5. (Wilford, NYT, 4/7/70, 1)
President Nixon made brief appearance at banquet for Republican leaders in Washington, D.C., after learning of Apollo 13 astronauts’ safe return. He told group that when he called mission commander James A. Lovell, Jr., after splashdown, Astronaut Lovell had said he was sorry mission had not been completed. “My reply,” President said, “was: ‘Captain, you and your colleagues did complete the mission.’ ” President told group, “After what happened this tumultuous week, let’s not take American wealth and strength for granted. . .where machines failed, we had to turn to man, and man came through.” President said it had been “proudest day of my life and in the life of the country.” Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said “social levelers of the New Left” would seize on Apollo 13 neardisaster to demand space budget be “soaked down into the nearest slum.” It would be “shortsighted tragic blunder” to heed warnings of “fair weather friends” of space program who were “readying the life-boats for a quick exit.” (Hope, W Star, 4/18/70, A2)
Author Norman Mailer said in San Francisco that Americans were as interested in Apollo 14 as they would be in “border war in Bolivia.” He criticized images of astronauts projected by NASA. They were “tough men—daredevils” but nasa presented them as “priests.” NASA was “asking this country to love saints and Americans are not noted for that.” (AP, W Post, 1/31/71, A24)
Lagos, Nigeria, Morning Post congratulated Apollo 15 astronauts for successful mission, which they attributed to ingenuity and resourcefulness of NASA. Lunar explorations, Post said, would strengthen faith in and appreciation of God’s work. (FBis-Nigeria-71-153, 8/11/71, W6)
Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., received Honorary Knight of St. Patrick Award from College of Engineering, Univ. of Missouri at Columbia, Mo. (NASA Activities, 4/15/71, 61)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., retired from nasa to become Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif. He had logged 289 hrs 53 min in space during astronaut career. (AP, W Post, 7/2/71, A3)
NASA announced tentative schedule for 12-day Apollo 15 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft, carrying three-man crew, would be launched from ksc at 9:34 am edt July 26. Apollo 15 lm would land near moon’s Hadley Rifle at about 6:15 pm edt July 30. Two astronauts would spend 67 hrs on moon making three trips across surface on lrv. Spacecraft and crew would splash down in Pacific at 4:46 edt pm Aug. 7. (nasa Release 71-73)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, announced at msc that Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had become first man to gain weight while in space. Other two crew members had lost weight: Edgar D. Mitchell had lost 0.5 kg (1 lb) and Stuart A. Roosa had lost 4.5 kg (10 lbs). Shepard had gained 0.5 kg (1 lb). NASA physicians were making fluid tests on astronauts to determine reason for weight loss during space flight. (Altman, NYT, 2/11/71, 40)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented LM similar to those used for Apollo 11, 12, and 14 lunar landings to Michael Collins, Director of Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum and Apollo 11 astronaut. LM would remain on permanent display at museum. (Smithsonian Release 111—71; NASA PAo)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa began preflight semiquarantine at ksc to minimize their exposure to disease or illness that could delay Jan. 31 liftoff toward moon. Astronauts would be restricted to three buildings and contacts would be limited to 160 persons, all of whom had undergone comprehensive medical examinations, (upi, W Star, 1/11/71, A9)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 11484, bill permitting sale of land at ksc for Chapel of the Astronauts. (CR, 11/2/71, D1109; H Rpt 92-600)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 15 lunar landing: “Today, tomorrow and Monday will come the payoff for the years of work by the astronauts and thousands of others who made possible last night’s success. The trek across the moon’s surface these next three days will be the longest both in time and in distance to date, partly because of the availability of the lunar rover to permit moon rides as well as moon walks. The vast variety of geological conditions in the neighborhood of the Falcon’s landing site suggests that these excursions may be extremely fruitful.” (NYT, 7/31/71)
U.S. Postal Service public relations officers had asked Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to accompany cancellation of lunar landing commemorative stamp on moon during Apollo 11 mission with dialogue from two “casual, conversational” scripts, Julian W. Scheer, former nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, said in Washington Post article. “But NASA, figuring the first manned lunar landing was hairy enough without ceremonials, declined politely and, instead, Armstrong and Aldrin quietly canceled the first moon stamp and came home without postal fanfare.” Washington Post editorial commented on article: “While we have not cast the roles and read the script aloud, timer in hand, it is our definite impression that this spontaneous little exchange might have been good for the better part of one orbit of the moon and good also for a veritable barrage of phone calls from a flabbergasted public.” (W Post, 8/17/71, A14)
More than 15 astronauts were taste-testing three meals daily for five days in msc experiment to evaluate proposed food items for 28- and 56-day Skylab missions in 1973, msc announced. Tests would determine astronauts’ preferences and each astronaut’s energy requirements. They were coordinated by Technology, Inc., and conducted in msc Life Systems Laboratory. (Msc Release 71—74)
CBS commentator Walter Cronkite received Bradford Washington Award of Boston Museum of Science for “outstanding contribution toward public understanding of science.” Award, which included $5000 and gold medal, was presented by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at dinner commemorating museum’s 35th anniversary. Cronkite was cbs anchorman for coverage of most NASA manned space flight missions. (AP, Denver Post, 11/22/71; Lovell Off)
Economist editorial discussed lunar science investigations: “The growing importance of all this peering at, prodding, pounding, baking and growing plants upon moon soil is that the results are contradicting most of the moon theories of the past 15 years. It is not often that scientific concepts are set by the ears, and the piquancy this time lies in the way that the bulk of serious scientists originally believed that putting men on the moon was an unnecessary extravagance; instruments and unmanned probes could do the job, they felt, for a fraction of the cost and none of the risk. But, as it turns out, they could not. The instruments that were sent to the moon ahead of the astronauts did not produce the same results that the actual collection of rock samples has done, and it will be interesting to see if the Russians have done any better out of the robot shovelling of Luna 16.” (Economist, 1/9/71)
Findings that linked light flashes experienced by astronauts in periods of otherwise total darkness to high-speed cosmic rays passing through eye retina were reported at nasa and American Nuclear Society Conference in Las Vegas, Nev. Findings were from studies by scientists of Univ. of Washington at Seattle and Univ. of California at Berkeley. Dr. Cornelius A. Tobias and Dr. Thomas F. Budinger of Univ. of California at Berkeley had twice exposed themselves to low doses of cyclotron-accelerated cosmic rays aimed at their eyes in effort to reproduce flashes described by Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell. Scientists said they saw flashes that differed from visual phenomena associated with x-rays or electrical and magnetic exposures. They concluded that flashes came from ionization and excitation of atoms in retina as it was bombarded by cosmic rays. Evidence indicated flashes were detected by retinal rods, structures in eyes that allowed night vision. Radiations were not believed to be hazardous to astronauts on short flights, but long-duration effects had not yet been evaluated. (Wilford, NYT, 3/4/71, 18)
President Nixon was host to Apollo 15 astronauts and families at White House dinner. (PD, 9/20/71, 1288)
New York Times editorial commented on discovery of water on lunar surface [see Oct. 15]: “The possibility that the water vapor that has now been detected on the moon was originally brought there by Apollo astronauts cannot yet be dismissed. Nevertheless, even before Drs. Freeman and Hills announced their finding it was becoming increasingly clear that the moon is a much more complex body than had been supposed. We are still in the very infancy of the era of moon exploration, and its development for the benefit of the human race.” (NYT, 10/19/71, 40)
Cold-cathode ion gauge left on moon by Apollo 14 astronauts had discovered first hard evidence of gas escaping from lunar surface, Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said at MSC. At same time, seismometer left at Apollo 14 mission landing site had detected moonquake, suggesting quake might have released gas from moon or that sudden venting of gas trapped in cavern beneath lunar surface initiated quake. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/6/71, Al)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for “most complex and carefully planned scientific expedition in the history of exploration.” (nasa Release 71—242)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins assumed duties as Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. He had served as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs after leaving NASA. (Smithsonian Ann; Smithsonian Pio)
Scientists at msc, after studying Apollo 14 photos and questioning crew, reported Astronauts Mitchell and Shepard had turned back within 25-50 m (80-165 ft) of Cone Crater during second eva period. Crew was apparently misled by slight downhill slope around top of Cone Crater which led them to believe it was not part of crater. Ridge astronauts were struggling to reach appeared to have been southeast of Cone. (AP, B Sun, 2/17/71, Al)
Federal court in Orlando, Fla., had dismissed $5-million damage suit filed by widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, on grounds it was filed after statute of limitations expired, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 5/13/71, A9)
nasa published Mariner-Venus 1967, Final Project Report (nasa SP—190). In foreword, Project Manager Glenn A. Reiff said Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967, toward Oct. 19, 1967, flyby of planet Venus), apart from significant contributions to knowledge of deep space, had achieved secondary objective, “to gain engineering experience by converting a spare Mariner-Mars 1964 spacecraft into one that could be flown to Venus,” with substantial savings. Cost of mission had been 10% less than anticipated. (Text) During 1971: U.S. orbited 51 spacecraft in 29 launches—including Apollo 14 and 15 csms Kitty Hawk and Endeavor with lms Antares and Falcon and their S—IVB stages intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 97 payloads in 83 launches; Japan, 2; U.K., 1; France, 1; Italy, 2 (1 for U.S. on U.S. booster); and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 33 orbited by DOD in 17 launches and 19 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for USAF on behalf of NATO, 1 for France, and 1 for U.K. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launches of Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 manned lunar landing missions. Mobile equipment transporter, used for first time on Apollo 14 to carry equipment and samples, allowed astronauts to explore 3.5 km (2.2 mi) of lunar surface and collect 43 kg (94.8 lbs) of samples. On Apollo 15, astronauts traveled 28 km (17.4 mi) over lunar surface on four-wheeled, battery-powered lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover and collected 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples, including one white anorthosite rock about 4 billion yrs old. Unmanned program was highlighted by Mariner 9 Mars probe, which traveled 400 million km (248 million mi) to Mars and began transmitting photos of major Mars dust storm and, later, of details of Martian surface and moons Deimos and Phobos. Mariner 8 launch vehicle malfunctioned at launch. Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory—rescued from initially incorrect orbit by ground command—made first x-ray observations of beginning solar flare and revealed that sun had “polar caps.” Other unmanned missions included lntelsat-IV F-2 and Intelsat-IV F—3 for ComSatCorp and Explorer 43, Explorer 44, and Explorer 45 (the last launched for NASA by Italy). Launched as secondary payloads were Subsatellite on Apollo 15 and Tetr 3 on Oso 7. All elements of Skylab flight system reached final manufacturing and checkout in preparation for 1973 launch and intensive engineering studies on Space Shuttle were conducted throughout year. In joint NASA—usaf lifting-body program, M2—F3 and X—24A lifting bodies made 17 flights, including first supersonic flight by M2-F3. X-24A reached 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) before completing program and beginning modification for new flight program as X—24B. In aeronautics NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing - made 27 successful flights. USN F-14 fighter aircraft successfully demonstrated first automatically programmable variable sweep wing. USA CH—54B helicopter set new world altitude record of 5120 m (16 798 ft) while carrying 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) payload. New v/stol Wind Tunnel at LaRC became operational, providing greatly improved testing capability for scaled models. GE quiet experimental engine successfully completed initial tests in NASA program to reduce jet engine noise, and NASA let competitive design contracts for development of quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) transport U.S.-U.S.S.R. Space Activity, 1957-1971 Successful Launches to Earth Orbit or Beyond aircraft, sst program ended, with Congress voting to terminate program. In sounding rocket program, 126 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations and to make astronomical observations in x-ray, uv, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum. DOD’s 33 payloads included orbiting of 2 Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs-2) military comsats, 2 ov—i scientific satellites, and Cannonball 2 and Mmketball. U.S.S.R.’s 83 launches set an all-time record in number of flights. The 97 payloads included 81 Cosmos satellites, 2 Luna, 2 Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 2 Mars, 1 Intercosmos, 4 Meteor, 2 Molniya I, 1 Molniya II, and Oreol (launched for France). Soyuz 11, carrying three-man crew, Summary of Soviet and United States Space Payloads by Mission Category Soviet Union						United States 1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total		1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total Earth orbital science			 5	10	3	9	7	59	12	16	14	4	11	137 Earth orbital engineering								6	1	5	1	10	50 Communications				...... 4	4	2	5	3	23	19	11	6	6	6	83 Navigation/ferret			6	6	16	27	84	3	1		1 .		25 1	1	1	1 .		17 Military observation: Low orbit recoverable			 22	29	32	29	28	202	19	16	12	9	7	198 Low orbit nonrecover 		..... 8	10	12	12	12	67	7	7	11	4	6	77 4 .						10 Synchronous or higher 								2	1	3	5	1	18 Q	2	1	2	1	17 . 9	5	2	4	8	25 . Earth orbit man-related 			 3	4		i	2	20	1 .		1 .			11 Earth orbit manned			1	5	i	3	19 .						14 Lunar man-related			3	1	2 .		8	1	2 ,		1	3	13 Moon-unmanned programs			1	3	3	2	25	8	1 ,				21 Venus 		...... 2 .		2	2 .		17	1 .					2 5	10 .			2 .		1	5 Subtotal 				77	71	91	102	602	87	64	66	39	53	764 Orbital launch platforms			 6	8	6	10	7	59 . From Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Staff Report, Soviet Space Programs, 1971, 92d Cong., 2d Sess., April 1972, p. 5. ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971	During 1971 successfully rendezvoused and docked with unmanned Salyut 1 to form first orbital scientific station, but cosmonauts died during earth reentry because of improperly sealed hatch. Mars 2 and Mars 3 dropped instrumented capsules on Mars surface. Mars 2 capsule crashlanded and Mars 3 capsule transmitted 20 sec. Lunokhod 1 lunar rover carried to moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, continued to explore lunar surface until October 1971, when isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night. Japan launched two satellites—Tansei and Shinsei. China launched Chicom 2, France launched Tournesol, U.K. launched Prospero, and Italy launched San Marco 3. (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Lifting Body Off; GSFC Sounding Rocket Br; NASA Exec Secretariat; Sheldon, United States and Soviet Progress in Space, Library of Cong, 1/22/72) • NASA’s scientific and societal achievements advanced national goal of alleviating environmental problems and expanding basic research on behalf of humanity, as public pressed for immediate, usable returns from research in all fields. Apollo manned missions swelled storehouse of lunar information. Unmanned astronomical missions gathered unique data, including new clues to Martian atmosphere. NASA-developed inventions saw increased use beyond space exploration—in environmental sciences, communications, medicine, industry, and agriculture. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space meetings set stage for future joint space missions. And balanced program of space and ^aeronautics, despite low funding level, continued to raise U.S. prestige as aerospace pioneer while it worked to improve man’s future. Some observers, however, warned of higher rate of technological advances abroad than in U.S. and of ever-growing U.S.S.R. space program and technological capability. Soviet expenditures on space were estimated at level about double U.S. peak expenditure of l°/o of GNP when combined nasa-dod space program was at highest level and four times present level. Dr. James C. Fletcher was nominated new nasa Administrator by President Nixon. President of Univ. of Utah and former aerospace executive, Dr. Fletcher took office April 27. He succeeded NASA’s third Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, who had resigned Sept. 15, 1970, to return to industry. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, had served as Acting NASA Administrator in the interim. Operating at lowest budget level since 1962, nasa in 1971 continued phase-out of Apollo program with successful completion of Apollo 14 and 15. Man’s fourth landing on moon, in Apollo 15 mission, proved to many that man had an effective scientific role in space. At year’s end, Apollo 16 had been scheduled for March 1972, with Apollo 17 to complete program later in year. Reduced funding forced additional reduction of personnel as well as program cutbacks, stretching out remaining Apollo missions, delaying first Skylab flight, and slowing studies of space shuttle, nerva nuclear rocket engine program was reduced to holding action. Bioscience funding was eliminated. Aerospace employment in industry throughout nation also fell, reflecting cuts in DOD spending as well as in NASA’s. During year, however, Skylab hardware manufacture neared completion and space shuttle work continued. Shuttle preliminary design contracts were extended so that nasa could examine alternative configurations, contingent on Administration approval of shuttle development. In erts program, aircraft tested remote sensing devices for gathering earth resources data and first satellite for global monitoring of resources was scheduled for 1972. During 1971, instrumented aircraft measured air pollution, investigated corn blight infestation, and sought hidden natural resources. Pioneer-F spacecraft for planned 1972 launch and December 1973 Jupiter flyby went into final manufacturer’s tests. Increased emphasis on aeronautics included research into aircraft noise reduction, increased air transport efficiency with use of supercritical wing, and STOL aircraft for transportation. To emphasize practical goals of space science, NASA established new Office of Applications, increased technology utilization budget from $1 million to $5 million, and issued request for proposals for additional uses of space-developed technology to solve problems of society. Among NASA projects were nsf contract to investigate use of solar cells to electrify homes and buildings and hud contract to study application of space technology to sewage recycling. Joint nasa-dot study resulted in recommendations for civil aviation R&d policy (card). Research achievements at NASA centers included ARC discovery of amino acids—building blocks of life—in second meteorite. Discovery strengthened case for chemical evolution of life elsewhere in universe. NASA FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion was $27 million more than requested $3,271 billion and $29 million above FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion—halting downward trend but far below 1965 peak of $5,250 billion. (A&A 1971; O’Toole, W Post, 1/2/72, Al; Sheldon, Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70, Senate Doc 92-51)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 14 lunar landing: “. . . no one who sat entranced before the picture of yesterday’s historic events can have doubted that Antares has scored a major triumph in the effort to advance lunar exploration. Today Shepard and Mitchell will face new problems and grasp new opportunities as they lope their way toward Cone Crater and its geological riches. These two brave and highly skilled men—along with their partner, astronaut Roosa, in lunar-orbiting Kitty Hawk—are writing another brilliant and memorable chapter in man’s still-infant probing of earth’s nearest neighbor in the vast reaches of space.” (NYT, 2/6/71, 28)
Washington Post editorial criticized nasa agreement with New York Times Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for byline articles by Apollo 15 astronauts [see July 23] and reprinted excerpt from Sept. 19, 1963, New York Times editorial that had scored earlier NASA agreement with publications. Post said: “. . . we would like to record . . . some reservations about the practice of commercializing the space program by permitting any of its official participants to sell personal accounts of their experiences. Strictly in legal terms, there is not much doubt that such material is subject to copyright protection. But, leaving aside regulations, there is a question of propriety, first raised back in 1963, when the Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Life Magazine nailed down contracts totaling $1 million for the personal stories of 16 astronauts over a four-year span.” New York Times editorial in 1963 had said sale of astronauts’ stories represented “stain of commercialism on the record of the space program,” and that astronauts “should not be permitted to reap enormous private profits from outside sources on the basis of their participation in a great national effort.” (W Post, 7/29/71, A14)
Appointment of James T. Murphy as Director of faa Office of Air Transportation Security was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Murphy, former fbi special agent, had been serving on acting basis since May 1971. (faa Release 71-153) September 24^-25: Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were honored by usaf Academy at Colorado Springs, Colo., with parade and special civic day. They received usaf Distinguished Service Medals from Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nominations of representatives and alternates to 26th session of U.N. General Assembly. They included Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of msc Astronaut Office, as alternate. {PD, 9/13/71,1257, 1261) C.	Jones presented papers on space vehicle docking mechanisms. (nasa Release 71—169; arc Astrogram, 9/16/71, 1)
Retirement of Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., from NASA and usn, effective Jan. 1, 1972, was announced by nasa. Gordon, pilot of Gemini II (Sept. 12-15, 1966) and cm pilot for Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969), would join John W. Mecom, Jr., organization in New Orleans, La. Retirement would reduce number of astronauts to 46. (nasa Release 71—243)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by Univ. of Miami in Oxford, Ohio. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
President Nixon announced appointments to Citizen’s Advisory Committee on Environmental Quality, including Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman. {PD, 7/19/71, 1056)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received 14th annual Sylvanus Thayer Award from U.S. Military Academy Assn, of Graduates in ceremony at West Point, N.Y. Citation read: “For his selfless devotion to this nation’s aviation and space efforts reflecting the ideals symbolized in the West Point motto—Duty, Honor, Country. His outstanding accomplishments, spanning more than two decades of aeronautical history, have made him an acknowledged leader among American space pioneers.” Earlier he received sabre from 1800-member cadet corps and told cadets, “As I stood on the Sea of Tranquility and looked up at the Earth, my impression was of the importance of the small, fragile, remote blue planet.” Asked about future of U.S. space programs, Armstrong told press, “I am certainly optimistic, but we’re doing considerably less than we’d like to. But space is here to stay for all humanity.” (nasa pao; Everly, AP, NY Post, 5/5/71, 17)
KSC launch complex where Apollo 15 spacecraft and Saturn V booster stood ready for liftoff had been struck by lightning 11 times during past six weeks, Washington Post reported. First strike, June 14, had been equivalent to 98 000 amps—almost three times as powerful as average lightning strike and two thirds as strong as biggest lightning strike ever recorded in Florida. Two more strikes had followed within 15 min of each other and a 31 000-amp strike had hit launch pad one day later. On July 20 five separate lightning bolts with total amperage July 26-August 7: ApoJlo 15 carried three astronauts on the fourth successful lunar landing mission, returning them with 77 kilograms {170 pounds) of samples after 66 hours 55 minutes on. the moon’s surface. During prelaunch activities in Firing Room 1 of the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Control Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, Nisi. Administrator {right), spoke utith nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders; i/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), former Apollo Program Director; and Dr. Wernher tton Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning (left to right). of almost 100 000 amps had been recorded. Ninth strike of 22000 amps had occurred June 25, and last—weakest to date at 6600 amps— had occurred July 19, Neither spacecraft nor launch vehicle had been damaged. Apollo 15 was first spacecraft to have even a near miss from lightning strikes while being prepared for launch. [W Post, 7/25/71, A16) July 26—August 7: nasa’b Apollo J5 (AS—510) carried three-man crew on fourth successful lunar landing mission. LM-10 Falcon landed on moon’s Hadley-Apennine region and two astronauts conducted experiments, rode first manned lunar roving vehicle (lrv) on moon, and explored lunar surface. After 66 hrs 55 min on surface, Falcon rejoined orbiting CSM-112 Endeavor and astronauts transfered for safe return to earth with lunar samples, Spacecraft and S-1VB combination entered parking orbit with 171.4-km (106.5-mi) apogee and 169.4-km (105.3-mi) perigee. Translunar injection (tu) was achieved at 2:56 get and csm separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:22 get. Docking of csm with lm at 3:34 get was shown clearly by onboard color TV. S-IVB aps burns were conducted at 5:48 get and 10:00 get to send stage toward moon. Separated S-IVB/iU impacted lunar surface at 79:25 get (4:59 pm edt July 29) at 1° south latitude and 11.9° west longitude, 188 km (117 mi) northeast of Apollo 14 landing site and 355 km (221 mi) northeast of Apollo .12 landing site. Impact was detected by Apollo 14 seismometer 37 sec after impact and by Apollo 12 seismometer 55 sec after impact. . First midcourse correction (MCC-1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Shortly after csm-lm docking, telemetry data indicated electrical short in service propulsion system (sps). Troubleshooting isolated problem and MCC—2 at 28:41 get used sps bank A to analyze apparent intermittent short. Data indicated bank A could be safely operated manually. Modified procedures were developed for using bank B alone for remaining midcourse corrections except lunar orbit and transearth insertions, which would be dual bank burns. Scott and Irwin entered lm at 33:56 get, 50 min earlier than planned, to check out LM communications and other systems. TV pictures of csm and lm interiors were shown between 34:55 and 35:46 get. During checkout crew discovered range/range-rate exterior glass cover had broken, removing helium barrier. Crew began lm housekeeping V/2 hrs earlier than scheduled and vacuumed broken glass. At 61:13 Get, during preparations for water chlorination, water leak developed in cm chlorination septum gland but was stopped by crew, following repair instructions from ground, and water was absorbed with towels. Door of scientific instrument module (sim) was jettisoned at 74:06 get. July 29—August 4: Apollo 15 entered lunar orbit with 314.8-km (195.6-mi) apolune and 107.5-km (66.8-mi) perilune after LOI burn at 78:32 get (4:06 pm edt July 29). “This is really profound . . . it’s fantastic,” Scott said of view from moon. Apennine Mountains looked unreal. “They stand out in tremendous relief. They appear to be smooth or rounded. But they are cratered and in many places rough in texture. We don’t see any jagged peaks. They don’t look like . . . any other mountains we’ve seen on earth.” csm-lm undocking and separation maneuver was initiated during 12th lunar revolution, on far side of moon at 100:14 get, but spacecraft did not undock. Worden entered tunnel to inspect csm—LM umbilical and found plug was loose. After he reconnected plug and adjusted spacecraft attitude, undocking and separation were achieved at 100:39 get—about 25 min later than planned. lm Falcon touched down in moon’s Hadley-Apennine region near Salyut Crater at 104:42 get (6:16 pm edt July 30) about 600 m (656 yds) north-northwest of planned target. “OK Houston,” Scott said after touchdown, “the Falcon is on the plain at Hadley.” He said LM’s engine had stirred up so much dust that landing site had been completely obscured from 15-m (50-ft) altitude to touchdown: “We flew ifr from then on down.”	> Stand-up extravehicular activity (seva) to observe and photograph landing site and surrounding area began after cabin depressurization at 106:43 get. Scott put his head out of upper hatch and described and photographed area for 33 min. Scott said he could describe site July 29-August 4; Apollo IS entered lunar orbit July 29 and the lm Falcon touched down in the moon’s Hadley-Apennine region July SO for three eva periods of exploration. The lunar room# vehicle Rover, deployed during the first EVA July 31, was photographed by Astronaut James B. Irwin near Hadley RiUe (right center above), with the Hadley Delta in the background and St. George Crater partially visible at the upper right edge. Astronaut David R. Scott was working at the Rover. In the photo at right Irwin scooped a trench, with Mount Hadley in the background. A gnomon indicated the local vertical and the sun angle. Meanwhile CM pilot Alfred M. Worden, orbiting Hie moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography. for hours. Area was covered with craters, but strewn with very few large boulders; it was hilly, hut not rocky or rugged. First EVA began July 31 at 9:04 am EDT. Scott climbed down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded his descent, and stepped on lunar surface. Irwin followed and, while Scott removed TV camera from mesa and deployed it on tripod, Irwin collected contingency sample. Crew had difficulty deploying lev Rover; during checkout they found that front steering mechanism was inoperative and that there were no readouts on lev battery No. 2 amp-volt meter. Battery was found to be operating satisfactorily and decision was made to perform EVA-1 without LEV front-wheel steering. Crew mounted LEV and proceeded on EVA-1 traverse at 121:45 CET. Crew described EVA as “exploration at its greatest," and repeatedly used words “fantastic,” “breathtaking,” and “spectacular” to describe features as they rode Lrv at about eight km per hr {five mph). Scott said Rover handled quite well: “It negotiates small craters quite well, although there is a lot of roll. The steering is quite responsive . . . and 1 can maneuver pretty well. . . . There is no accumulation of dirt in the wire wheels.” Stops at stations where crew collected lunar samples and took photos were broadcast on TV with excellent transmission. At end of traverse alsef was deployed. Scott and Irwin reentered LM after 6 hrs 33 min exploring surface, 28 min sooner than planned because Scott used up more oxygen than anticipated.	' After resting inside LM, recharging and repairing portable life support system (plss), and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:15 get (7:49 am Edt Aug. 1). Lrv was powered up, circuit breakers were cycled, and lrv front steering was found to be completely operational. EVA—2 traverse included stops at Spur Crater, Dune Crater, Hadley Plains, and area between Spur and Window craters. Numerous samples and photos were obtained and TV transmission was good. Crew completed heat Sow experiment initiated during EVA—1, collected core sample, and deployed U.S. flag. After stowing sample container and him in LM, astronauts reentered LM at 149:27 GET, after 7 hrs 12 min on surface during EVA-2. Third eva began at 163:18 get (4:52 am edt Aug. 2), 1 hr 45 min later than planned because of cumulative changes in surface activities timeline. Late start and requirement to protect nominal liftoff time required shortening EVA. Alternate EVA plan was devised with traverse west from lm to Hadley Rifle. Astronauts traveled to Scarp Crater, “The Terrace” near Rim Crater, and Rim Crater, collecting samples and photographing lunar surface features. Scott tripped over a rock July 29-August 4: The command and service modules were photographed in lunar orbit from the lunar module, giving a view of the scientific instrument module (sim) bay, housing cameras and sensors to record data from the moon’s surface and atmosphere. and fell, but experienced no difficulty in getting up. Astronauts retrieved drill-core-stern sections and samples near ALSEP, returned to LM, off-loaded LRV and stationed it for TV coverage of lm liftoff, and reentered lm at 168:08 get, after 4 hrs 50 min—bringing total EVA time to 18 hrs 35 min. While lm was on moon Worden, orbiting moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. His observations included discovery of fields of cinder cones made by volcanic eruptions, delineation of landslide or rock glacier on northwest rim of crater on lunar farside, interpretation of ray-excluded 2one around crater P roc ulus as result of fault system, and discovery of layers on interior walls of several craters, suggesting volcanic collapse craters of calderas in maria. Scott and Irwin depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized LM, and lifted off lunar surface with 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples at 171:34' get (1:11 pm edt Aug. 2)—66 hrs 55 min after landing on moon. Liftoff, accompanied by usaf anthem “Off We Go Into The Wild Blue Yonder” taped and broadcast by astronauts from LM, was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully at 173:36 GET, as TV viewers watched. Scott and Irwin transferred from LM to csm with samples, equipment, and film, csm-lm separation and LM jettison were delayed one revolution to verify that CSM and LM hatches were completely sealed, LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 26° 22' north latitude and 15' east longitude at 181:30 get, 93 km (59 mi) west of Apollo 15 alsep site. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, Apollo 14, and Apollo 15 seismometers. Orbit-shaping maneuver was performed during 73rd lunar revolution in preparation for subsatellite launch. Scientific subsatellite was launched at 222:39 get (4:13 pm edt Aug. 4) into lunar orbit with 141.3-km (87.8-mi) apolune and 102.0-km (63.4-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 36-kg (80-lb) satellite 79 cm (31 in) long and 36 cm (14 in) in diameter carried three experiments and was housed in SIM bay with seven other new experiments. Satellite extended three l^-m (5-ft) booms, one with magnetometer to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and two for stabilization. Satellite also carried charged-particle sensors and equipment to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Transearth injection maneuver at 223:49 get put CSM on trajectory for home after 85 hrs 18 min (74 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Endeavour separated from sm at 294:44 get. Drogue and main parachutes deployed but one of three main parachutes partially closed during descent, causing harder landing than expected. CM splashed down in mid-Pacific about 10.1 km (5.5 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. Okinawa at 295:12 get (4:47 pm edt Aug. 7)-—12 days 7 hrs 12 min after liftoff. Astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, were carried by helicopter to biomed area* on recovery ship for post-flight examinations. After being declared in very good shape, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam afb, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. CM was retrieved and placed on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb, and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 15 objectives: to make seleno-logical survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Hadley-Apennine region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased eva operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for intermittent short circuit in Delta V thrust switch A, CSM—LM failure to undock properly, and increase in CM tunnel pressure preceding lm jettison. Flight crew performance was excellent. Accomplishments included first use of Lrv, lunar surface navigation device, direct lunar communications without lm relay, and ground-controlled remotely operated TV camera on moon; largest payload in earth orbit (140 310 kg; 309 330 lbs) and largest payload in lunar orbit (33 803 kg; 74 522 lbs); longest lunar surface stay time, lunar surface eva, distance traversed on lunar surface (28 km; 17.4 mi), and lunar orbit time (74 orbits); first subsatellite launched in lunar orbit; and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth. Apollo 15 was 12th Apollo mission to date, 9th manned Apollo mission, and 4th successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 14 mission had been conducted Jan. 31—Feb. 3. Apollo program was directed by OMSf; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by CSFC under overall direction of otda. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 7/26-8/7/71; W Post, 7/27-8/8/71; gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; nasa Special Release; NASA Release 71-119K; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/71, A1; AP, W Star, 8/1/71, A10)
Soviet President Nikolay Podgorny sent message to President Nixon: “Please accept . . . our congratulations on the successful conclusion of the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 14 and on the safe return of the American astronauts.” Tass said he also asked President Nixon to forward best wishes to “courageous crew.” (Reuters, C Trib, 2/11/71)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held press conference at msc. Astronauts described plans for Jan. 31 lunar landing mission and said they were eager to fly on what Mitchell called “a more mature spacecraft” in which “residual risks go down.” (Lannan, W Star, 1/11/71, A4)
Election of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins to International Aerospace Hall of Fame was announced by Hall of Fame President Martin R. Engler, Jr. Awards for 1971 would be presented to astronauts in San Diego, Calif., Oct. 23. Astronauts had been nominated “in view of their epic flight and its representation as one of the greatest single scientific achievements in the history of man.” (Letter to nasa Historian)
Safely back on earth after a nine-day journey to explore the surface of the moon, the Apollo 14 astronauts watched a pararescueman close their command module hatch following splashdown in the planned Pacific Ocean landing tone. of spectrum was high. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Data would be compared with data from similar launch jan. 29. (NASA Rpt srl; NASA Release 71-1)
NASA announced availability of two new publications. First, Implantable Biotelemetry Systems (SP—5094), listed biomedical telemetering instruments developed by NASA for monitoring physiological functions in human beings and animals and described devices and techniques for radiotelemetry physiological monitoring. Analysis of Apollo 10 Photography and Visual Observations (SP—232) described Apollo 10 mission and contained miniature halftones of photos taken by Apollo 10 astronauts, which could be obtained for study, (nasa Release 71-30; nasa Hq WB, 7/12/28)
Tenth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight. Freedom 7—Mercury spacecraft launched May 5, 1961—had achieved objective of putting man into suborbital flight when Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., went to 185-km (115-mi) altitude during 15-min flight. Anniversary was observed at KSC with exhibition of Mercury spacecraft and Redstone launch vehicle in main auditorium, motion pictures on Freedom 7 and Apollo 14, and guided tours. Following commemorative ceremony, Shepard visited Freedom 7 Elementary School in Cocoa Beach, Fla., where he told students he had made his last venture into space and would step aside to give younger astronauts a chance, (msc Release 71-28; msc pao; W Star, 5/6/71)
Apollo 14 astronauts completed test of ability to react to inflight emergencies in ksc simulators. During four-hour session, engineers simulated malfunctions that could occur during flight and monitored astronaut reactions. (AP, B Sun, 1/28/71, A10)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, described Apollo 15 crew’s medical status to press at msc. Astronauts James B. Irwin and David R. Scott had suffered brief periods of irregular heart rhythm on moon, probably as a result of extreme fatigue. Irwin also had dizzy spells in space. Arythmic heartbeats and dizziness had not been disclosed to press earlier, Dr. Berry said, because tests were still being conducted and complete information was not known. Until Aug. 13 Irwin was still suffering from effects of weightlessness; he still had mild dizzy spells and, when lying prone, felt as if his bed were tilted downward about 30°. Astronaut Alfred M. Worden’s medical data during transearth coast EVA had been close to predicted, and Worden was adjusting better than Scott and Irwin. None of the three, however, had returned to preflight norms, but there was “no medical danger” as far as crew was concerned. “Things from past space flights were all going in a pattern and now suddenly these guys don’t fit the pattern.” In assessing astronauts’ return to normal it was important to note how Apollo 15 differed from previous manned space flight missions. Important factors were longer time spent on lunar surface, longer lunar orbit stay time, and longer time spent in 100% oxygen atmosphere. Heartbeat irregularities, which had lasted about 10 heartbeats, were usually associated with fatigue, low potassium level, and increased adrenalin flow—all of which were present in astronauts. Because of fatigue levels of which astronauts were often unaware, flight surgeons were considering recommending that first evas on Apollo 16 and Apollo 17 be shortened. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 8/14/71, 1)
Miniature analytical clinical laboratory to monitor astronauts’ health on spacecraft was being developed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, aec announced. “Gravity-Zero” system would permit astronauts to perform quickly and automatically 16 parallel chemical tests on samples of plasma or serum, based on colorimetric determinations. Test results would be automatically radioed to ground control, which would recommend action to astronauts, (aec Release 0—51)
President Nixon presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa at White House dinner. President recalled briefing of President Eisenhower after Soviet launch of Sputnik 1: “And the briefing was a very exciting one by one of the scientific advisers to the President. . . . But then I shall never forget that at the conclusion . . . the one who was briefing the President . . . turned to him and said, ‘Mr. President, members of the Cabinet, I simply want to say that probably the most important discovery we will make in our exploration of space is not on this chart.’ And that was a lesson for me. It was a great lesson for the American people. Exploration . . . involves going into the unknown.” In space, “we think we know what we want to find and what we may find, but the more we explore we break into new vistas of knowledge. . . . America must continue to be a great nation. We must explore the unknown, not because of what we are going to find or think we are going to find, not because of the uses that we expect to get from space, but because there is something there, something there that we must explore. It’s there to find. . . . this Nation with all of its capability and with all of its promise is first in space today and America, as a great nation, must set as its goal remaining first in space, because that’s the way to continue to be a great nation. This is a goal that we must set for ourselves. “Now, to do this requires thousands of men and women on the ground, devoted and dedicated men in the scientific field, in the engineering field and other areas. It requires very brave men going on these journeys into outer space with all of the uncertainties that we saw on Apollo 13 and very brave women waiting at home with their children, their fathers, and their mothers.” (PD, 3/8/71, 407—11)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4067 designating day as National Moon Walk Day, “to commemorate the anniversary of the first moon walk on July 20, 1969, and to accord recognition to the many achievements of the national space program.” He said, “Two years after the first landing . . . other brave men are following in the footsteps of [Astronaut Neil A.] Armstrong and [Astronaut Edwin E.] Aldrin to explore the unknown and advance scientific knowledge for the benefit of all mankind.” (PD, 7/26/71, 1068)
NASA manned space flight officials proposed four-launch program to place astronauts in earth orbit to map U.S., study earth resources, and study pollution, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D.	Myers said in AP-reported interview that program was in preliminary stages and would require additional funding from Congress. MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said project would keep U.S. in maimed space flight business during period when U.S.S.R. would probably be very active in the field. Project would fill four-year gap between Skylab and manned space shuttle tests. It would also directly benefit mankind, Kraft explained: “The two-man crews will fly at a higher inclination than we’ve ever flown before in earth orbit. Using photographic and other sensing equipment developed in the space program, they could accurately map the entire United States, including Alaska. The astronauts also could make earth resources and environmental measurements.” (AP, W Star,	A16)
Analysis of discolorations on camera that had landed on moon with Surveyor 3 April 19, 1967, was reported in Science by JPL scientist Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe. Camera had been retrieved from lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts Nov. 20, 1969. Discoloration pattern indicated that camera had been whitened by impact of particles blown from lunar surface by exhaust of LM as it landed and also that many particles had moved at very low angles to the horizontal. (Science, 2/28/71, 798-9)
Senate and House met in Joint Session to receive and pay tribute to Apollo 15 astronauts, who reported on mission. Mission commander David R. Scott said of Apollo 15 lunar samples, “As I approached a fragment freshly deposited on the slopes of the Apennine, I realized it had been undisturbed since before life came out of the sea on earth.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden said first thing noticed after launch, “particularly when we got into earth orbit, was that we had a further view—we were further away from earth, and our view was expanding. We did not see any area around Cape Kennedy. What we saw were continents and oceans. . . . After we left earth orbit and foT the remainder of the flight our view was one of the earth.” Astronaut James B. Irwin described Hadley-Apennine campsite as “friendly, beautiful spot, like a valley in the high mountains of the earth; and it was with some reluctance that we left our valley on the moon.” He told Congress: “The future of man’s role in space lies in your hands. We realize very well the grave responsibilities in these days. The decisions you make will determine man’s travels and explorations in space. We think that an investment in space technology is an investment in America. America needs space to grow.” (CR, 9/9/71, H8224-5)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received rear admiral stars from Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee during Pentagon ceremonies. Shepard was first astronaut to achieve rear admiral rank. (W Post, 8/27/71, Al)
Newspaper editorials praised U.S. exploration. New York Times: “The Apollo program was born a decade ago as an element in Soviet-American rivalry for prestige and political advantage. But the program’s brilliant success has made obsolete the nationalistic considerations that seemed so important in the early 1960’s. Now it is evident that lunar exploration and eventual settlement offer rewards and challenges for all mankind. Do Washington and Moscow have the courage and imagination to begin making that prospect a reality?” (.NYT, 8/8/71) Washington Post: “There seems to be very little doubt that the mission completed yesterday by astronauts Scott, Irwin and Worden has been the most productive in the history of the Apollo program. The yield of scientific data has already been large and much more is sure to come as laboratories around the world analyze the rocks, pictures and other material. . . . The trip has been a bonanza . . . and it may well go down in history as one of the most useful expeditions ever conducted in helping mankind understand the universe in which it lives.” (W Post, 8/8/71)
Apollo 15 Astronauts Alfred M. Worden, David R. Scott, and James B. Irwin rode in motorcade to City Hall in New York, where they received gold medals from Mayor John V. Lindsay. Astronauts presented Mayor Lindsay with flag carried on Apollo 15 mission. Later astronauts were welcomed to U.N. by Secretary General U Thant, to whom they presented replica of plaque they had placed on moon to commemorate astronauts and cosmonauts who had died in performance of duties. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 147-8; Kaufman, NYT, 8/25/71,1)
Apollo 14 astronauts and families visited both houses of Congress. Astronauts reported to Senate and House on mission. Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., told Senate they had “a totally successful mission, not only from the areas of scientific and technical endeavors achieved, but also in the areas of international prestige and the tremendous posture of this country.” (CR, 3/2/7\, S2306-7)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 14 difficulties in docking CSM with LM [see Jan. 31-Feb. 9]. New York Times said that “as the world waited tensely for the outcome of the struggle to solve the problem, there was a deep sense of disappointment at the possibility that all the effort, training and planning that went into this mission have been imperiled.” (NYT, 2/1/71, 30) Washington Evening Star editorial called Apollo 14 “pressure mission.” It had “already qualified for several entries in the record book. It is the first Apollo mission to be crewed entirely by men who have never before flown in earth orbit and commanded by a veteran whose total previous time in space was 15 minutes. The mission is led by the oldest man to go into space, the first American to ride a rocket, the only astronaut to return to active duty after a medically enforced period of idleness. It is the first Apollo shot to be delayed because of weather. It is the first to run into a major problem on its first day out. It is a mission that, in the opinion of many in the top ranks of the space agency, will decide the future of manned space flight.” (W Star, 2/1/71) _	_
Rep. Leonor K. Sullivan (D-Mo.), Chairman of Consumer Affairs Subcommittee of House Banking and Currency Committee, sent to ftc material on Franklin Mint, private corporation that produced silver medallions carried on Apollo 14 mission Jan. 31—Feb. 9. She suggested ftc investigate promotional use by Franklin of medallions, which had been melted down into ‘minimoons’—coins advertised as containing silver that had been to the moon. Washington Daily News said Rep. Sullivan’s action had been prompted by order issued by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of Astronaut Office, that no more Franklin Mint medals be carried on NASA missions. Shepard had noted, News said, that Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 Franklin medallions in CM (which never left lunar orbit), had distributed 150 to friends and relatives on mission’s completion, and had returned 50 to Franklin with understanding they would be made into coins for members of Franklin Mint Collectors Society, but not used to promote sales. (Thomasson, Scripps-Howard, W News, 9/2/71, 24)
Columbia Journalism Review editorial criticized New York Times for Aug. 15 publication of “soap-opera style exclusive interviews with the families of Apollo 15 astronauts obtained through the newspaper’s purchase of their personal stories.” Times had “condemned this kind of exploitation, by other publishers, only eight years ago.” (Columbia JournRev, 11/12/71, 6)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was named Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC. Veteran of four space flights totaling nearly 30 days in space, Lovell would assist in overall management of Science and Applications Directorate, (nasa Special Release; msc Release 71-34)
President Nixon transmitted nasa’s 22nd Semiannual Report to Congress covering July 1 to Dec. 31, 1969. In letter accompanying report, Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, wrote, “The two successful Moon missions [Apollo 11 and 12] fulfilled the national goal of a manned lunar landing and safe return within the decade of the sixties and convincingly demonstrated the technological competence of the Apollo program.” Flights had shown “value of the space program as a unifying force in international relations, for interest in the Moon landings and in the astronauts transcended national boundaries. This Nation, in turn, took the view that the achievement was a triumph for all mankind even though the deed itself was performed by American astronauts.” (Text; CR, 3/17/71, H1631)
NASA board investigating Jan. 23 helicopter crash in Indian River near ksc—in which pilot, Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, escaped injury— had named misjudgment in estimating altitude as primary cause, nasa announced. Mitigating factors were lack of familiar objects on Indian River surface to help pilot judge altitude, possible visual focusing on false water surface because of water’s smoothness, change in sun reflection on water caused by change in course, and possibility that Ceman’s experience with high-speed aircraft might have contributed to altitude misjudgment in slower craft. Board said Cer-nan’s survival training as astronaut and naval aviator was major factor in his escape from submerged wreckage and burning fuel. (nasa Release 71-206)
Langley Visitor Information Center was dedicated in formal ceremonies at LaRC. Dr. James C. Fletcher attended, in first official visit of new NASA Administrator to any NASA center. Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) said in dedication speech: “Space flight has opened up new vistas of flight and of the mind to understand the universe and our place in it. Our technology has become the world’s best and has brought us prosperity in a highly competitive environment.” Dr. Fletcher said center would give public broad understanding of what was happening in aerospace technology. Science was “part of our everyday life.” Technological society would continue “for the next 100 or perhaps 1,000 years.” Center displayed model aircraft, model spacecraft, lunar sample, and suit used by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., while training for Apollo 14 mission. (Langley Researcher, 5/28/71, 1; 6/11/71, 1: Text)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) died of heart attack in Washington, D.C. He had been ranking Republican member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics and member of House Committee on Foreign Affairs. In 1958 Rep. Fulton had volunteered at committee hearing to serve as astronaut. Washington Post obituary said he had fought hard for programs to keep U.S. from “dropping out of the space race.” (Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
Marine* 9, launched, from the Eastern Test Range on a 398-million-fdlometer (247-million-mile) direct-ascent trajectory, headed toward the planet Mars. Encountering Mars Nov. 13, the spacecraft would be the first to orbit a planet other than earth. Mariner 9—weighing 1000 kilograms (2200 pounds) and spanning almost 7 meters {22% feet) with its solar panels extended—would orbit Mars 90 days to study the atmosphere and surface in detail and map 70 percent of the surface. during 1971 opportunity; Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) launch attempt May 8 had failed because of malfunction in Centaur stage of booster. Scheduled for arrival at Mars on Nov. 14, Mariner 9 would make detailed study of Martian surface and atmosphere and map 7G^o of surface during planned 90-day orbit of planet. Launch vehicle performance and spacecraft injection were nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed four solar panels at 6:40 pm, and locked sensors on sun at 7:16 pm, soon after leaving earth’s shadow. About four hours into flight Canopus sensor was energized and spacecraft rolled 55° and locked onto star Achernar. Canopus acquisition was achieved at 10:26 pm and spacecraft would remain in sun-Canopus orientation for mission except during maneuvers. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. Mariner 9 weighed 1000 kg (2200 lb) at launch and carried six scientific experiments: infrared radiometer to measure surface temperature; uv spectrometer to investigate composition and structure of atmosphere; infrared interferometer spectrometer to measure surface and atmospheric radiation; S-band occultation experiment to study pressure and structure of atmosphere; TV cameras to transmit low-and high-resolution photographs of surface; and experiment to investigate Martian gravity field. Orbit of spacecraft was designed to guarantee it would not hit Mars for at least 17 yrs, to avoid contamination of planet before studies on surface were made by landing spacecraft. ossa assigned project responsibility to Jpl, including mission operations and tracking and data acquisition. Launch vehicle was responsibility of Lenc, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Division, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 71—75) May 30-June 6: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa during visit to France attended Paris Air Show; inspected aerospace facilities at Bretigny, Toulouse, and Salon-de-Provence, and attended reception by Mayor of Dijon, (nasa Release 71-84; msc pio)
Apollo 15 astronauts on European tour met with Pope Paul VI in Rome. Pope told them he hoped their voyage to moon would help men appreciate God and live in harmony. (AP, W Post, 11/18/71, H3)
Dr. Donald L. Holmquest, scientist-astronaut selected in August 1967, had been granted one-year leave from NASA for teaching and medical research at Baylor Univ. School of Medicine in Houston, NASA announced. Dr. Holmquest would pursue “sub-specialty studies in the field of nuclear medicine in addition to general medical research and research related to NASA programs, such as a more convenient method of measuring changes in body calcium.” He would return to astronaut program May 15, 1972. (msc Release 71—73)
Washington Post editorial commented on plans for new Air and Space Museum: “We are glad that skyrocketing costs have brought the proposed National Air and Space Museum down to earth. The trouble with the design architect Gyo Obata prepared several years ago was not only that it would now cost $70 million to build. It was also far too grandiose, bold and ambitious.” U.S. air and space accomplishments “have a very prominent place in the hearts of the American people . . . they should also have a prominent place in the nation’s capital. But that is not to say that we need or want a monumental aircraft hangar.” Museum Director, Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins, had described new museum as “national center for education about the science and technology of flight and its economic, social, cultural and political meaning.” New model, Post said, “shows a pleasing and interesting structure that is well behaved. ... If it lacks architectural excitement, that is not what we want on the Mall.” Post also published letter from Gilmore D. Clarke, former Chairman of Commission of Fine Arts, protesting construction of Air and Space Museum on Mall, “on a site of restricted size whereon the structure cannot be enlarged in the course of years as the science of aviation and outer space technology advances. Whatever is built will, within a decade or two, prove to be too small,” (W Post, 11/23/71, A18, A19)
Gold issues of first annual United Nations Peace Medal, issued to coincide with U.N.’s 26th anniversary, had been presented to Apollo 15 astronauts, AP reported. For collectors, medals would be in silver and bronze. (B Sun, 11/14/71, A3)
Washington Post editorial commented on NASA’s public information policy: “There is something strange about the decision ... to bring in a New York lawyer, Paul Sawyer, as a consultant on its public affairs policies. NASA has had, for a decade now, what seems to us and to most journalists to be the most effective and most honest public information program in government. It is hard to see why public monies should be spent to study it, particularly when the man chosen to make the study has represented the astronauts in recent months in negotiating private contracts for the stories of their activities.” (W Post, 3/27/71, A18)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified on aerospace unemployment before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 authorization hearings: From number of studies of unemployment of scientists and engineers, estimated 30 000 to 40 000 were out of work at end of 1970. “The majority of these came from aerospace-related industries. Projections indicate that this number could more than double by June 1972, which means that as many as 30 percent of the Nation’s aerospace scientists and engineers will be unemployed. The effect of this national trend—in terms of an individual scientist or engineer being reemployed—is magnified by the concentration of this unemployment, geographically and by training and experience. . . . This not only causes great personal hardship but . . . represents the loss of a tremendous national resource.” NASA-sponsored survey by Battelle Memorial Institute of persons laid off by group of nasa contractors from June 1968 to September 1970 had made preliminary findings: only 31% had found permanent jobs, 32% had found temporary jobs, 32% were still unemployed, and 5% had left work-force. Average person was unemployed 31 weeks. Of those who had found permanent jobs, only 18% returned to aerospace. Of those permanently employed outside of aerospace, only 12% reported having positions highly related to aerospace skills and 50% reported new positions unrelated to aerospace. Unemployment rate of those over 50 was 48%. Of those who had found permanent work outside, 31% said they would not return to aerospace if given opportunity; 16% said they would. Preliminary results of survey indicated “we are losing much of the aerospace capability that is an indispensable ingredient of our long term economic strength and national security.” In closing, Dr. Low made point that there was “no either/or choice between technological advances and social advances. Without technology, we cannot maintain the capability to deal effectively with any national problem.” Dr. Low was questioned on his testimony that U.S.S.R. was spending more on R&D than U.S. was spending in total science and technology area. He answered that Soviet space program, with apparent Soviet policy of steadily increasing r&d investment, would soon match and then surpass U.S. program in size and accomplishment. “For this comparison, I am dealing with the combined civil and military space programs of both nations; to try to differentiate between civil and military activities of the U.S.S.R. would be speculative at best. The most difficult comparison to try to make between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. economies or programs is in terms of absolute costs: each national economy is geared and motivated to produce a different, nonparallel mix of goods and services.” (CR, 7/31/71, E8611—2) Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed future of Apollo program: “We can now move with confidence to the final phase. ... In these last missions, we will expand the capability of the system very dramatically. Design changes in the spacecraft and supporting equipment will allow the two astronauts in the lunar module to remain on the moon up to 67 hours, as compared with 34 hours on Apollo 14. The scientific payload landed on the moon will be doubled to above 1200 lbs [544 kg]. Changes in the command and service modules will permit up to 10 days total flight time and major increases in orbital scientific activities. During the Apollo 15 and 16 missions small subsatellites will be placed in lunar orbit and will continue to make scientific measurements long after the astronauts return to earth.” In Skylab program, “three separate three-man Skylab flight crews will be selected during the coming year. Scientist astronauts will be included. . . . They plan to perform about 50 experiments in various disciplines. Twenty of these are in the life sciences, to determine how human beings adjust and perform under the conditions of prolonged space flight, up to 2 months’ duration. “They will also operate the Skylab Earth Resources Experiment Package in the second space flight phase of NASA’s earth resources program. These observations will be in conjunction with [and] complementary to those [of] the automated earth resources test technology erts, to be launched in 1972.” FY 1972 request for space shuttle of $100 million would provide for broad spectrum of studies, including analysis of new alloys and promising external materials for thermal protection; test demonstrations of design concepts for structures; wind-tunnel tests to define aerodynamic heating, launch aerodynamics, etc.; design of long-leadtime hardware, subsystems, and test devices; initiation of scaled model for flight tests; dynamics testing; electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing; and integration of upgraded fuel-cell electrical power subsystem with other components for proof-of-concept testing. (Transcript) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, testified on dod applications of space transportation system and dod-nasa teamwork on space shuttle: “Present dod satellite communications program consists of two major systems: The long distance point to point or strategic system and the local-area multiple-user or tactical system. . . . We are pursuing a new system called Defense Satellite Communications System, Phase II, which can provide many voice channels to selected limited areas of the earth. These present and proposed systems give us the flexibility for voice and teletype communications from our forces overseas and allow rapid transmission of photographic images from operational theaters to the United States.” In conjunction with NASA studies, usaf was analyzing defense applications of space shuttle to provide better insight into utility of concept for dod. usaf was providing NASA with data to help ensure that configuration was of maximum utility to dod. nasa and usaf had worked jointly on engine development. Air Force “has supported advanced development efforts on liquid rocket engines in the past, and more recently concluded a hydrogen/oxygen high performance engine demonstration program.” Engine, XLR-129, had “provided the basis for selection of the reusable high pressure rocket engine concept for the shuttle. It also provided design data for a 250 000-pound [1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which supports the current shuttle engine design concepts.” In operational testing area, “usaf and NASA recently conducted unpowered approach and landing demonstrations with F—Ills and B-52s. . . . These demonstrations investigated terminal area energy management for maneuvering reentry vehicles and have a relationship to the Space Shuttle operational concepts.” (Transcript)
Safe splashdown-—with an extra bump. The Apollo 15 command module, completing its 12-day lunar mission, descended to the waves on two of its three parachutes. The third parachute collapsed, increasing impact velocity to 35 km per hr 122 mph), but did not endanger the astronauts or the spacecraft.
Dale D. Myers, Nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on nasa FY 1972 authorization bill: “With the Apollo 14 scientific instruments operating properly, we now have begun to develop the networks of instrumentation at different locations on the lunar surface which will allow us to use normal triangulation procedures to establish the details of the moon’s structure. We have two passive seismometers and two suprathermal ion detectors in operation, one each at the Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 sites, about 115 miles [185 km] apart. Last week severed moonquakes were reported . . . when the moon reached its perigee. Our instruments pinpointed the location of these events . . . close to the Fra Mauro crater area. “We also have a laser ranging retroflector at the Apollo 11 Tranquility Base and another at Fra Mauro—750 miles [1200 km] apart. The laser ranging team at the MacDonald Observatory in Texas has reported high-quality returns from the Apollo 14 reflector. As the world’s observatories refine their ability to use these instruments, we hope that they will be able to detect random wobbles of the earth’s rotational axis. If so, this may contribute to the ability to predict major earthquakes.” During past year, design and essentially all phases of development testing had been completed for Skylab and flight hardware was in fabrication. Definition of space shuttle was nearing completion. To develop limited capability to rescue Skylab astronauts from space, NASA had initiated design action on modification kit to give Skylab CM capacity to carry two men up to orbit and five men back to earth. Stranded astronauts could use Skylab cluster as shelter while modification kit was installed and Apollo-Saturn IB launch vehicle assigned to next revisit was made ready for launch. (Transcript)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden arrived in London to begin two-week, five-country tour of lectures and meetings with European scientists, (upi, C Trib, 11/8/71)
DOD signed $25-million contract with Lockheed Space & Missiles Corp. for definition and development phase of new-generation submarine-launched ULMS (underwater long-range missile system) with maximum 10 000-km (6200-mi) range. (Reuters, B Sun, 12/1/71, A12; W Post, 12/1/71, A14)	,	-.. November 30—December 2: Apollo 15 investigator’s symposium was conducted at Lunar Science Institute in Houston, Tex. Apollo Photo Science Team members Robert D. Mercer of Dudley Observatory and Lawrence Dunkelman of GSFC described photos of sun and interplanetary dust taken by Apollo 15 cm pilot Astronaut Alfred M. Worden. Photos showed features of solar corona and zodiacal light never before observed. Preliminary examination of photos showed “light levels less than can be seen by the best telescopes on earth.” Analysis of photos would permit direct, comparative measurements of solar phenomena’s relative brightness to obtain information on mechanisms by which energy left sun and on distribution of particles outward from sun. (msc Release 71—97) November 30-December 3: Joint meeting of nasa and European Space Conference (esc) was held in Washington, D.C., to identify candidate areas for possible European participation in post-Apollo space programs. Meeting had been proposed in Sept. 1 letter from Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson to Belgian Science Minister Theo Lefevre, esc Chairman, (nasa Release 71—235, 71—241; nasa pao) During November: arc research into heat shields to protect aircraft passengers in crash fires was described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by ARC and Avco Corp. scientists. Concept of surrounding passenger compartment by fire-retardant shell to protect occupants long enough for fire to burn out or be extinguished had been made possible by Apollo program research into fire-retardant materials polyisocyanurate foam and intumescent paint. “Exposed to heat . . . paint expands to many times its original thickness and insulates the surface underneath it. The thermal-protection mechanisms of these materials operate on the same ablative principles . . . that protect our astronauts during re-entry of the Apollo spacecraft.” (Neel, Parker, et al., A&A, 11/71, 18-26)
Newspapers commented on Apollo 15 mission, while astronauts were exploring lunar surface. Christian Science Monitor editorial praised Apollo 15: “Once again, a superbly synchronized lunar mission has proven man’s capacity to focus the knowledge of hundreds of specialists to achieve a singular goal. Apollo 15 is one more grand historic achievement. It testifies to the benefit that science and technology, properly harnessed, can reap for mankind.” (CSM, 8/2/71) French novelist and TV critic Jean Dutourd commented on Apollo 15 TV coverage in France Soir. It had made him walk away from TV set. “It must be confessed,” he wrote, “that these experiments are an unspeakable bore.” (Reuters, W Post, 8/3/71, All) New York Times editorial defended manned space flight: “After Apollos 16 and 17 next year, there are no known plans of any nation to send any more men to the moon. A vast and complex technology developed at the cost of many billions of dollars over the last decade is being abandoned even as its vast potentialities are being demonstrated. If American resources do not permit manned lunar exploration beyond the end of next year, the United Nations should take over the task, appealing to all governments for funds and soliciting contributions as well from private individuals and private business enterprises. The dusty planet that is the moon could become the planet of human cooperation, a new frontier of hope for all mankind.” {NYT, 8/2/71, 22)
Spencer M. Beresford, NASA General Counsel, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during hearing on H.R. 4545, Chapel of the Astronauts bill. NASA had agreed to consider request by Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., to purchase up to seven acres (three hectares) of land adjacent to ICSC Visitor Information Center for construction of “nondenominational, nonsectarian, nonprofit public facility for worship or meditation and a memorial to the astronauts.” NASA was then “actively engaged in the defense of a law suit arising from the reading of portions of the Bible by the crew of Apollo 8 while in space.” Wishing to avoid a further suit, NASA had sought assurance that Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., purpose was “truly nondenominational.” Corporation had complied with NASA’s request for assurance. “It is my professional opinion that ... if present plans for the Chapel are followed and it is operated with sound discretion, the Chapel Corporation, NASA and the United States Government are as secure from successful legal attack as is possible.” (Proceedings)
U.S. Dept, of Justice asked Supreme Court to deny atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair’s request that U.S. astronauts be prohibited from undertaking religious activities during lunar missions. Solicitor Gen. Erwin Griswold said astronauts carried only personal religious items which improved their morale and contributed “to the success of the flight.” (upi, H Post, 2/17/71)
Wapakoneta, Ohio, birthplace of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, celebrated second anniversary of first moon walk by Armstrong with display of flags and model of lm on concrete blocks on street comer. For third anniversary, in 1972, Armstrong expected to return to home town for dedication of $l-million Armstrong Museum being constructed at edge of town. Daniel R. Porter, Director of Ohio Historical Society, had said museum would feature Ohio’s contributions to aerospace age from early balloon ascents through achievements of Wright brothers, who had lived in Ohio, to space exploits of Ohioan Astronaut John H. Glenn. Exhibits would include experimental aircraft flown by Armstrong as test pilot, gallery of flight artifacts, “nasa Room” containing space travel exhibits, and “infinity cube,” mirrored room with lighting to give effect of projection into infinity. (Wilford, NYT, 7/21/71, 22)
European interest in U.S. space program had “with notable exceptions” dwindled since Apollo IPs first lunar landing and “trouble-fraught” Apollo 13, New York Times said. Despite extensive press and TV coverage, Europeans had taken Apollo 14 for granted. “In some countries local events overshadowed man’s third visit to the moon,” but in West Germany opinion poll had shown that 64% favored continuation of manned space flights. Frankfurter Rundschau editorial had said, “What Shepard and Mitchell carried off couldn’t have been done by a Lunokhod.” Polish newspapers had given equal prominence to Lunokhod 1 and Apollo 14, but stressed technological feat of unmanned vehicle. Soviet press had highlighted Apollo 14 difficulties to suggest superiority of unmanned vehicles. Soviet man in street “seemed bored with space exploration, although some Russians went out of their way to ask Westerners about the United States moonshot.” Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet youth daily, had praised astronauts’ “indisputable bravery.” In U.K. Apollo 14 had been overshadowed by unrest in Northern Ireland and collapse of Rolls-Royce Ltd. Live TV coverage of Apollo 14 had been less than of previous Apollo missions. Earthquake and civil disorders had crowded Apollo 14 from front page of Italian newspapers, and Feb. 7 power blackout in New York had received as much space as launch. Italian radio and TV coverage had been thorough but audiences seemed smaller than for previous Apollos. Pope Paul VI had praised Apollo 14 as advance for all mankind. In France interest had waned as mission progressed. Newspapers and TV offered comprehensive coverage but “excitement of two years ago” had vanished. Spaniards, too, were losing interest in space exploration and public interest had declined in Hungary and Yugoslavia. Communist student, leader in Zagreb had said, “If the Americans and Russians would cooperate in space instead of carrying their rivalries to the moon, maybe there could be some scientific progress on earth and maybe the smaller nations could be helped to contribute their knowledge instead of being shut out of science by the expense.” (NYT, 2/10/71, 24)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held 25-min press conference, televised from spacecraft during transearth coast. Mitchell called mission “quite a success” in spite of failure to reach Cone crater during second EVA: “I think the majority of the type rocks we would find at the rim were in the boulder field that we were working, although it was a disappointment, just as a matter of challenge, not to get up there. I think we accomplished the scientific objectives that we went for.” Shepard explained major problem was “the undulating terrain where you simply couldn’t see more than 100 to 150 yards [90 to 140 meters] away from you. Consequently, you were never quite sure what landmark would appear when you topped the next ridge. We were very surprised when we . . . approached the ridge which we thought to be the rim of Cone Crater, to find there was another one behind it. And that was the beginning of the real problem. As far as we were concerned, our only problem was the amount of time allotted for the excursion. To us it was just a matter of working against the clock. I don’t believe that we were disoriented or lost any time. I think if we had wanted to reach the top of the crater and did nothing else, that we could have done that within the time period allotted. But I think the method to which we reverted ... of collecting rocks from a point not quite near the top of the crater provided a lot more geologically and gave us a better cross-section of the rocks in the area . . . than had we gone to the crater and back and not collected as many rocks.” (NYT, 2/9/71, 26)
Dangers inherent in separation of science and government were discussed in New York Times article by Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Prizewinning Hungarian biochemist at Marine Biological Laboratories in Woods Hole, Mass. “Among our 450 representatives in Washington there is not a single scientist, so they do not know that problems are like equations which cannot be solved by trickery, blows or bombs, not even atomic bombs.” With different assumptions different selfconsistent systems could be constructed; each seemingly logical. “Ptolemy placed the earth at the center of the universe, Copernius the sun. Each system is perfectly logical and self-contained. Copernicus himself never dared to give preference to his own. The only way to decide between the two is to see where they lead. An astronaut basing his calculation on Ptolemy would end in the nowhere. Our present political system leads to poverty, inflation, unemployment, crime, drugs, war and the neglect of our priorities toward a final catastrophe. The solution is not separating science from politics . . . but making it penetrate into politics.” (NYT, 10/23/71, 33)
Extrasensory perception tests aboard Apollo 14, launched Jan. 31, were described by Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell during press conference at Foundation for Research on the Nature of Man at Durham, N.C. In unauthorized experiment, Mitchell had tried to send messages to four “receivers” on earth while en route to moon. He had carried cards bearing ESP test symbols and concentrated on random order of cards while receivers on earth wrote down order in which they believed he was	“transmitting.” While	plan	had called for “transmission” once daily	for six	days, Mitchell	had	been able to	perform experiment for only four days. Two of his receivers had reported “receptions” for all six days, one for one day only, and another for two days. Mitchell said preponderance of wrong answers was significant because it was	“so far	below chance	that	the odds are	approximately 3000 to one	against	it being a chance	result.” If it	was not chance, Mitchell said, results indicated “extrasensory exchange.” Mitchell declined to identify his receivers, but Olof Johnsson of Chicago had said he was one psychic who had participated. (AP, NYT, 6/22/71, 22; upi, W Star, 6/22/71, Al)
Newspapers published preliminary summary of Apollo I5’s scientific and technical achievements. Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post: “The voyage of Apollo 15 did far more than extend man’s reach into the heavens. It showed dramatically that man belongs in space. At the end of their three days on the moon and six in lunar orbit, the astronauts . . . had gathered more scientific information about the moon than all the manned and unmanned spacecraft that had flown before them.” Cameras and instruments in SIM had made first extensive observations from lunar orbit. One of first findings was confirmation that moon was not perfectly round and was dimpled. Evidence from seismometer was backed up by bistatic radar in which spacecraft signals were used to penetrate lunar surface to core. Seismometer’s reception of LM’s impact on moon indicated that even small explosion or impact could be recorded at extreme range and verified earlier hypothesis that meteorite impacts were being recorded daily from all over lunar surface. Addition of Apollo 15 station to existing seismic net completed triangular array of instruments for determining focal points of moonquakes. Data from cold cathode gauges at Apollo landing sites and mass spectrometer in orbiting Endeavour confirmed presence of thin lunar atmosphere. Spectrometer picked up pockets of neon and argon and scooped up carbon dioxide that had apparently burst from fissure near where sun was lighting lunar surface at daybreak. Other data obtained by Endeavour’s instruments indicated lunar highlands were rich in aluminum and deficient in magnesium. Waterless basins were rich in magnesium and deficient in aluminum. Most highland regions contained three times as much aluminum as lowlands, and one mountainous region had five times as much aluminum as typical lunar basin. Magnetometer on subsatellite launched into lunar orbit discovered moon had electromagnetic boundary layer. Camera system recorded data for comprehensive map of areas never before flown over, with details and resolution previously impossible. Report by Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin of terracing along sides of Hadley Rille identical to terracing noted on sides of two tallest mountains in Apennine group—Hadley Delta and Mt. Hadley— suggested mountains and Hadley Rille had been thrust up from moon by internal pressures that built up inside moon when object the size of state of Rhode Island struck moon and created Sea of Rains 4 billion yrs ago. Scientists had previously thought Hadley Rille to be younger than mountains and independent of their formation. Samples might hold clues to sun’s history and its effects on earth climate, past and future. Walter Sullivan said in New York Times: “Sun-determined changes in the earth’s climate have controlled man’s history, from the ice ages that plagued the cave men to the desiccation that buried Middle Eastern civilizations, not under invading armies but invading sands. By understanding the role of the sun in these past events, man may be able to assess the effect our parent star will have in determining climates of the future.” (W Star, 8/8/71, A10; W Post, 8/8/71, Bl; NYT, 8/8/71)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, told press at msc that preliminary examination of Apollo 15 crew had revealed astronauts were in good health, but were not returning to normal as rapidly as expected. Examination had also revealed that Astronaut David R. Scott had ruptured blood vessels . under four fingernails—apparently during first eva on moon. Ruptures had resulted from increased pressure on fingers from spacesuit as Scott moved his arms to conduct experiments. Although Scott had mentioned some discomfort to his hands after EVA—1, officials had assumed discomfort was typical hand cramp experienced by previous astronauts. Dr. Berry said Scott’s injury was not serious enough to warrant space-suit modifications: “It’s just one of those things that you’ve got to put up . . . with, and we keep trying to make suits better all the time, and I think this current suit is probably as far along the line to being comfortable and providing mobility as any suit we’ve ever had. . . .” (Transcript)
President Nixon honored Apollo 15 astronauts in address on economic program before Joint Session of Congress: “Later today, in this great chamber, the Congress will pay tribute to three splendid Americans back from the moon. Theirs was a magnificent achievement, a stunning testament to their personal skill and courage, and also to what American technology can achieve. “Let us find the means to ensure that in this decade of challenge, the remarkable technology that took these Americans to the moon can also be applied to reaching our goals here on earth.” (PD, 9/13/71, 1250-6)
The white anorthosite “Genesis rocU' collected on the moon by Apollo 15 astronauts was about 4.1 S billion years old, scientists announced. In the photo the sample, oldest lunar rock collected so jar, was in the nonslerile processing line oj the Lunar Receiving Laboratory at the Manned Spacecraft Center. “This is unquestionably one of the most important rocks ever returned from any lunar mission. It has a recording in its minerals of many series of events in lunar history-events of high temperature and high pressure.” (Auerbach, W Post, 9/18/71, A3; AP, B Sun, 9/18/71, A10; NYT, 9/18/71, 25) *	MSC announced start of series of cold weather environment tests on performance of Skylab CM postlanding and recovery systems in Climatic Laboratory at Eglin AFB, Fla. Objectives were to determine performance characteristics and limitations of Skylab cm in cold weather, determine cm test crew response to cold and to interior environmental conditions of CM, and determine extent of ice buildup on CM exterior and effect of ice on systems performance. Tests, conducted in chamber with 274 K (33°F) water temperature and 269 K (25°F) air temperature, were necessary because spacecraft would pass over areas colder than previously experienced and, in event of emergency landing, cm and crew limitations had to be known, (msc Release 71-70)
Newspapers reviewed Of a Fire on the Moon by Norman Mailer. In New York Times Book Review Morris Dickstein said book aimed at confrontation with “brave new world of science and technology.” Mailer found himself “frustrated at every turn. The event seems packaged, distant, unapproachable. . . .” Mailer gave “rather depressed personal account of his attempt ... to make an approach to the mission, especially to the astronauts and their machines.” Mailer felt “betrayed by the gap between his romantic expectations and the gray hut immense realities. Seeking to understand, he turns the book into an account of the other America, the Wasp hinterland.” In end Dickstein concluded, “This is not perhaps the book on the impact of technology that we needed, but it is important nonetheless, and offers much to ponder and prey on.” (NYT Book Review, 1/10/71, 1, 42-45) In Washington Sunday Star, Day Thorpe said: “Mailer wasn’t a passenger on Apollo 11, but in his motel rooms in Houston and Canaveral, and in his home in Provincetown ... he has put together a long and excellent book about the flight, the story not only of what the adventure meant to the three astronauts who lived it but, no less interesting, what it meant to Mailer himself. The bureaucrats Mailer encountered first in hermetic Houston and then in hermetic Canaveral were unlike all other bureaucrats. They were infallibly courteous, considerate and helpful, and they invariably told the truth.” Mailer showed Apollo 11 astronauts as “three human beings, as similar as necessary for their mission, but as unlike one another as experimental prototypes should be.” (W Star, 1/10/71, D 6)
MSC scientists reported instruments left on moon by Apollo astronauts had apparently survived sudden drop in temperature during lunar eclipse. Instruments registered no unusual seismic events or radiation fluxes during eclipse. Temperature at Apollo 12 site dropped from 348.9 K (168.3°F) to 170.4 K (-153°F), a 178.5 K (321.3°F) change. Temperature at Apollo 14 site dropped from 341 K (154.1°F) to 170.4 K (—153°F). {NYT, 2/11/71, 40)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced H.R. 11487 for himself and cosponsors. Bill would authorize sale of up to seven acres of unimproved land adjacent to ksc Visitor Information Center to Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc. Organization was nonprofit Florida corporation interested in constructing and operating nonsectarian chapel on property, No federal funds were involved in proposed transaction. (Text; H Rpt92-600)
U.S. Supreme Court refused to grant hearing to atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair on appeal of suit charging nasa had knowingly used taxpayers’ money for religious activities by permitting astronauts to conduct Bible readings and prayer services while orbiting moon. (Reuters, B Sun, 3/9/71, A3)
Office of Management and Budget had released $98.1 million in FY 1972 funds voted for science education and institutional support, while impounding $30 million, Aviation Week & Space Technology noted. “The 25% holdback of funding at the basic science level is considered by some in Congress as highly destructive because it will tend to reduce the number of future scientists.” It was viewed as “direct contradiction of the pro-science policy they have been led to anticipate.” (Av Wk, 9/20/71, 15) Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott told opening session that analysis of 2.7-m (9-ft) Apollo 15 lunar core sample had disclosed 58 distinct layers that represented 58 “chapters in the history of the sun.” Number of “pages in each chapter” awaited further analysis. Later Scott said in interview that Dr. Liaquat Husain, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientist who had analyzed Apollo 15 “Genesis” rock, was concerned that alteration of rock by shock when it impacted with site at which it was found might have partly invalidated determination of rock’s age at 4.15 billion yrs. arc engineer John C. Arvesen described development of method for monitoring biological productivity from air by detecting signs of chlorophyll. Monitoring device, when tested over California lakes and offshore areas, had produced results that conformed closely to readings obtained by arduous direct sampling of waters. Ultimate goal was to develop satellite-borne system that could monitor global productivity of oceans. Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said newly completed studies of medical data from Apollo 14 had shown radiation exposure to crew that was more than twice that of previous Apollo missions. Primary reason for higher exposure was passage of Apollo 14 spacecraft close to Van Allen radiation belts. Dr. Berry said radiation dose was “of no hazard or biological significance.” Soviet scientists said later that cosmonauts carried special antiradiation drug on all space flights but had never used it. Dr. Berry said Apollo 14 Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had lost 27% of fluid within his body cells during mission. His total body water had dropped 18% and red cells in his bloodstream had decreased 9%. Losses had been far less for other Apollo 14 astronauts and no such dramatic losses had been recorded for Apollo 15 astronauts, indicating that individual responses to space varied widely. Heavy loss of “exchangeable” potassium had been noted in astronauts during extended missions. On Apollo 15, loss had been as great as 15%. Potassium was deemed exchangeable because it could move readily in and out of tissues and thus could be purged from body. E. G. Johnson, Equipment and Facilities Branch Chief in NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office, described program for development of teleoperator systems in which remote-controlled devices could perform tasks in situations dangerous to health or safety of humans. In space, teleoperator could enter high radiation environment of space station’s nuclear power plant to change fuel elements or make repairs. Johnson said optical or radioastronomy observatory on moon’s far side could be run for 40 to 50 yrs using computer-controlled teleoperators whose control could be assumed from earth when necessary. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium was held during iaf congress. Sessions discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries in regard to earth resources research. iaa Fifth History of Astronautics Symposium on Sept. 23 was chaired by JPL Historian R. Cargill Hall. Soviet Cochairman V. N. Sokolsky did not attend for unexplained reason. Papers read included “From the History of the Development of Powder Rockets in the U.S.S.R.,” by Soviet Academician Yu A. Pobedonostsev, which traced work on Soviet solid propellants leading to Katyusha rocket in current use; “Comparative Analysis of Projects for Jet Planes Constructed up to the 1940’s,” by V. N, Sokolsky; “Evolution of Spacecraft Attitude Control Concepts before 1951,” by R. E. Robertson of Univ. of California at San Diego; and “Memoir: The Evolution of Aerospace Guidance Technology at M.I.T., 1935-1951,” by Dr. C. Stark Draper. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium, held during Congress, discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries. Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award was presented to Professor Luigi Broglio of Univ. of Rome for achievements in experiments with floating platforms to launch satellites into equatorial orbits. Only cosmonaut attending IAF Congress was Boris B. Yegorov, only physician to travel in space (launched in Voskhod 1 Oct. 12, 1964). (iaa Annual Rpt 1971; Sullivan, NYT, 9/21/71, 9/23/71, 9/27/71; Proceedings)
NASA announced it had signed agreement with New York Times Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for one byline article each by Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden after mission and three articles by Scientist-Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt while crew was on lunar surface. Agreement, extending to 30 days after mission’s end, provided for payment by Special Features of 50% of gross proceeds from syndication of articles. It also permitted still photos in Apollo 15 astronauts’ homes and interviews of family members. Agreement did not infringe on NASA policy of free flow of information to all media nor limit NYT coverage of all aspects of space program, (nasa Release 71-138)
William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary and Apollo 8 Astronaut, and Astronauts John L. Swigert, Jr., William R. Pogue, and Jack R. Lousma met with President Nixon at White House to report on their visits to 17 college campuses from October to December 1970. At White House press conference later, Anders said meetings with students had been “very positive.” Students had been “very curious about the Space Program.” (PD, 3/15/71, 475; Transcript)
Former astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, who had also been aquanaut in USN’s Sealab Project, testified before Senate Committee on Commerce’s Subcommittee on Oceans and Atmosphere. Carpenter, president of Sea Sciences Corp., said man must explore ocean floor if he is to understand it, just as he had to explore lunar surface to understand it. Subcommittee was examining ocean pollution. (CR, 10/18/71, D1039; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/19/71, Al)
Training models of Sky lab’s Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount arrived at the Manned Spacecraft Center from fabrication at the Marshall Space Flight Center. They would be used for training crewmen for the 1973 mission, planned to include three separate crews of three astronauts each—the first crew to stay for 28 days and the next two for 56 days each. The overhead view above shows crew quarters in the 1-g trainer model of the Workshop. At the top is the general control and working area with several experiments. At the right is the wardroom, where crewmen would prepare and eat food and spend leisure time. At the lower center is the waste management compartment, or “space bathroom.” At the left is the sleep compartment. perigee, 116.6-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/71; fbis-Sov-199-3, 10/14/71, LI; SF, 4/72, 132)
GSA had said it would take bids on towers and equipment from two Saturn launch complexes at icsc, AP reported. Equipment from Complexes 34 and 37, to be sold in one lot, included cranes, boom hoists, 298 km (185 mi) of copper and steel cable, and five towers weighing total of more than 8.2 million kg (9000 tons). NASA had said complexes, which cost $147 million to build, were obsolete. Complex 34 was scene of Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire that took the lives of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Roger B. Chaffee, and Edward H. White II. It was also launch site of Apollo 7 (Oct. 11-22, 1968), first manned mission in Apollo program. Complex 37 had been used for pre-Apollo unmanned missions. NYT, 12/24/71, C7; icsc Hist Off)
On second anniversary of its emplacement on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, atomic battery designed to power Apollo 12 experiments for one year was still generating at more than 70 w. Battery had been designed to produce 63.5-w power. Apollo 12 instruments were still reporting data. Identical batteries, fueled by radioactive plutonium 238 and taken to moon by Apollo 14 and 15, were generating more than 70 w. Apollo 16 and 17 would land similar batteries on moon during 1972 missions, aec reported, (upi, W Post, 11/20/71, A3)
Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Gold Medal for Aero-dromics was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), samso Commander and former NASA Apollo Program Director, at ceremonies commemorating Smithsonian’s 125th anniversary. Medal, presented periodically for “meritorious investigations in connection with the sciences of aeronautics and astronautics,” was established in memory of Dr. Samuel P. Langley, aviation pioneer. Among recipients had been Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1964 and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in 1967. (Smithsonian Release SI-131-71) Gold Space Medal, Federation’s highest award for space achievement, was presented to Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., for “his courageous achievements and leadership as the Commander of Apollo 13.” In recognition of achievements of entire Apollo 13 crew, Astronauts Lovell, Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., received iaf’s V.	M. Komarov Diploma for 1970. Diploma had been created in memory of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov, killed during Soyuz 1 mission April 24, 1967. Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov were awarded Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for 1970 for achievements as crew of Soyuz 9, June 2—19,1970. Gold Air Medal, highest iaf award for aeronautics, was presented to Capt. Henry T. (Dick) Merrill for contributions to aviation over 50 yrs. Capt. Merrill, civilian pilot, had flown Atlantic in 1935 and 1937. Concorde technical team of bac and Aerospaciale employees received group diploma for “valuable example set by . . . effective collaboration developed since 1962 between the engineers of British Aircraft Corp., Aerospaciale, Rolls-Royce and Snecma, operating as a single industrial team.” During conference lrv was presented to Swiss Transport Museum. (Letter to NASA Administrator, 6/10/71; letter to NASA Historian, 9/29/71; W News, 9/30/71, 42; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 9; bac pio; NAA PIO )
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, directed four-hour physical examination of Apollo 14 astronauts and declared them “certified and ready to fly.” Countdown for launch began on schedule at 9:00 am EST in preparation for liftoff toward moon at 3:23 pm est Jan. 31. (AP, B Sun, 1/26/71, A5)
Astronaut Information: American and Soviet (Revised) (71—204 SP) was published by Library of Congress Congressional Research Service. Paper provided general reference on astronauts and cosmonauts, table of U.S. and Soviet space flights, and description of highlights of each flight. (Text)
Preparations for Apollo 15 mission were proceeding on schedule with liftoff planned for July 26, Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Apollo Mission Director, told press in Washington, D.C. Astronauts would be able to remain on lunar surface for long EVA periods because of new spacesuit that would give astronauts greater mobility and facilitate experiments. New suit had neck and waist convolutes to permit bending at neck and waist, improved zipper for pressure control, improved thermal garment, more abrasive material protection, and increased water and oxygen supply. Suits also had pocket for fruit bar so astronauts could take bites during mission. (Transcript)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial described plight of McDonnell Douglas Corp. in “aerospace depression”: Total employment was off almost a third from high of 43 500 in mid-1967 and layoffs were continuing though at declining rate. “The loss of these 14,100 jobs is equivalent to a loss of income for all the families in a city of 35,000 persons. . . .” In one 30-day period, 1600 McDonnell Douglas workers had been laid off. “That is equal to 20 per cent of the workforce from a city the size of Berkeley, where the corporation has its headquarters.” Hope for McDonnell Douglas “rests in large measure with the company’s plans to produce the F—15 fighter-bomber. Already Congress is looking at this program with a wary eye, and . . . there are indications that production may be slowed as part of an increasingly cautious congressional approach to military spending.” (St Louis P—D, 6/21/71) Delegates discussed possibility of joint test flights to test requirements being developed for docking systems. Experiments “might be conducted between spacecraft of the Apollo and Salyut station types and between spacecraft of the Soyuz and Skylab programs,” NASA statement said. Soviet visitors were escorted on tour of msc by Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and John W. Young. Several “flew” computerized simulators used to train Apollo astronauts to dock cm and lm for lunar landing, (nasa Release 71—111; Transcript)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa completed final dress rehearsal for scheduled Jan. 31 launch toward moon. Countdown began at 9:23 am est, with simulated liftoff on time at 3:23 pm est. (P Inq, 1/20/71, 3)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were greeted by crowd of 3500 persons during brief stopover in Hawaii en route to Ellington afb, Tex. On arrival in Texas astronauts were cheered by 2500 persons who waved banners and flags while band played “Fly Me to the Moon.” Astronauts were first to return from moon without being required to undergo quarantine. (Stevens, NYT, 8/9/71,1; AP, C Trib, 8/10/71)
National Capital Planning Commission approved plans for Smithsonian Institution’s new $40-million National Air and Space Museum after hearing testimony from Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 astronaut. During 90-min debate, Commission member Paul Thiry described museum building, designed by architect Gyo Obata, as “industrial type” from “elevator-air conditioner school of architecture” lacking “classic proportions.” Collins said museum would possess “flavor of air and space.” Commission stipulated that building’s roof remain clear of mechanical equipment and that use of granite and marble be considered for construction. Final approval of plans would be considered following Nov. 17 meeting of Fine Arts Commission. (Combes, W Post, 11/5/71, A14)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden held press conference at MSC, during which they showed films and described mission. Irwin and Scott praised performance of LRV Rover and said it had exceeded their expectations. Showing film taken from Rover during traverse, Irwin said he hoped simulated ride didn’t make viewers seasick. Ride on LRV, he said, “is kind of a combination of a small rowboat in a rough sea and a bucking bronco.” Scott said only change he would recommend for Rover was “some manner of strapping yourself in the vehicle other than just pure seat belts.” He also said moon should be explored to far greater extent than was currently planned, with “a whole base of scientists” and “a Rover that can carry 6 to 10 men. I think we can . . . establish bases on the moon similar to those in the Antarctic and explore it and discover a vast amount of data that we don’t even know we have up there.” Core sample drilling, Scott said, was “one of the best things we ever did on the moon. It was very difficult, very time consuming and at times it was rather perplexing . . . because we did not expect the regolith or the surface material to be quite as well integrated or packed as it was. There was nothing wrong with the equipment, it was just that we encountered the unknown. And we had to compensate for that and . . . that’s why man goes to the moon. His subjective mind can evaluate the situation and come up with a fix far better than a machine. The machine would have stopped. It would have never gotten the drill.” Scott said in closing, “We went to the moon as trained observers . . . to gather data, not only with our instruments on board, but with our minds, and I’d like to quote a statement from Plutarch . . . : ‘The mind is not a vessel to be filled, but a fire to be lighted.’ ” Astronauts later revealed they had left plaque and tiny silver figure of a fallen man on moon as memorial to 14 astronauts and cosmonauts who had died in pursuit of space exploration. Plaque, bearing names of eight astronauts and six cosmonauts, had been left in small crater about 6 m (20 ft) north of rille. (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 8/13/71, Al)
Apollo 7 Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham announced his resignation from NASA, effective on or about Aug. 1, to become Vice President of Operations for Century Development Corp., developers of Greenway Plaza in Houston, Tex. (nasa Release 71—110)
Widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, one of three astronauts killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, filed $10-million suit in Brevard County Circuit Court against North American Rockwell Corp. and subsidiaries North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. Mrs. Betty Grissom charged negligence in fire which killed her husband and Astronauts Roger B. Chaffee and Edward H. White II. Suit asserted spacecraft did not have proper fire extinguisher system, had no emergency egress, and was “defective” because electrical wiring permitted electrical arc to flash in cabin. (AP, W Star, 1/19/71, BIO)
nasa announced it was requesting proposals from potential U.S. and foreign experimenters for investigations of data to be acquired from earth resources experiment package (erep) to fly on manned Skylab spacecraft in late 1972. Data would be used to appraise value and direct applications of space observations in agriculture, geography, forestry, geology, hydrology, oceanography, and cartography. Objectives of erep were to extend use of sensors; use man to observe, discriminate, and select study areas; and provide early source of unique research data for analysis. Three-man experimental space station would be manned by three different crews for total five months during eight-month mission in circular orbit of 435 km (270 mi) with 50° inclination. Astronauts would investigate solar astronomy, space medicine, space physics, bioscience, and material processing in addition to operating erep sensors, including six high-precision, 70-mm cameras, infrared spectrometer, multispectral scanner, microwave radiometer/ scatterometer and altimeter, and passive radiometer, (nasa Release 71-5)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans held press conference at msc. Ph.D. geologist Schmitt defended his selection for mission and declared his readiness to “compete with anybody” in flying Apollo spacecraft. Schmitt, selected over Astronaut Joseph E. Engle, said Engle was “one of the most outstandingly qualified test pilots in the business” and speculated that Engle, transferred to space shuttle program, would “probably . . . contribute for the next 10 or 15 years a ... lot more than maybe even we can contribute by a lunar mission.” Sending a “professional observer” like himself to moon, Schmitt explained, would significantly increase knowledge gained, particularly concerning early history of earth and sun. (Transcript; Reuters, W Post, 8/20/71, A2)
NASA announced decision to discontinue quarantine of astronauts, spacecraft, and lunar samples for remaining three Apollo flights. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said NASA had concluded from analysis of Apollo 11, 12, and 14 quarantine information “that there is no hazard to man, animal, or plants in the lunar material. These results have been reviewed by the Interagency Committee on Back Contamination, and that committee has recommended that further lunar missions need not be subject to quarantine.” (NASA Release
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Aug. 25 resignation from NASA of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong: “Offhand, it is regrettable to see any of these accomplished men leave the program they helped make such a smashing success. But Mr. Armstrong will be teaching engineering and it will be no surprise if some of his students wind up in future space exploration. So count his ‘defection’ to education as another spinoff benefit of the space program.” (W News, 8/30/71, 22)
Distribution of about 6.8 kg (15 lbs) of the 42.6 kg (94 lbs) of samples returned from moon’s Fra Mauro area by Apollo 14 astronauts had begun, NASA announced. To date, 187 scientific teams in U.S. and 14 foreign countries had been scheduled to receive samples. Additional proposals for consideration under Apollo 14 through Apollo 17 sample program were under review. More than 700 scientists would analyze samples, believed to include material formed at same time as original lunar crust. Investigating teams in U.S. were at 65 different institutions in 30 states and Virgin Islands. The 56 foreign teams were at 41 institutions, (nasa Release 71-62)
New York attorney Paul Sawyer, who had joined nasa to evaluate agency’s public relations efforts on March 22, had taken 30-day leave from law firm in which he represented astronauts in negotiating exclusive rights to their stories for magazines, Washington Post reported. Sawyer had said he would not be representing astronauts during NASA assignment. (W Post, 3/26/71, A3)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried gsfc payload to 115.9-km (72-mi) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with all 19 grenades exploded and recorded as planned. Launch was part of series of similar experiments at three sites [see Jan. 7]. (nasa Rpt SRl) arc team of scientists headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett announced that first measurements of moon’s interior indicated moon had basaltlike mantle 338 km (210 mi) deep surrounding “cool core of primordial olivine-like rock.” Measurements suggested moon’s outer layer was melted during first billion years of its 4.5-billion-yr history. Measurements had been made with arc magnetometer placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts and also made by Explorer 35 moon-orbiting satellite launched July 19, 1967. (arc Release 71—2) Cornell Univ. astrophysicist Dr. Thomas Gold said stratifications found in Apollo 12 lunar surface samples were caused by earth in same process that made near side of moon different from far side. Moon passed behind earth with face turned earthward for four days during regular monthly cycle and was bombarded by high-energy electrons in earth’s magnetic field. Dr. Gold said he and coworkers had reproduced lunar surface markings inside vacuum chamber by bombarding finely ground earth material and small amounts of lunar soil with high-energy electrons up to 800 ev. Dr. Gold’s theory of “electrostatic motion” was disputed at meeting by Univ. of California physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey. (Lannan, W Star, 1/12/71, Al) NASA announced plan to continue lunar exploration with unmanned robots after last Apollo manned lunar landing in 1972. Plan would cost minimum $1 billion. Robot vehicles would travel 965 km (600 mi) across lunar surface and return to earth with samples or would rendezvous with other robot spacecraft that could return samples to earth. NASA spokesman said, “We sincerely hope that collaboration with the Russians takes place in space. A common program to explore the moon with instrumented spacecraft remotely controlled from earth might be the best way to help that collaboration take place.” (O’Toole, W Post, 1/14/71, Al)	_	_ Dr. Gerald R. Taylor, msc scientist, described laboratory experiment in which three highly resistant strains of bacteria were killed within 10 hrs of contact with one core sample from a number of centimeters below surface of moon’s Sea of Tranquility. Micro-organisms in protein soup had been exposed to lunar soil. Dr. Narenda Bhandari of Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India, reported that analysis of cosmic ray tracks on moon had provided “conclusive proof” of existence in lunar soil of fossils from chemical elements far heavier than any previously discovered in nature or in laboratory. If verified, discovery would greatly extend periodic table of elements. (Wilford, NYT, 1/14/71, 9) Dr. P. Buford Price of Univ. of California at Berkeley, said during interview that Apollo 12 lunar samples might contain first real evidence of “magnetic monopoles,” basic force units that were to magnetism what electrons were to electricity. If their existence could be confirmed, it would mean rewriting books on magnetism and electrodynamics. Dr. Price’s group of scientists appeared to have found two fossil tracks of nuclear type of particles which, theoretically, could have been made by monopoles in two lunar cysts. (Lannan, W Star, 1/14/71, A3) Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Soviet academician and Director of Vernadsky Institute for Analytical Chemistry in Moscow, told conference U.S.S.R. would continue to explore moon with unmanned spacecraft and would attempt bolder missions in future. He believed U.S.S.R. would exchange lunar samples with U.S. beginning with samples of Sea of Fertility returned by Soviet Luna 16. He said main task for Lunokhod 1, Soviet moonwalker still on moon, was to determine how eight-wheeled vehicle could best move about moon and how it could best be used in future. “We discovered that the moonwalker can move in very large angles and can go down into craters at angles of 20 degrees. The mechanical qualities of this car are very good.” Dr. Vinogradov said Lunokhod 1 carried instrument to analyze soil, but device had not done so thus far. He described Luna l6 samples as bearing no evidence of water or life on moon. Drill used to dig samples had been stopped at 330 mm (13 in) below lunar surface because it hit rock. “We were afraid to send it any deeper.” Dr. Vinogradov described Sea of Fertility as “blackish powder” sprinkled with “cosmic beads.” Luna 16 sample was similar to soil brought back by Apollo 12 from Ocean of Storms and not very different from samples returned by Apollo 11 from Sea of Tranquility. Age of Sea of Fertility had been calculated at 4.6 billion yrs, older than some rocks returned by Apollo missions. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/15/71, Al) Dr. Paul W. Gast, chief of msc Earth and Lunar Sciences Div., reported discovery by msc scientists of “exotic components” in lunar soil believed to be fragments from primitive crust that covered moon 4.5	billion yrs ago. Fragments differed from other Apollo lunar samples and were thought to be pieces of crustal bedrock scattered by impact of meteorites pounding more ancient lunar highlands. Discovery, through chemical analysis, supported theory that moon once had hot, molten surface and that crust had hardened as it began cooling off. Discovery also helped explain why lunar soil was mostly one billion years older than lunar rocks. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory described norite found in chemical analysis of five soil samples. Norite was lighter in color than most Apollo samples and did not appear to be chemically native to landing sites. Most norite represented “nearsurface material in an ancient lunar crust.” Coarser grained relative of norite might have come from “somewhat deeper in the moon— perhaps several miles.” If discovery proved true, samples would go back in age to beginnings of solar system. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg—Cal Tech physicist who had dated Apollo 12 Sample 13, oldest rock yet found, at 4.5 billion yrs (other Apollo 12 rocks were about 3.4 billion yrs old)—said Sample 13’s oldest parts were granite that crystallized early in lunar history and could fie some of original crustal material and some of “magic component” that accounted for difference in ages of lunar rocks and soil. Dr. Wasserburg believed that fact there was always some missing ingredients in lunar soil meant soil contained debris from granites and other materials originating elsewhere on moon. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, reported Apollo 12 seismometer was recording weak but frequent moon-quakes along rilles near landing site. He suggested rilles might be “fault zones,” where slight movements in lunar surface were occurring. (Wilford, NYT, 1/17/71, 4:7; Gast, msc)
Smithsonian Institution’s revived plans for construction of $40-million Air and Space Museum on south side of Mall in Washington, D.C., were described by Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 Astronaut, in interview published by Washington Post. Plans for building, to contain exhibit areas and galleries with displays on history of aviation and science and technology of flight, would be presented to National Capital Planning Commission in November. Collins said only best items in Smithsonian’s collection would be exhibited in new museum, designed by architect Gyo Obata, who had designed previous building that would now cost $70 million to construct. Collins said Smithsonian would ask Congress to appropriate funds for new building in FY 1972. (Scharfen-berg, W Post, 10/28/71, Bl)
Dr. Vasily V. Parin—Soviet physiologist, former President of Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, and member of Soviet Academy of Sciences—died at age 68 of liver ailment. Dr. Parin had been known primarily for his work during 1960s on human physiological problems during space flight and had authored studies on effect of weightlessness on functioning of heart and circulatory system. He had received Order of Lenin, U.S.S.R’s highest award, in 1963 for his work in developing Soviet medical science. (AP, NYT, 5/Yl/ll, 42) Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified June 15 on nasa policy on backup spacecraft and Centaur reliability: “In the manned program, all possible steps are taken to assure the safety of the astronauts. Single point failures are reduced to an absolute minimum. Missions are planned to build upon the previous missions so as to reduce the number of unknowns.” Within missions, “plateaus are established so that all systems can be checked out in real time prior to committing to the next plateau. Vigorous testing procedures coupled with redundancy and in many cases dual redundancy are adopted before a system is ‘man-rated.’ ” In Skylab “we are building a back-up workshop which will be brought right up to the point of actual checkout. This will permit us to proceed with the program even in the event that the first workshop would not be successfully launched. Similarly, we will have a single back-up Command and Service Module-Saturn IB capability for the three manned visits to the workshop.” Capability was built into program and was “key to the plan for a rescue capability in Skylab which we recently adopted.” In earth-orbital automated programs “we generally plan a series of related missions, using identical or similar hardware. If we have a mission failure, decisions will then be made, based on all available factors, whether we will (1) prepare and fly a specific back-up to the mission which failed, (2) modify succeeding flights ... to achieve the objectives, or (3) defer achieving the mission objectives to future years.” In planetary programs, with launch opportunities at only discrete intervals, NASA usually had provided for two identical launches. Each launch in dual mission was planned to complement its twin, while at same time serving as backup if twin were lost. This year Manner 9 was backup, flying hybrid mission. Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle had history of 3 failures out of 16 operational vehicles, without apparent relationship between failures, giving probability of success of 80% if based solely on past experience. Launch vehicles for automated missions—such as Scout, Delta, and Atlas-Centaur—were “complex systems without much redundancy, and cannot be expected to achieve reliabilities much greater than about 90% without very major and costly changes. They certainly cannot be considered ‘man-rated’ vehicles.” Addition of redundant systems would be investigated again but was not complete solution. Redundancy added weight, reduced payload capability, and was expensive. For launch vehicles of size of Titan-Centaur, which would carry Viking and Grand Tour payloads, additional redundancy might be practicable and desirable and would be actively studied. Major increase in reliability of achieving orbit would be one of important attributes of space shuttle. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on June 16 continued testimony on backup philosophy, expanding on application in ossa: “We do not schedule backup missions for observatory spacecraft. We always buy, and intend to fly, at least two flight units of a new series of observatory-class spacecraft. When we have a failure or a malfunction in a spacecraft or a launch vehicle we will always do everything possible to thoroughly understand and correct all other future missions which could conceivably be subject to a similar malfunction. When we have a failure we will always review the effect of the loss on the program, determine the alternative recovery plans by which we can attain the objectives of the lost mission, assess the cost and any other impact of those alternatives on the program and then decide which alternative to choose.” Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified June 17: “In the basic considerations which establish the philosophical approach to reliability of unmanned space vehicles, the over-riding necessity for protection of the lives of human passengers is absent. The result is an approach to reliability in which cost and simplicity play a much larger part. We have not imposed a requirement for total elimination of single point failure modes, but have concentrated upon reducing the probability of failure by careful design, parts application, major quality and reliability efforts, and, most importantly, tender loving care. Our launch vehicles . . . are characterized as simplex systems, implying lack of the complexity characteristic of redundancy.” (Testimony; Subcom Rpt, 10/71)
Kansas City Times editorial commented on “ambiguous” announcement of progress in NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings to develop compatible space docking system [see Dec. 3]: “The first interpretation was that agreement soon would be reached on a joint mission involving astronauts of the two countries in an orbital linkup. In hasty clarification, NASA explained that the mooted accord covered only the technical matters which could make such a mission possible. . . . Either way, the conclusion is obvious: The two space powers are moving at last, and seriously, toward the sort of shared space planning that logic and economics have long indicated but which competition and secretiveness have prevented.” (KC Times, 12/8/71)
Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) which would transport astronauts John W. Young and Charles M. Duke, Jr., on moon during Apollo 16 mission had successfully completed prelaunch checks and been installed on lunar module for flight, KSC announced. Astronauts Young and Duke would make three excursions on LRV in Descartes area of moon during mission, scheduled for March 1972. Final approval of LRV flight readiness was given by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, after installation review. LRV was managed by msfc and was built by Boeing Co. (ksc Release 259-71)
Cuban internal radio newscasts gave detailed account of ApoUo 15 mission. Radio reloj, all-news station in Havana, read reports of astronauts’ activities on moon. (NYT, 8/3/71)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell had tried personal experiment in mental telepathy during flight to moon and back, AP reported. Mitchell, who had life-long interest in psychic phenomena, had concentrated at prearranged times on symbols. Psychic in Chicago had concentrated at same time in attempt to receive signals. Mitchell confirmed that he had conducted experiment, but declined to reveal details. (AP, B Sun, 2/13/71, Al)
New York Times editorial on NASA decision to continue Apollo 14 mission: “Space officials know that they have taken on an extra degree of responsibility with the ‘go’ decision, and have opened the way for massive recrimination should their judgment be proved wrong by later developments. Nevertheless there is some reassurance in the fact that the original docking problem—which for a time seemed certain to abort the flight—was successfully overcome by the astronauts thousands of miles from earth. The nation and the world will be watching this flight with renewed hope—and admiration for the brave men embarked upon it.” (NYT, 2/2/71, 34)
Apollo 15 astronauts would wear pressure suits—instead of flight coveralls as originally planned-—during lm jettison, nasa announced. Requirements for crew to wear suits had been reevaluated after deaths of three cosmonauts during reentry from June 6-30 Soyuz 11 mission. (nasa Release 71—134)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4060 Commemorating World Law Day. He said: “We can see many heartening evidences that law is becoming stronger and more just around the world under the pressures which reason and necessity exert. Within the nations, human rights and ecological wisdom continue to gain stature in the law. Among the nations, security and cooperation—on every front from space to the seabeds—are being enhanced through negotiations, treaties, and conventions. The United Nations is entering its second quarter of a century, and many other international organizations are working effectively through and for world law.” {PD, 6/21/71, 942) June 17—July 2: Fourteenth Plenary Meeting of Committee on Space Research (cospar) was held in Seattle, Wash. International meeting of scientists hosted by NAS included symposia and working groups on 1970 total solar eclipse, astronomical observations from space, use of stratospheric balloons in space research, and lunar lasers. Grumman Aerospace Corp. scientist Dr. Henry C. Courten, professor of astronomy at Dowling College, said mysterious tracks on photographic plates he made during 1966 and 1970 solar eclipses appeared to be of small planet or asteroid belt inside Mercury’s orbit. Cal Tech scientist and lunar expert Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg told cospar meeting four rocks gathered by Apollo 14 astronauts had ages ranging from 3.85 billion to 3.95 billion yrs. Ages were surprising “since it was anticipated that Fra Mauro would yield rocks of greater antiquity.” Discovery suggested that volcanism was active on moon far longer than had been thought and was still forming lunar crust more than 600 million yrs after moon came into being. It also suggested that Sea of Rains had been carved by collision 600 million yrs after moon’s formation, or 100 million to 150 million yrs later than lunar experts had originally believed. Soviet scientists Yuri G. Nefyuduv, L. I. Kakurin, and A. D. Yegorov said Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov “found it difficult to keep the upright posture and had to be assisted while walking” during first three hours after return from June 2-19, 1970, mission. “Next day . . . their walk was still inadequate and erect positions were maintained with great efforts.” When cosmonauts returned to physical activity, few days after flight, effects of prolonged weightlessness had proved temporary. Astronaut John W. Young represented U.S. astronaut corps at ceremony to honor 10th anniversary of first space flight by Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. He asked, “What better tribute to the memory of Yuri Gagarin can we offer than the hope that the growing unity of efforts in space—which this cospar meeting so well exemplifies— may one day extend to all the Earth? (nas Release, 4/21/71; AP, W Post, 6/13/71, A7; O’Toole, W Post, 6/21/71, Al; upi, W Post, 6/28/71, A7; NASA Activities, 7/15/71,107) nas and nrc submitted to cospar United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1970. Report included summaries of observations from spacecraft, sounding rockets, high-altitude balloons, and aircraft made or reported during 1970 and discussed flights planned for 1971. (Text)
President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia and Mrs. Tito visited msc during state visit to U.S. They were shown Apollo 9 CM, Mercury and Gemini spacecraft, and lm test article. The Titos visited Mission Control and saw demonstration of spacesuit and Apollo 15 films. Center presented Tito with framed and autographed photo of earth as seen from moon’s vicinity by Apollo 8 astronauts, (msc pao)
usaf in Space” exhibit opened at Smithsonian Institution. Exhibit included two Vela nuclear detection satellites and dod comsat, scale models of wind tunnels and space chambers, no-torque impact wrench to counter effect of weightlessness, astronaut equipment, prototype space tool for tests simulating weightlessness under water, and sextant used on Dec. 4—18, 1965, Gemini 7 mission. Also exhibited were scale models of afcrl solar telescope and Titan boosters and integrating maneuvering life support system—nasa-usaf spacesuit for eva outside orbiting laboratories, (afsc Newsreview, 9/71, 8-9)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar IT. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held news briefing in Washington, D.C. Crew showed film and slides and described mission and preliminary results. To question on future of manned space flight Shepard said: “The relative comparison of the efficiency of the manned versus the unmanned systems, I think we tried over the years to show where we feel that man has his point, has his place in space . . . and with 14, certainly, there were several instances where basic reflexes, basic judgment, and human instincts made it a successful flight where it would not have been successful otherwise. “Obviously, we brought back a lot more rocks than the Lunokhod has brought back. But I don’t think that is the point. I think the point is that we have chosen to exercise part of the expenditures of our money along the areas that we have found to be successful; that is, manned flight. I think we have shown on the 14 . . . that manned space flight can contribute on a scientific basis and contribute efficiently when it comes to assessing the dollar value put on it.” (Transcript)
Prague newspaper Rude Pravo commented on Apollo 15: “The scientists eagerly anticipate the results of the work of the astronauts and instruments which were sent on such a long trip. People of goodwill throughout the world who follow these flights will always wait long into the night for the two words from Houston, Baykonur, and eventually from other places on earth: ‘Mission complete.’ ” (FBis-Czecho-slovakia—71—155, 8/11/71, Dl)
LRL geologists Dr. William C. Phinney and Dr. Paul W. Gast described anorthosite rock from Apollo 15 sample bag No. 196 to press at msc lunar sample briefing. Dr. Phinney, praising crew’s descriptions of samples, said “as in all cases so far where we’ve looked at what the rocks are, it matches exactly what the astronauts said it was. It’s about fist size, 269 grams—%-lb—anorthosite . . . essentially pure plagioclase.” Grain was quite coarse, 1-cm (0.4-in) grains, “about the coarsest grain size of any lunar rocks that we’ve seen so far.” Its milky-white color suggested “that it has probably undergone a fair amount of stress, maybe a shock type of deformation.” Rock, popularly called “Genesis rock,” was significant because it supported hypothesis that moon had been extensively molten with anorthosite crystallizing from liquid, floating to top, and producing anorthositic crust. Although discovery did not prove hypothesis, Dr. Gast explained, it was “a long step in the direction” of determining moon’s origin. “If results on the dating of this anorthosite and some of the chemistry on it . . . turn out that all point to the fact that it is essentially 4.6 or 4.7 billion years old, which is the time that we think the moon formed, ... it gets to be rather difficult to argue with the hypothesis.” (Transcript)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was celebrated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with articles commemorating Sight. At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of American astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover represented start of new era envisioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space stations. Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975 economic plans called for 1‘fundamental development of scientific research, with a significant role foT lunar and solar investigation.”
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
Apollo Day” was celebrated in State of Indiana. Gov. Edgar H. Whitcomb attended ceremonies at Spring Mill State Park honoring Indiana-born astronaut, the late Virgil I. Grissom who was killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, (msfc Hist Off)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received Golf Magazine's All-America Award for making first golf shot on moon during Apollo 14 mission (Jan. 31-Feb. 9). (AIT, 4/21/71, 57)	'
First book taken from earth to moon was not microfilmed Bible carried by Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell on Apollo 14 (launched Jan. 31, 1971) as had been reported by upi, Robert H. Goddard Library publication Goddard Biblio Log said. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., had carried miniature copy of Robert Hutchings Goddard—Father of the Space Age on Apollo 11 (launched July 16, 1969, 45 years after Goddard’s first liquid-fueled rocket flight) but had not been allowed by NASA to leave book on moon. Apollo 11 astronauts had given three-by two-inch book, published by Achille J. St. Onge, to Mrs. Esther Goddard, who had donated it to Goddard Library at Clark Univ. (Goddard Biblio Log, 7/71, 11—2)
Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said at Washington, D.C. press conference, “I hope to see the day when our astronauts go up in Russian spacecraft and the Russian cosmonauts in ours.” He would explore idea with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin before he left for visit to U.S.S.R. in August, “if our own government will permit me to do so.” (upi, W Post, 7/10/71, A3)
President Nixon, at ceremonies marking dedication of Rathbun Dam in Centerville, Iowa, referred to Apollo 15 astronauts: “At this very hour, if you were watching television you could see that fantastic ride in a golf cart on the moon.” Apollo 15 astronauts “look down on earth. What does it look like? Well, we’ve had descriptions from other astronauts and often they have remarked about the fact that from far out there the earth looks like a very peaceful planet.” (PD, 8/9/71, 112-5)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden visited KSC to thank personnel for their support during Apollo 15 mission, ksc Deputy Director Miles Ross told crowd of about 5000 that with all talent assembled in vab “I think this is the real Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.” (Spaceport News, 10/7/71, 1)	........................
Pope Paul VI told crowd assembled at Castel Gondolfo that he had sent confidential message to Apollo 15 astronauts on their July 26-Aug. 7 lunar mission. Astronauts had replied: “Our journey is for all men and we hope that the talents which God has given us will enable us to satisfy those who so kindly support our undertaking.” (AP, W Star, 8/2/71, A2)
Sleep analyzer developed for nasa by Dr. James D. Frost of Baylor Univ. and built by sci Electronics, Inc., Div. of sci Systems, Inc., as Skylab experiment had been made available as research device to U.S. medical institutions, NASA announced. Device would record quality of sleep of Skylab astronaut during 28-day stay in space by combining and evaluating inputs of electro-encephalogram and electro-occulogram. Medical application of device could be to treat insomniacs and other patients experiencing “sleep neuroses.” faa doctors were considering study of sleeping patterns of air controllers and pilots after stressful duty. (NASA Special Release)
President Nixon accepted resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs effective April 11. Collins would become Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. {PD, 3/1/71, 384)
President Nixon issued statement following successful splashdown of Apollo 15 spacecraft: “Apollo 15 has returned safely to Earth. It brings with it new proof of man’s invincible will to master the moment of his own destiny. It brings new tribute to man’s unquenchable thirst for understanding. It brings the seeds of scientific understanding which may open a new chapter in the history of our planet. We salute Astronauts Scott, Irwin and Worden, who have stood poised on behalf of mankind on the brink of man’s new world.” (PD, 8/16/71, 1154)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin demonstrated LRV Rover for press at KSC. Newsmen were permitted to take turns driving vehicle at maximum 16-km-per-hr (10-mph) speed. Scott told press, “We expect this little buggy to work just fine on the moon. It’s really a very straightforward little vehicle, just like driving your own automobile.” On first lrv excursion, Scott and Irwin would drive about one kilometer (six tenths mile) from Apollo 15 landing site at Hadley Rille to west edge of foothill for Hadley Delta at average speed of eight kilometers per hour (five miles per hour). On second excursion next day, they would drive to location as far as eight kilometers (five miles) from landing site and seek place to climb front and survey valley. “We’ll be looking for bedrock or some unique feature that might have sprung up from the moon with the front,” Irwin told press. “If we see it and the trail upward looks traversable, we might climb as high as 600 ft [180 m] to get to it.” Third and last trip on third day on moon would take astronauts to edge of Hadley Rille and north along ravine to sample crater cluster that appeared to scientists to be volcanic in origin. On return, astronauts would park lrv 90 m (300 ft) east of LM with TV camera pointed directly at lm. Irwin told press if all went well worldwide TV audience would get first live picture of spacecraft rocketing off moon on first leg of return journey to earth. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/5/71)
Federal Reserve System had begun supplying banks with 62 million copper and nickel dollars commemorating President Eisenhower and Apollo 11 lunar landing, AP reported. One side of coin carried reproduction of Apollo 11 astronauts’ emblem—eagle against moon’s surface. (B Sun, 11/3/71, A6)
New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo program to fund space station and shuttle while U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 was already in orbit: “In effect, the unique American capability to land men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations for military as well as civilian purposes. This is a prospect that literally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 26) Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you, but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . . I radioed to mission control, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots of eggs spread across the lawn, hut there’s only one golden one, and there it was—The Golden Egg.” Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe moon as barren and desolate dead world, “it can be a beautiful one to anyone who loves the mountains of earth. . . . When I first climbed down the ladder ... I was really taken back by those mountains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight, were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me. . . . you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at home.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from all that is below. . . . one of the most important observations from Apollo 15, as far as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training we studied and discussed volcanoes . . . but I guess I wasn’t really prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 1; 8/14/71, 1)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, named to five-man board chaired by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., to investigate Jan. 23 crash of NASA helicopter piloted by Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan. (msc Release 71-03)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, described future benefit of space program spinoff in Parade article on applications of space technology to social problems. “On the 1973 flights in the Skylab experimental space station, a medical doctor will go into space with the astronauts. He will carry out a comprehensive program of experiments ... to establish how well men live and work in weightless conditions in an enclosed space as big as a three-bedroom house.” With data obtained, space benefits could be achieved in a few years and made available to people everywhere. (Parade, 12/5/71, 8, 12)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1970 to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Other recipients were RAF Squadron Leaders Graham Williams and Leslie Lecky-Thompson, first to cross Atlantic nonstop in vtol aircraft, and Turi Wideroe of Norway, first female airline pilot. (W Post, 5/20/71, A28)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell for promotion to grade of captain in usn. Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had been promoted by usaf to grade of lieutenant colonel. (PD, 2/22/71, 266)
Apollo 15 astronauts were honored by Chicago with parade, special City Council meeting, and civic luncheon. Mayor Richard J. Daley presented them with honorary citizenship medals. (Wolfe, C Trib, 9/16/71)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski testified on FY 1972 budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics authorization hearings. During 1970 otda supported some 50 ongoing scientific, applications, planetary, and lunar experiment missions as well as some 14 new flight projects launched in year by NASA and DOD. During Apollo 13 mission, with safe return after inflight explosion, MSFN “demonstrated that it is, in fact, the astronauts’ life-line to earth.” Valuable clues to origin of explosion were found in analysis of recorded telemetry data, msfn was still supporting experiments left on moon by Apollo 12 and 14 missions. After FY 1972’s Apollo 15 and 16 missions, network would be continuously monitoring 16 alsep experiments. Satellite network provided tracking and data acquisition for average monthly workload of some 40 earth-orbital satellites, including NASA’s scientific and applications satellites and projects of other Government agencies and foreign countries. dsn supported Mariner 6 and 7 probes in extended mission phase and Apollo 13, as well as four ongoing Pioneer missions (6 through 9). Data acquired by Goldstone antenna on effect of solar gravitation on Mariner spacecraft signals had verified Einstein theory of delay of 200 microseconds in return of signals from gravitational field of sun. Construction continued on second 64-m (210-ft) antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and ground was broken for third near Madrid, Spain. (Transcript)
Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at New York Univ. Medical Center had accepted for evaluation and testing motorized wheelchair controlled by sight-switch, NASA announced. Switch, worn on head, enabled user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movements with his eyes. It had been developed under NASA direction to help astronauts in training to operate equipment under extreme flight conditions. Institute’s director, Dr. Howard A. Rusk, had estimated that more than 100 000 quadriplegics—persons with no use of arms or legs—could achieve mobility if chair could be made available, (nasa Release 71-122; A&A 1970)
Apollo 15 completed simulated liftoff at 9:34 am edt in preparation for launch from ksc July 26. Spacecraft was unmanned and fully loaded with propellants. Astronauts would practice countdown in spacecraft without fuel July 14. (SBD, 7/14/71, 56)
House passed and sent to Senate H.R. 11487, bill to permit sale of land at ksc for Chapel of the Astronauts. {CR, 11/15/71, H10998, D1171)
Dedication ceremonies for (Ac historic launch site at Kennedy Space Center marked the 10th anniversary of the first U.S. manned space flight, fiotun on the Freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft. The first American to go into space, Astronaut Alan B, Shepard, }r.—who also was commander of the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission fan. 31—Feb. 9 this year—stood by the plague marking the site at AauncA Complex 5/6 during ceremonies attended by 3000 guests. The site had been restored to its original condition. DOT, and FAA, with assistance from dod, cab, and eight other Federal agencies. Report concluded that aircraft noise abatement deserved highest priority because of widespread concern for environment and because noise abatement program’s success would affect solution to other aviation problems. Study recommended reductions of at least 10 decibels every 10 yrs until aircraft noise was suppressed into community background noise. Continued Federal support at high level of aeronautical K&D was necessary to ensure strong technical base. Continued R&d was essential if current and future problems of civil aviation were to be solved and if civil aviation was to contribute to such future areas as regional development. Study recommended Government evaluate its regulatory role to be certain that policies were not inhibiting innovations by industry and that NASC develop permanent mechanism to review and recommend policies affecting civil aviation that embraced several agencies. Study called for exchange of middle management personnel between aviation-related agencies like NASA, DOT, DOD, and CAB. (NASA Release 71-82; Text; Av Wk, 5/10/71, 20-1)
Skylab astronauts would begin extravehicular training in pressurized suits in msfc Neutral Buoyancy Space Simulator later in year. Mockups of Skylab space laboratory modules had been submerged in water tank 12 m (40 ft) deep and 23 m (75 ft) wide, which simulated weightlessness of space environment, (nasa Release 71—205)
Four extra manned space flight missions to use four Apollo spacecraft and one Saturn V launch vehicle left after 1973 Skylab mission were proposed by msc officials to nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at nasa Hq. Missions would include one lunar flight and three Saturn IB-launched earth-orbital missions. Houston Chronicle later quoted msc Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., who had presented proposal, as saying msc plan called for one mission of up to nine days in lunar orbit. Astronauts could map 60% of lunar surface and place Nimbus weather satellite in lunar orbit to complete photography of entire moon in one year. (Hill, H Chron, 11/29/71)
introduction he said, “This is a time not for routine reading of sophisticated papers about a future that is itself in question, but for addressing ourselves to the basic issue of where we are headed—if anywhere.” Technical display included space shuttle technology exhibits by NASA and major contenders for shuttle contracts and models of Grumman F—14A fighter aircraft, McDonnell Douglas F—15 fighter, and NR B—I bomber aircraft. On Oct. 25, designated by aiaa as “Aerospace Day,” Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott narrated NASA Apollo 15 film. Panel discussions included “Rocketry in the 1950’s” chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; “stol and vtol—Where Do They Fit In?” chaired by arc Director Hans Mark and transmitted by telephone link up to LeRC employees; and “The Aerospace Professional—What Is His Future?” with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as panel member. Von Karman Lecture, “Trends in the Field of Automatic Control in the Last Two Decades,” was given by Dr. Irmgard Flugge-Lotz of Stanford Univ. Automation had been penetrating nearly every field of engineering. Mathematical theory and large computing equipment allowed development and extension beyond handling of linear and weekly nonlinear systems. Investigation of systems with large transport time lags had been advanced. Major aiaa awards presented included John Jeffries Award to Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director of Medical Research and Operations, for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of Manned Space Flight and aerospace medical research through your leadership in the development of life support systems.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given to Ronald L. Berry, Chief of MSC Planetary Missions Analysis Branch, for “many outstanding achievements in the field of manned space flight, particularly in lunar mission analysis and design development.” Spacecraft Design Award was presented to Anthony J. Iorillo, Manager of Special Projects for Hughes Aircraft Co., for “invention of the Gyrostat stabilized spacecraft which formed the basic stabilization and configuration for the successful Tactical Communications Satellite, Intelsat IV, and a series of other satellites now in design and production.” Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award was given to Dr. Hubertus Strughold, Emeritus Professor of Medicine at Brooks afb, Tex. Citation said, “With his prophetic foresight and exceptional talents he established the rational biomedical foundations for manned exploration of space.” DeFlorez Training Award went to Capt. Walter P.	Moran of American Airlines for his “pioneering efforts in the utilization of flight simulation to increase safety and economy of airline flight training and checkout operations. . . .” Aerospace Communications Award was presented posthumously to Siegfried H. Rieger for “his personal contributions over a 10 year period, in analytical work evolving basic concepts, and in the origination and implementation of the Intelsat Program which led to the establishment of the present worldwide communications satellite network.” aiaa History Manuscript Award was presented to Dr. Richard C. Lukas of Tennessee Technological Univ. for “best historical manuscript dealing with the science, technology and impact of aeronautics and astronautics on society.” Award winning manuscript was “Eagles East: The Army Air Force and the Soviet Union.” Among 23 new Fellows honored at Honors Night Banquet Oct. 28 were George H. Hage, Boeing Co. Vice President for Product Development and former NASA Apollo Program Deputy Director; Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Head of 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at LaRC; Eugene S. Love, Chief of Space Systems Div. at LaRC; James W. Plummer, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.; Wilbur L. Pritchard, Comsat Laboratories scientist; and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Douglas Corp. designer. (Program; aiaa Releases; Lewis News, 10/22/71, 1) 1971.	In this connection the sides referred to the important achievements in cooperation in the fields of space exploration, peaceful uses of atomic energy, as well as high energy physics, in particular the installation of a French laser reflector on the moon surface, the commissioning of the French bubble chamber Mirabelle at the Soviet proton accelerator in Serpukhov, the Soviet-French contact on enriching French natural uranium in the Soviet Union.” (fbis-Sov-71-210, 11/1/71, F4)
Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny had sent congratulations to President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 15 mission, Tass reported. Podgorny had asked President Nixon to convey congratulations and good wishes to “courageous” Apollo 15 astronauts. (fbis-Sov—71— 153, 8/9/71, Gl)
Following Apollo 14 splashdown, President Nixon telephoned Apollo 14 astronauts aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans to express personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. He released statement comparing Apollo 14 with May 5, 1961, Freedom 7 mission flown by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr.: “The difference between that first flight and this latest is a measure of how far we have progressed in space in the short span of 10 years. But two things have not changed: the courage and determination of the men who fly these missions, and the skill and dedication of the thousands here on earth who make their flights possible.” (PD, 2/15/71, 205)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 15: “All the evidence suggests that this is the most productive scientific expedition ever carried out in space. Even before the astronauts’ own return, the information they have sent back has already forced reconsideration of some key ideas about the natural history of the moon. In ultimate perspective, however, it may turn out that the dividends from the Falcon’s stay on the moon will be as substantial in the realm of changed human ideas and aspirations as in scientific knowledge. For millions who watched the superb television pictures of the two astronauts working comfortably on the lunar surface, the image that came across was that of a friendly moon, a place where men could walk and ride and work with ease. This is a far cry from the traditional picture of the moon as a hostile, alien environment totally inhospitable to man.” (NYT, 8/3/71)
Scientists at lrl in Houston began opening bags of rocks returned from moon by Apollo 15 crew. Before and after day-long debriefing Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin assisted geologists in identifying samples. Material included football-size piece of black, glass-like rock; brick-size chunk of volcanic rock pitted with small cavities (vesicular basalt) ; and 9%-kg (21-lb) rock, largest single sample ever returned from moon, from rim of Hadley Rille. Scientists were anxiously waiting to examine crystalline rock in sample bag No. 196, scheduled to be opened Aug. 12, that Scott had described as possible chip of moon’s original crust. (W Post, 8/11/71; AP B Sun, 8/10/71, Al)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden thanked usaf personnel at Patrick AFB, Fla., for their support during Apollo 15 mission and presented base with U.S. flag they had carried to moon. Later, astronauts thanked msfc employees during six-hour visit to Center, (msfc Release 71—164; NY News, 10/1/71, 64; msfc pao)
President Nixon telephoned msc Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton and asked him to send President’s congratulations to Apollo 14 astronauts and ground crew. Later President issued statement: “Apollo 14’s successful landing on the moon was a thrilling event for humanity. I congratulate the astronauts and also the thousands of other dedicated people who helped make this awesome achievement possible.” (PD, 2/8/71, 173)
Resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to set foot on moon, was announced by NASA. Armstrong, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, would join Univ. of Cincinnati as its first professor of aerospace engineering Oct. 1. He would continue to serve NASA as consultant. Armstrong had joined NASA in 1955 and had served as aeronautics research pilot for naca and NASA. He had piloted X-15, X-l, F-100, F-101, F-102, F-104, F-5D, and B-47 aircraft and, as B-29 “drop” aircraft pilot, had participated in more than 100 rocket aircraft flights. Armstrong had been selected by NASA as astronaut in September 1962. He had served as backup command pilot for Gemini 5; command pilot for Gemini 8 (launched March 16, 1966), during which he had performed first successful docking of two vehicles in space; backup command pilot for Gemini 11; backup command pilot for Apollo 8; and commander of Apollo II.	(nasa Release 71-159)
Air Force Assn.’s Schilling Trophy was presented to Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin and Alfred M. Worden in recognition of “their unique contribution to manned spaceflight and science.” (NASA Activities, 10/15/71,172; afa pio)
Scientists and engineers at mit described planned Apollo 17 surface electrical properties experiment to probe for water on moon, in telephone interview with New York Times. Experiment consisted of 6.8kg (15-lb) radio transmitter with four 35-m (115-ft) lengths of wire which astronaut was to unreel on lunar surface in X pattern as antenna. Radio signals at varying frequencies would be beamed into lunar surface. Small receiver on LRV would receive signals bounced back from beneath lunar surface and signals would be recorded by tape recorder on lrv. Pattern, timing, and strength of reflected signals were expected to indicate presence of water, if any, and kind of material in lunar subsurface. Times said experiment’s importance had been heightened by Oct. 15 announcement of discovery of water vapor on moon. (Wilford, NYT, 10/19/71, 29)
Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the JohnsonSea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft) vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star, 1/30/71, A9) January 31-February 9: nasa’s Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting CSM—110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM Kitty Hawk. January 31~February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot), was launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at 4:03 pm est Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was 40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72° to 75.6°. Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr. Spacecraft and S—IVB combination entered parking orbit with 188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Midcourse correction (MCC—1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:02 get. Onboard TV was initiated to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encountered. First five docking attempts by cm pilot Roosa were unsuccessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible. Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 get, 1 hr 54 min later than planned. Separated S-IVB/iu impacted lunar surface at 83:18 get (2:41 am est Feb. 4) at 7°49' south latitude and 26° west longitude 174 km (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs. Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was initiated at 10:00 get to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they found no indication that systems would not work normally again. Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. 1]. Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-sec sps burn at 30:36 get, increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver, crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth’s dark side and continued to check out systems, get update was performed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay. MCC—3, scheduled for 60:38 get, was not necessary. Third TV transmission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 get, showed Shepard and Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC—4, at 77:38 get with 0.6-sec sps burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec (3.5 fps). Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before firing rcs thrusters at 104:28 get to separate CSM and lm. Spurious bit in lm guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent January 31-February 9: Propelled into space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the moon on the third .successful United States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5 touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored the Fra Mmtro area for 9 hours 24 minutes in two extravehicular periods before the LM Aniares lifted them off to rejoin Roosa in the orbiting cm Kitty Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch activities were monitored by Dr. George M. Low (at left below), Acting nasa Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at ksc. abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manually. LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 108:54 get (4:17 am est Feb. 5) on 8° slope 9—18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy, undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.” First eva began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent plss communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar surface at 114:30 get (9:53 am est Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the forward footpad landed is extremely soft. . . . it’s in a small depression. The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads, it even folded over the sides to some degree. ... we can see the boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route up to the top of the Cone.” Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb) contingency sample; deployed TV, S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experiment; and photographed lm, lunar surface, and experiments, alsep was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of lm and laser-ranging retrorefiector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of alsep. Mitchell conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibrations 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min extension on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:48 get (3:11 am est Feb. 6)—2 hrs 27 min earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded met with photographic equipment and lunar portable magnetometer (lpm) and proceeded toward Cone Crater, met bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable. Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Everything’s going to be covered with dust before long.” lpm site measurement was made at first stop and lpm traverse measurement was later made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and materials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m (1.5-ft) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected. Alignment adjustment was made to alsep central station’s antenna to improve signal strength being received at msfn ground stations. Crew was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of timeline and minor problems. Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement: “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the February 4-6; Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed, (at top left) leading across the lunar surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-band antenna was positioned by the astronauts to the left of the lm. Lunar dust clung to the legs of Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extravehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to M tons of tht. contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball on lunar surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds). Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing total eva time to 9 hrs 24 min. While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in csm, completed bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic photography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for shortened rendezvous technique. Shepard and Mitchell depressurized lm, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg (94.8 Ihs) of samples at 142:25 get—33 hrs 31 min after landing on moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 get (3:36 pm Feb. 6) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to earth for postflight analysis. Excellent TV during rendezvous and docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET (7:05 pm est Feb. 6) at 3° 35' south latitude and 19° 40' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 alseps. Transearth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 get, injected CSM into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Kitty Hawk separated from sm at 216:12 get. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 get (4.05 pm est Feb. 9). Astronauts, wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston. CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for lrl. Primary Apollo 14 objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro; deploy and activate alsep; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occasional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent. Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSm/lm docking attempts and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first use of met, largest payload—32 500 kg (71 650 lbs)—placed in lunar orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations. Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capability to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), aborted by sm tank explosion, had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; Av Wk, 2/15/71, 19)
Apollo 14 astronauts were presented Distinguished Service Medals at dod ceremonies. Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee presented usn dsm to Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented usaf dsm and Command Pilot Astronaut Badge to Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa. (NASA Activities 4/15/71, 61; dod Release 218-71; msc Hist Off)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden received Order of Leopold from King Leopold of Belgium in Brussels. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
Donald K. Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, sent cable on behalf of U.S. astronauts to Soviet Academy of Sciences: “We share with the world community deep sorrow for the loss of Cosmonauts Georgy Dobrovolsky, Vladislav Volkov and Viktor Patsayev, and we mourn with all the Russian people the deaths of three brave countrymen.” (Reuters, B Sun, 7/1/71, A2; msc pio)
Newspaper editorials commented on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: Chicago Tribune: “Any one of a million things could have gone wrong, because there are a million things that have had to go right for each Soviet and American success in space. It is no discredit to Russian scientists that something went wrong at the last moment. It is testimony to the good fortune and skill and care of the United States space program that something of this kind hasn’t happened yet to us.” (C Trib, 7/1/71) Christian Science Monitor:	. . those men who fly such missions are taking the risk for the aspirations of mankind to break the limitations of earth’s gravitational and atmospheric fields. They depend on the accumulating technological knowledge of mankind to protect them. As a result, the Soyuz 11 event argues the more determinedly that nations—for the moment chiefly the United States and the Soviet Union—should share their space research efforts.” (CSM, 7/1/71) Washington Post: “The special sorrow that must be felt at this event does not proceed from their numbers—three deaths next to, say, thousands among the world’s more recently savaged refugees. Nor does it proceed alone from their conspicuous bravery, their willingness to take the ultimate risk in pursuit of a national mission: daily, men in combat make the same commitment and do so minus the glory and unambiguous sense of purpose that cosmonauts and astronauts share. So it is more than the death of three men on a high risk venture that must move the earthbound to a special sorrow: it is the death of these men in pursuit of the ultimate adventure, exploration of the outer limits of human knowledge and endurance—and beyond.” (W Post, 7/1/71) New York Times: “. . . it should be apparent that the staggering dangers of space can be met most effectively by mobilizing all the knowledge and talent available irrespective of nationality. It is time to abandon the wasteful irrationality of prestige-motivated competition. The real lesson of this tragedy is . . . that space exploration ought to be a cooperative endeavor of all nations.” (NYT, 7/1/71) Baltimore Sun: “The three cosmonauts lived in space for almost 23 days, and by all indications the station’s operation came up to its designers’ hopes. Only in the final brief stage, a stage often successful before, did disaster intervene. It is tragedy, but it is not defeat.” (B Sun, 7/1/71)
Astronaut-geologist Harrison H. Schmitt praised Apollo 15 astronauts in msc briefing for their completion of eva geological activities: “I don’t think there is any question that we had a fantastic exploration mission. There’s just no question in my mind we sent two very competent observational scientists to the moon.” Samples collected, Schmitt said, “sounded very much like . . . crystalline rocks . . . that may well, and I emphasize may . . . represent the early lunar crust. I am not sure until we see the samples that we’re much closer to understanding the origin of the rille than when we started, except that there probably are some origin theories that can be eliminated now. “I think that the net result of the mission was to indicate that our preliminary thinking about the moon . . . still looks like a valid picture, it’s a valid foundation [on] which to attempt to further select sites and to further approach the analysis of rocks and soils that are brought back.” (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 8/4/71, A6)
Twin eight-cent stamps commemorating decade of U.S. achievement in space were issued during ceremonies at ksc, msc, and msfc in conjunction with Apollo 15 mission. Stamps, depicting ApoUo 15 lunar landing and lrv carrying Apollo 15 astronauts, later went on sale throughout U.S. (msfc Release 71-132; NYT, 7/18/71, 24; W Star, 8/1/71, B7; msfc pao)
aec announced it was developing plutonium-fueled water recovery and waste management system for crew on extended space flights. Device converted liquid wastes into sterile drinking water by high-temperature processing and disposed of nonmetallic cabin wastes by incineration. System would meet needs of four astronauts for up to 180 days, (aec Release 0-47)
At Paris Air Show Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa met in Soviet Pavilion with Vostok 4 Cosmonaut Pavel R. Popovich and Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Andrian G. Nikolayev. Astronauts saw models of Baykonur launch complex, Vostok 1, and Soyuz spacecraft; examined display devoted to 10th anniversary of first space flight by Yuri A. Gagarin on April 12, 1961; ascended to Soyuz cm; and admired Lunokhod 1 lunar vehicle and Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft that had returned lunar samples to earth. Later astronauts and cosmonauts went to U.S. Pavilion where cosmonauts were shown Apollo 12 spacecraft and other exhibits. Cosmonauts presented astronauts with model of Soyuz spacecraft; astronauts reciprocated with small Soviet flag they had carried to moon aboard Apollo 14 and NASA astronaut badges. (fbis-Sov-7 1-108, 6/4/71, FI; NYT, 6/3/71, 41)
Cosmic ray tracks found in helmets of Apollo astronauts had indicated that exposure during space mission was sufficient to damage certain nonreplaceable cells on long flights, General Electric R&D Center team reported in Science. On two-year mission, fraction of cells killed could rise to 0.12% in cerebral cortex, 0.05% in retina, and more than 1.5% for giant cells. Proportions might be “highly worrisome, since additional safe shielding would impose important weight considerations on spacecraft design.” (Comstock, Fleischer, et al., Science, 4/9/71, 154r-6)
Return of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to active service with usaf in July 1971 was announced by Gen. John D. Ryan, usaf Chief of Staff. Col. Aldrin would assume command of AFSc’s Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards AFB, Calif. He had joined NASA in January 1964 as astronaut trainee after serving with usaf in Germany and Korea. He held B.S. degree from U.S. Military Academy and Sc.D. degree from mit. (nasa Special Release; dod Release 45-71)
Heart problems encountered by Apollo 15 astronauts necessitated changes in diet and exercise regimen for Apollo 16 astronauts, Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said in speech before annual clinical meeting of American College of Surgeons in Atlantic City, N.J. All three Apollo 15 astronauts had experienced drops in potassium levels during July 26-Aug. 7 mission. Astronaut James B. Irwin had developed cardiac arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat) for one minute after he returned to CM from lunar surface and ventricular contractions (premature heartbeats) for following hour. Astronaut David R. Scott also had developed cardiac contractions during mission. Because of findings, first Apollo 16 eva would be shortened, astronauts would rest full eight hours between moonwalks, and more potassium would be added to Apollo 16 diet. (McGehan, B Sun, 10/19/71, A5)
First flight model lrv had begun six-week acceptance testing by Boeing Co. preliminary to scheduled delivery to NASA on April 1, NASA announced. Model would transport two astronauts on three extravehicular traverses during Apollo 15 mission in July. Second lrv flight model, being built at Boeing, was scheduled for testing in last week of March and for April delivery. Third model was scheduled for May delivery. (nasa Release 71—25)
President Nixon sent individual messages from Caneel Ray, Virgin Islands, wishing success to Apollo 14 astronauts Alan R. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa on eve of launch. Message to Shepard said: “The courage and determination you have displayed in coming back against such great odds to fly again have earned our unanimous admiration at home and abroad. That this important mission should be entrusted to our Nation’s first man in space makes us especially proud and confident in its success.” (PD, 2/8/71, 151)
Ashes of Soyuz 11 Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav N.	Volkov, and Viktor I. Patsayev, killed during reentry from June 6— 30 mission, were buried in Kremlin Wall in Moscow’s Red Square. Military funeral, climaxing national day of mourning, was watched by millions of TV viewers and attended by leading Soviet and foreign officials and thousands of other onlookers. Condolences were sent by world leaders. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford represented President Nixon at funeral. Eulogy at funeral was presented by Andrey P. Kirilenko, head of funeral commission: “On a small island of the motherland traveling at a fantastic speed across the expanses of the universe they were filled with courage and the conviction that the tasks of the party and people would be fulfilled; and they fulfilled these tasks, successfully completing a complex and varied program of scientific research and technical experiments. The results of their observations are invaluable for science, for the future of space technology, for mankind. For 24 days we saw the valorous cosmonauts on the television screens and listened to their voices. With unbated attention we followed their work. Millions of people, as it were, became intimately linked with the heroes of the cosmos. We all impatiently awaited the cosmonauts’ safe return to home territory. Their lives tragically came to an end when the long cosmic journey was close to completion.” Letter from 19 surviving cosmonauts printed in Pravda said: “Today we are paying the last tribute to our talented and courageous comrades. There is not only grief in our hearts, but also pride for what they have done for the homeland in outer space. We know that our road is a difficult and thorny one, but we never doubted the correctness of our choice and were always ready for any difficult flight. We express firm confidence that what happened cannot stop the further development and perfection of space engineering and man’s striving for space, striving for knowledge of the mysteries of the universe.” (fbis-Sov-129-3, 7/6/71, LI; Kingston, Canada, Whig-Standard, 7/2/71,1; AP, W Star, 7/1/71, A2)
At Apollo 15 press briefing in Washington, D.C., Astronaut Alfred M. Worden, CM pilot, described planned activities in lunar orbit, including first “working walk” in space. At 320 000 km (200 000 mi) from earth on return journey from moon, he would move outside cm, hand-walk on 7.6-m (25-ft) tether along rail, and open bay in SM to retrieve two canisters of film used to photograph moon while spacecraft was in lunar orbit. It was necessary to retrieve film before SM was jettisoned 160 km (100 mi) from earth before cm’s reentry. Worden said one hour had been allotted to space walk but underwater practice had indicated retrievals could be completed in 20 min. Two roundtrips from cm to SM were necessary because only one canister could be carried at a time. First canister would weigh 36.3 kg (80 lbs) and hold 2000 m (6700 ft) of film, including more than 1600 exposures of lunar surface taken from 113-km (70-mi) lunar orbit. Photos would be enlarged on earth to compose blowup 15.2 m (50 ft) wide and 160 km (100 mi) long showing details on lunar surface as small as 1.5 m (5 ft) in diameter, nasa hoped these would include photo of UEtv. Second canister would weight 3.6 kg (8 lbs) and hold 1100 m (3600 ft) of film used in mapping camera. While Worden retrieved cannisters, cm’s hatch would be opened. Astronaut James B. Irwin would guide Worden along tether and Astronaut David R. Scott would stow canisters when Worden passed them through hatch. Worden told press, “We’re going to be doing something out there, not just testing out an engineering concept or working out a procedure to do something.” (Transcript)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 15 astronauts to extend good wishes on eve of launch. (PD, 8/2/71,1099)
NASA released 9 color photos, 14 black-and-white photos, and segment of 16-mm film taken during Apollo 14 mission. Pictures showed lm, footprints, tire tracks, Astronauts Shepard and Mitchell during eva, American flag on surface, and large boulders. (AP, W Star, 2/14/71, A3)
nasa announced assignments within msc Flight Crew Operations Directorate: Apollo 10 Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had been named Deputy Director and Apollo 14 Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would resume duties as Chief of Astronaut Office. Stafford also would assist Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, in technical matters related to flight crew activities. Post of Deputy Director had previously been vacant, (nasa Release 71—116)
NASA test pilots Stuart M. Present, age 41, and Mark C. Heath, age 37, were killed when their T-38 aircraft crashed on landing at Matagorda Island off coast of Texas. Radar contact was lost during third instrument approach to landing strip while fog bank was moving in. Pilots were checking out T—38 for use by astronauts to maintain flight proficiency. (msc Release 72-20)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden participated in pregame pageant at 1972 Orange Bowl Classic football game in Miami. Pageant, “The First Decade,” was dedicated to U.S. space program. (NASA Activities, 2/15/72, 35) January 2:	Research in U.S. was shifting from pure to practical, Thomas O’Toole wrote in Washington Post. “Changes that stress practicality have already been made to parts of U.S. science, but they’re scarcely detectable against the $16 billion the federal government spends every year to support U.S. science and technology. One of the few programs of any size begun by the Nixon administration is a $49 million project at the National Science Foundation code-named rann—for Research Applied to National Needs, rann supports a host of small programs aimed at improving things like subways, cancer treatment, earthquake forecasts and sewers.” Changes within NASA required “little new money, but they serve to spotlight the emphasis the Nixon administration places on the practical goals of science. In the last six months NASA has taken on study projects from the Departments of Commerce, Interior, and Transportation— none of which involves space exploration. The space agency also has a contract from the National Science Foundation to investigate the use of solar cells (used on most unmanned spacecraft) to electrify homes and buildings. It has another contract from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to look into ways an apartment complex might recycle its sewage and water the way future astronauts will do inside their spacecraft.” (W Post, 1/3/72, Al) 9-12 in experiments, demonstrations, or activities to be performed by astronauts during 1973 Skylab missions. NASA would select 25 proposals on basis of compatibility with Skylab requirements. Selectees and their teachers would attend Skylab Educational Conference and award presentation at Kennedy Space Center at Skylab launch time. NASA would build required hardware in consultation with students. Regional and national selectees would be announced in April, (nasa Release 72-1)
U.S. Postal Service officials had been “somewhat upset” by reports that Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden had taken 400 unauthorized covers—stamped envelopes with postal markings—to moon, Washington Sunday Star reported. German philatelic magazines had reported that Herman E. Sieger, German stamp dealer, had sold 100 Apollo 15 covers at 4850 German marks each for total $150 350 at official exchange rate. Under NASA regulations, astronauts had been permitted to carry on mission small mementos of flight for friends and relatives but not for sale. Official “moon mail” covers were distributed to purchasers by U.S. Postal Service. Specially struck medals had been carried on several Apollo missions and later sold to public through Government channels. NASA officials had identified unidentified “friend of crew now in Germany” as link between Apollo 15 astronauts and German dealer. Friend had told dealer that 20 covers had gone to astronauts’ friends and relatives; remaining covers had been turned over to NASA management. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, said that no member of crew had profited directly or indirectly from covers sold. (Faries, W Star, 6/18/72, 1)
Apollo 16 astronauts were honored with luncheon and hour-long ceremony at Kennedy Space Center. Astronauts greeted KSC employees who had worked to make mission successful. (O Sen, 5/18/72; KSC pao)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 16: While space program had been “worth the money,” it was “just a well that this is the next to last manned mission; the most promise henceforth will be in earth-orbital projects. The Soviets appear to be investing much more heavily in those than the United States.” (W Star, 4/15/72, A4) April 15—16:	Wallops Station held open house as part of joint program of Federal activities. Displays included moon rock and Apollo spacesuit. Television set was available for visitors to watch Apollo 16 launch on April 16. (Wallops Release 72-5) Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 175.9km (109.3-mi) apogee and 166.7-km (103.6-mi) perigee. Insertion into trajectory toward moon was achieved at 2:34 get in spite of minor anomalies—leak in instrument unit (iu) temperature control system’s gaseous nitrogen bottle pressure and malfunction of S—IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) helium regulators, which caused continuous venting. CSM separation from Lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:05 GET and docking with LM was shown on color TV for 18 min. First S-1VB APS burn was near nominal, but because of helium depletion and potential trajectory disturbances, second bum was not made and S-IVB lunar impact operations were terminated. Tracking of stage ended at 27:09 get when IU signal was lost. S-IVB impacted lunar surface at 75:08 get (4:02 pm EST April 19) at point estimated to be 1.8° north latitude and 23.3° west longitude. Impact was detected by seismometers at Apollo 12, 14, and 15 sites. Unexplained light-colored particles streaming from LM close-out panel during docking were reported by crew at 7:18 GET. Young and Duke entered lm, powered up, and found all systems normal. Grasslike particles, shown on cm TV, were later identified as shredded thermal paint, but degraded thermal protection was not expected to affect LM operations. First midcourse correction (MCC—1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Electrophoresis demonstration began on schedule at 25:05 get and appeared to be successful, from crew’s description of reaction of charged particles in liquid. Ultraviolet (uv) photographs of earth from 107 300 km (66 700 mi) and 216 600 km (134 600 mi) were taken as planned. Duke reported “spectacular” view of half earth from 201 000-km (125 000-mi) altitude when he could see sun shining on only half of planet. During MCC-2, made at 30:39 get, services propulsion system (sps) tank pressure anomaly that had occurred earlier in mission was tracked and minor leak in transducer reference cavity was located. Procedures were sent to crew to account for transducer reading. Visual light flash experiment was started about two hours late, at 49:10 get, because of problem in aligning spacecraft. Duke counted 70 white, instantaneous light flashes that left no after-glow, uv photography of earth at 327 800 km (203 700 mi) was completed as planned. Young and Duke entered lm at 53:50 get for two-hour checkout of LM systems. All system checks were nominal. Scientific instrument module (sim) door jettisoned at 69:59 get. csm—lm undocking and separation maneuver was conducted on schedule at 96:14 get. When Young and Duke came from behind moon in lm, Duke told Mission Control his helmet was full of orange juice. Duke’s microphone apparently had become entangled with tube through which he drank juice stored in his spacesuit. “Every time I turn my head I get orange juice. It’s delicious . . . hut it’s better in your mouth than floating around the cockpit. I’ve already had an orange shampoo.” When Mattingly came from behind moon in csm he reported he had not conducted circularization burn because of malfunction in SPS yaw gimbal servo loop. While flight controllers evaluated problem, LM-powered descent-initiate maneuver was delayed, and LM and CSM maneuvered into station-keeping mode prepared to dock or continue landing procedures. Analysis of problem identified malfunction in secondary circuit that would not preclude lunar landing. Second separation maneuver by CSM with RCS burn was performed and LM began descent to moon on 16th revolution. LM Orion touched down in moon’s Descartes region 230 m (755 ft) northwest of planned target point at 104:30 GET (9:23 pm EST April 20). “Wow, down. Old Orion is finally here, Houston. Fantastic,” Duke exclaimed. “All we’ve got to do is jump out the hatch and we’ve got plenty of rocks.” Duke and Young said site was rolling country surrounded by mountains and covered with big boulders. Sunlight was so bright it washed out moon’s colors and made lunar surface appear white. Since LM had stayed in lunar orbit six hours longer than planned it was powered down to conserve electrical power and first extravehicular activity (EVA-1) was rescheduled to follow sleep period. EVA-1 began at 119:05 get (11:59 am est April 21). Young climbed down ladder and stepped onto lunar surface. “Okay, Cayley Plains,” he said, “Apollo 16 is gonna change your image.” Duke followed and astronauts began deploying experiments. Because of problems with LM antenna astronauts’ first steps on moon—for first time—were not beamed back to earth. Once Young and Duke set up portable antenna, TV signal and communication with ground controllers were received clearly on earth. TV pictures showed bleak, pale surface resembling Apollo 15 site, with flat-topped Smoky Mountain to north and Stone Mountain to south. Astronauts said site was rockier, more hilly, and more cratered than previous landing sites. Soil was firm, with rocks scattered over 30% of the surface and small craters covering 70%. During deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) Young tripped over heat flow experiment (hfe) cable, pulling it from connector after Duke had drilled first bore hole. Mission Control later developed way to repair $1.2-million experiment, but procedure was not used because it would have been too complex and too time consuming and included some risk to other ALSEP components. U.S. flag and remaining ALSEP components were deployed successfully and functioned nominally. Crew deployed lrv and found ampere readings for battery No. 2 off-scale low and rear steering inoperable. About 40 min later, after loading, all meters and rear steering operated properly and LRV performed nominally throughout remainder of EVA. Young and Duke explored Flag, Spook, Plum, and Buster Craters and collected 20 kg (44 lbs) of samples, including number of white rocks. One crystalline rock coated with bluish glass appeared to have same texture as anorthosite “Genesis rock” collected on Apollo 15 mission; another was pure white. Some were flecked with green and black glass, some were black and gray, and one weighed about 6% kg (14 lbs). EVA-1 terminated at 126:16 get after 7 hrs 11 min 11 sec. After resting inside LM and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:51 get (11:33 am est April 22). They explored Survey Ridge and Stone Mountain and said ridge was pockmarked with small, subdued craters, most about one meter {three feet) wide and some containing smaller craters within main crater. Area around South Ray Crater was strewn with sharp boulders and resembled crater in Nevada where astronauts had trained. Young and Duke turned on lrv TV so viewers could watch them walking and collecting samples high up on slope of Stone Mountain. They reported seeing more of previously discovered white soil under gray surface layers and said soil was very loosely consolidated. While ascending ridge and traversing very rocky terrain, LRV rear wheels failed to respond at full throttle, lrv continued to move, hut front wheels were digging in. Troubleshooting procedures identified mismatch of power mode switching. After change in switch configuration lrv worked properly. Astronauts took core samples and collected rocks that appeared to be volcanic, a greenish rock shaped like a snake’s head, and pure crystalline rocks. EVA was televised in color with lrv camera and was extended 20 min. During crew’s return to LM, 5-cm (2-in) portion of Young’s portable life support system (plss) antenna broke off, causing 15- to 18-db drop in signal strength. EVA—2 ended at 150:14 get after 7 hrs 23 min 26 sec. Third eva began 30 min early at 165:45 get (10:27 am est April 23)	to allow additional time near North Ray Crater and two other stations. Astronauts chipped off samples from enormous basalt rock the size of a house. All planned activities were accomplished, but astronauts had trouble configuring cosmic ray detector for stowage and return to earth, lrv covered 9% km (6 mi) and reached 17 km per hr (11 mph) going down 15° slope. TV coverage was excellent throughout eva. Total EVA-3 time was 5 hrs 40 min 14 sec—bringing total eva time to 20 hrs 14 min 54 sec and total distance traversed to 27.1 km (16.8 mi). While LM was on moon, Mattingly, orbiting moon in Casper, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. He radioed information to geologists at Mission Control to help them plan EVA—3 exploration of Stone Mountain and determine best way to approach North Ray Crater. He located radioactive hot spot on eastern edge of Ocean of Storms south of Apollo 14 landing site and gamma spectrometer identified thorium, potassium, and uranium. Mattingly also discovered, on far side of moon, volcanic lava flows that resembled maria flows and spilled out over northeast rim of crater high in mountains near lunar equator. Two areas resembled volcanic flows around Flagstaff, Ariz., where crew had trained. Many large basins on moon’s far side appeared to be covered with same kind of material that covered area around Apollo 16 site. Young and Duke depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 96.6 kg (213 lbs) of lunar samples at 175:44 get (8:26 pm est April 24). Liftoff was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully and LM crew transferred samples, film, and equipment to CSM. For first time docking was not seen on TV, because LM steerable antenna was inoperable. LM jettison was delayed one day so that astronauts could rest. After LM jettison at 195:12 GET, LM lost altitude and began tumbling, apparently because circuit breaker in attitude-and-translation-controller assembly’s primary guidance and navigation system had accidentally been left open. LM ascent stage remained in lunar orbit and was expected to impact lunar surface in about one year. Boom that carried instrument to measure atmosphere of moon was jettisoned because it would not retract and might have broken off. Orbit-shaping maneuvers were canceled to avoid firing of SPS because of degraded backup SPS thrust vector control. Scientific Subsatellite was launched at 196:14 get (4:56 est April 24)	into lunar orbit with 123.3-km (76.6-mi) apolune and 97.9-km (60.8-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 40-kg (90-lb) satellite 77 cm long and 36 cm in diameter (30 x 14 in) carried three experiments. Subsatellite extended three 1%-m (5-ft) booms, two with magnetometer sensors to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and third for stabilization. Spacecraft also carried particle shadows and boundary layer experiment to collect data on plasmas and solar flares and S-band transponder to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Expected lifetime was 6 to 9 mos—shorter than 12 mos planned because shaping burn to optimize orbit had not been performed—but Subsatellite crashed into moon May 29. Transearth injection maneuver at 200:33 get put CSM on trajectory for earth after 114 hrs 5 min (65 revolutions) in lunar orbit. April 25-27:	Good-quality TV pictures of receding moon from inside CM and of lunar surface from LRV on moon were transmitted between 227 and 229 get. At 243:35 get (3:43 pm est April 25) Mattingly left CSM for inflight EVA to retrieve panoramic and mapping camera film cassettes from SIM on SM. Mattingly made two trips, during which he observed condition of instruments, reported that insulation paint near rocket nozzle was blistered, and deployed and exposed microbial ecological evaluation device (meed) experiment for 10 min. He reentered CSM after 1 hr 24 min. Scheduled TV press conference began at 268:13 GET and ended at 268:31 GET. Astronauts briefly described moon’s far side, including crater Guyot, which seemed to be so full of material that it overflowed and spilled down side of the crater. CM separated from SM at 290:08 GET, 15 min before entry interface at 121900-m (400 000-ft) altitude. Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and CM splashed down and flipped upside-down in mid-Pacific about 5 km (3 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 2:44 pm EST April 27, after 11-day 2-hr (265-hr 51-min) mission. After flipping spacecraft upright by inflating air bags, astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, left CM and were carried by helicopter to biomed area on recovery ship for postflight examinations. After being declared in excellent condition, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. Young had lost 3% kg (7% lbs); Mattingly, 3 kg (6V2 lbs); and Duke, 2% kg (5% lbs), but all were “euphoric, hungry and thirsty, and walking well.” CM was retrieved and placed in dolly on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 16 objectives: to make selenologi-cal survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Descartes region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased EVA operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for lack of rate feedback in thrust vector control and yaw oscillations that delayed lunar landing, caused revision of lunar surface activities, and necessitated end of mission one day earlier than planned. All anomalies were quickly analyzed and resolved or compensated for by workaround procedures developed to permit mission to continue. Flight crew performance was excellent. Minor errors made by crew were attributed to fatigue and did not preclude mission success. Mission was officially judged a success. Accomplishments included largest payload (34 518 kg; 76100 lbs) placed in lunar orbit, first cosmic ray detector deployed on lunar surface, first use of far-UV camera on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (71 hrs 14 min), longest lunar surface EVA (20 hrs 15 min), and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth (96.6 kg; 213 lbs). In addition, astronauts returned 3793.5 m (12 446 ft) of exposed film used on lunar surface and in lunar orbit. Apollo 16 was 13th Apollo mission to date, 10th manned Apollo mission, and 5th successful manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 15 had been conducted July 26-Aug. 7, 1971. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-64K; NYT, 4/16-30/72; W Post, 4/16-28/72; W Star, 4/16-28/72; B Sun, 4/18/72, Al; AP, New Haven Register, 4/21/72) April 16:	Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko—first Soviet dignitary to accept invitation to watch Apollo launch—described his reaction to launch to press at Kennedy Space Center. “It was beautiful, it was poetry. It was a great impression.” Yevtushenko said he had been even more impressed on his midnight visit to the floodlit launch pad with astronaut David R. Scott, “It’s really a beautiful show, this white tender body of a rocket, supported by the clumsy but sometimes tender hands of the red gantry tower. I absolutely had the feeling of one big brother embracing his sister before a long way, a long road. It was wonderful. Silence, not people. No press. Nothing. The sky, the ground, the rocket. It was so beautiful.” (Witkin, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)
Soviet news agency Tass reported completion of Polar Morning—joint U.S.S.R. and France experiment at E. T. Krenkel Hydrometeorological Observatory in Arctic. During three-month expedition, series of meteorological rockets 'had carried Soviet and French payloads to altitudes between 90 and 180 km (56 and 112 mi) during period of transition from winter to summer and from polar night to polar day. Data were obtained on atmospheric temperature, wind speed and direction, cloud formations, corpuscular radiation, and solar activity. (FBIS-Sov, 6/16/72, LI) June 15:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Apollo 16 Astronauts Charles M. Duke, Jr., John W. Young, and Thomas K. Mattingly II met with President Nixon at White House to discuss April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission and joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Following discussion Dr. Fletcher and astronauts held press conference. Dr. Fletcher said President was “very pleased” with progress made toward joint mission. “The President particularly wanted to emphasize that . . . this is only the beginning of what he conceives as a long association with the Soviet Union in many other areas of space cooperation. ... we are busy working on other kinds of things that we can do together . . . perhaps through the turn of the century, doing things together for economic reasons and because he feels strongly that the international aspect of this is important in improving relationships. If we can do this together, we can do other things together.” President also emphasized worldwide space cooperation. As areas for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in future, Dr. Fletcher thought “the ones we can be sure of” were “the cooperative program on Mars [and] a new cooperative program on Venus, where we explore the upper atmosphere and the entire atmosphere and they explore the surface. We are going to be doing that together.” (Other nasa officials explained later these would be coordinated efforts rather than joint missions.) July meeting of principals at Manned Spacecraft Center would “iron out the management” of joint docking mission. Astronaut Young said that “real problem” was communication; “once we solve that problem we can prove that we can work together in a lot of other areas besides.” Dr. Fletcher said plans for joint astronaut and cosmonaut training had not been concluded, “but it is going to be absolutely essential that the cosmonauts come over here and train on our equipment and vice versa. That much has been agreed to.” Training program probably would start “within about a year.” Dr. Fletcher summed up progress made on joint mission since May 24 signing of cooperation agreement: “We have set up the agenda for the meeting which will primarily involve the management aspects. ... We also have, at home, worked out some of the details of the specifications . . . and now are waiting approval.” Perhaps most “spectacular” progress had been “great enthusiasm from Congress for the mission, particularly when we told them this was not going to cost any more money.” (Transcript; WSJ, 6/16/72)	.
NASA had spent $800 000 on North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. study and design of system to permit rendezvous and docking of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in orbit, Associated Press reported. Study envisioned 14-day mission with Apollo command and service module linking special docking module with Salyut orbiting laboratory and Soyuz command spacecraft. NR had received $300 000 for method study and $500 000 for hardware design. No contract had been issued for hardware. (CSM, 2/19/72) February 20:	Tenth anniversary of Friendship 7 mission, first U.S. manned orbital space flight. Piloted by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., Friendship 7 had circled earth three times during 4-hr 55-min mission. Since Glenn’s flight—which was third U.S. manned space flight and sixth flight in Project Mercury—30 U.S. astronauts had flown in space total of 7700 hrs, 51 min—nearly 46 wks. Anniversary was observed at Kennedy Space Center Feb. 22, with 3000 guests and dignitaries invited to attend ceremony at Launch Complex 14, where commemorative plaque was unveiled. Glenn said space flight was “not a pleasure cruise for an individual. It’s research at the highest level and it is difficult to tell where it will go from here.” (ksc Release 37—72; B Sun, 2/23/72)
Apollo 15 Astronaut Alfred M. Worden—who had orbited moon alone in command module while Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin explored lunar surface during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission-—• read number of his space poems before meeting of Poetry Society of Texas. (W News, 2/18/72; Worden)
Richard Witkin commented on clarity of Apollo 16 TV pictures in New York Times article: “The space agency has a $46,008 contract with a three-month-old California company to process signals from the moon and improve the quality of Apollo television reception. The verdict so far from Apollo 16 scientists, the primary beneficiaries, is that the money is being well spent. And there appears to be no quarrel from the viewing public.” What company, Image Transforms, Inc., had been doing to signals from Apollo 16 was being kept confidential—even from NASA—to protect seven existing and two pending patents. Signals were sent from Apollo 16 to Houston and were immediately sent to Image Transform’s North Hollywood, Calif., plant and back before being displayed on NASA screens and being sent to networks. Extra delay was only one fifth second. NASA had arranged image processing so geologists could give astronauts better input on which rocks to collect on moon. Better reception for home TV viewers was side benefit. Process had been developed by Canadian John Lowry, coowner of company. (NYT, 4/22/72, 16; LA Times, 4/23/72)
U.S. press commented on safe April 27 return of Apollo 16 astronauts. New York Times: Mission had “reminded us once again that man’s study of the moon is but in its infancy, and that the great bulk of the moon’s territory is still completely unexplored.” Yet, “only one more manned lunar mission is now scheduled.” As Apollo program ended, “its enormous successes underline the opportunities on the moon and compel all men to lift their eyes to the heavens if they would understand whence and how our species, our world and our solar system came into being.” (NYT, 4/28/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution: “These three strong young men are heros in the truest sense of the term. They have pitted their courage, their physical strength and their minds against a multiplicity of awesome forces which singularly or collectively could totally obliterate them. And they did it for the noblest of reasons—the pursuit of knowledge. If mankind has any claim to greatness, surely it is men like this that give it credence.” Editorial also approved space funding: “It is appropriate to note, just when the next-to-last planned Apollo spacecraft is safely home from the moon, that a few days ago the U.S. House voted approval of a $3,4 billion space agency budget bill. Part of the money will go for the development of a space shuttle, the next logical step in the great adventure of exploring space. The technological advances that are part of the space program have already proven themselves of value here on earth. It’s likely that this kind of extra technical dividend will continue to lead to break-through areas not even related to space.” (Atlanta JC, 4/28/72) San Francisco Examiner:	. . Apollo 16 may well turn out to be the most rewarding of all our moon expeditions. All Americans can take pride in a feat so remarkably compounded of scientific precision and human courage.” (SF Exam, 4/28/72) Chicago Daily News: “With experience, the crews and the thousands of technical experts supporting them from the Earth have learned to correct the minor flaws and juggle the entire intricate timetable when necessary. It seems a pity that much of the experience so dearly gained is soon to be put on the shelf. . . . But the lessons of Apollo can be applied at least in part to the portions of the space program that will remain. . . . And if the pioneering aspects of the space program are about over, its benefits will continue—most spectacularly in the weather and communication satellites, but extending also into more mundane improvements in daily living.” (C Daily News, 4/28/72)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences met in closed session to hear testimony from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 15 astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin on Apollo 15 commercialism. Discussed were selling of stamp covers carried on mission and of replicas of statue “Fallen Astronaut” placed on moon during mission. Following meeting Committee Chairman, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), issued statement: “The testimony of NASA management and of the astronauts was forthright and complete. There is no doubt that certain provisions of NASA’s Standards of Conduct for NASA Employees were violated by the astronauts for which they have been punished. The question of whether or not they violated any law is being examined. No conclusions were reached by the Committee at this meeting and the Committee will decide at a later time what further action it will take.” (CR, 8/3/72, D869; Text)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent detailed medical examination and began technical debriefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Willard Hawkins of msc said astronauts looked good, were “in good physical shape,” and had normal responses. (AP, B Sun, 5/1/72, A3) During April: Soviet Space Program, 1971 was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences as supplement to Senate Document 92-51 [see Jan. 6 and 22], Report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—said 1971 had been peak year in Soviet space activity, with 83 successful launches against 31 for U.S. Soviet successes had included “remarkable performance of the roving lunar vehicle, Lunokhod 1, the versatile manned space station Salyut in which a manned world duration record was set, the arrival in Mars orbit of two very heavy payloads, Mars 2 and 3, and the placing in lunar orbit of the heavy automated laboratory Luna 19.” On negative side had been inability to develop large G booster, death of Soyuz cosmonauts, crash of Luna 18 on moon, failure of first Mars probe, and failure of Mars 2 and 3 landers to carry out planned experiments. U.S.S.R. in 1971 had flown manned-precursor spacecraft “with greater maneuverability than' the present ones, quite possibly testing the advanced propulsion needed for manned lunar flight.” Soviet spokesmen had reiterated commitment to manned space stations, applications satellites, and unmanned planetary exploration throughout solar system. Manned lunar and planetary flights “continued to get mention as a later goal.” U.S.S.R. was expected to launch another Salyut to be visited by Soyuz 12 and 13 for long stay. Thus far U.S.S.R. had given space program “continued verbal support” and had demonstrated “commitment of hardware which has been rising for the 15 years flights have been undertaken.” (Committee Print)
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s resignation from NASA May 26 was “reminder of how many others who forged the American space effort in the last 15 years have left the scene,” New York Times commented. Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was “Ohio businessman with political ambitions”; Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was Eastern Airlines Vice President; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was Univ. of Cincinnatti professor; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb, “who built the Apollo team,” was lawyer-consultant in Washington, D.C.; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, “administrator in charge at the time of the moon landing,” was General Electric Co. Vice President. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, “who gathered the manned space flight team while Dr. von Braun was building the rockets,” had “recently stepped down as director of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.” Others of “space’s first generation have scattered to industry or are close to retirement.” Of original 118 German-born engineers who came to U.S. with Dr. von Braun, only 35 remained at Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, “another of the Peenemuende V-2 rocket Germans,” was msfc director. Six of original team—including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, director of Kennedy Space Center—were still with NASA at other Centers. Of others of team, 22 were in industry, 12 were deceased, 16 had returned to Europe, and 26 had retired. (Wilford, NYT, 5/27/72)
Apollo 17 spacecraft atop Saturn V booster, scheduled for launch toward moon Dec. 6, was rolled to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at Kennedy Space Center. Roll-out was watched by about 5000 persons, including Apollo 17 astronauts. (Benedict, M Her, 8/29/72)
New York Times editorial praised Apollo program in which U.S. had “attained one of its finest hours.” Astronauts had gone to moon in “spirit of peace and selflessness.” They had been “seeking knowledge, not gold or slaves or other wealth. They went there consciously as representatives of all mankind, not as imperialists seeking to bring the moon under the Stars and Stripes. What they learned has been made available to all peoples and all nations without any request for a quid pro quo. In the atmosphere created by Project Apollo—with its constant reminder that what united men is stronger than what divides them—it was easier to reduce cold war tensions, to end the original space race, and to begin genuine international collaboration in cosmic exploration. Project Apollo has helped consecrate the moon and space to the cause of peace and cooperation among all men. This has been a glorious adventure in whose successful outcome the people of America and of the world can properly take pride.” (NYT, 12/17/72)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan piloted lunar landing training vehicle on last flight before vehicle’s retirement. First flight had been Oct. 8, 1968. All prime and backup commanders of lunar landing missions had practiced lunar module landings in lltv at Ellington Air Force Base, Tex. (msc Roundup, 12/8/72, 1)
Declining costs of food for space flights was cited by Manned Spacecraft Center Chief of Food and Nutrition, Dr. Malcolm C. Smith, in interview published by Los Angeles Times. Daily rations for each pre-Apollo astronaut in space cost about $300; first Apollo rations, $190; Apollo 15, $142; and Apollo 16, $75. Costs for packaging, inspection, and preparation accounted for major share of expense. Food itself was donated by manufacturers and producers. About 100 companies participated. (Voltz, LA Times, 2/28/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced appointment of Astronaut David R. Scott as Technical Assistant to Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program, effective immediately. Scott, recently reprimanded for carrying unauthorized postal covers to moon on Apollo 15 mission, succeeded Ronald W. Kubicki, who had been named Manager for Command, Service and Lunar Modules, (msc Release 72-162)
S.S. Stcctendam of Holland-American Line sailed from New York with about 100 passengers for cruise advertised as “Voyage Beyond Apollo.” Itinerary included Cape Kennedy for close-up view of Apollo 17 launch, scheduled for Dec. 6. Passengers included novelists Norman Mailer and Katherine Anne Porter, science writer Isaac Asimov, and Northeastern Univ. physicist Dr. Robert D. Enzmann. Dr. Wernher von Braun—Fairchild Industries, Inc., Vice President and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator—and former astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell and science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, who had been advertised as participants in space seminars aboard ship, did not appear. (Buckley, NYT, 12/12/72, 43)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director for Life Sciences, discussed spinoff of nasa biomedical research in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Ames Research Center (arc) was evaluating changes in lung tissue of coal miners in collaboration with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare to pinpoint possible damage to astronauts’ lungs from particulate contaminants in atmosphere. Study results suggested “cell destruction can be induced by release of intracellular digestive enzymes into the cell cytoplasm following penetration of the cells by particles, in the case of coal miners, silicates.” Joint NASA and TJ.S. Bureau of Mines program would develop carbon monoxide detecting system, arc and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture would develop hydroponic system for spacecraft to accelerate plant growth under space flight conditions. “The medical information needed to assure man’s safe journey into and return from space has led to the development of many items of information and equipment of great value to terrestrial medicine.” NASA life sciences program “exemplifies the success which can be achieved by combining the special talents of Government, industry, and university scientists.” Dr. Berry also reported there had been “no findings in the manned space flights to date by the United States or U.S.S.R. that would preclude the commitment of man to longer duration missions. Therefore ... we feel confident in committing man to a 28-day mission.” Apollo 16 and 17 and Skylab experiments would study physiological response of body before commitment to 56-day Skylab mission. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Advanced Missions in omsf, testified on space shuttle orbital systems and advanced missions definition and planning: In areas of payloads, research and applications modules (ram), advanced missions, and advanced development, “principal effort is directed toward developing . . . understanding and planning the use of the shuttle.” In RAM program, “we will be continuing the study of concepts of a family of payload carrier modules suitable for transport in the Shuttle Orbiter cargo bay.” Modules would range from “austere shuttle ‘Sortie Can’ with relatively simple laboratory equipment . . . through more sophisticated, dedicated laboratory and observation facilities, including automated free-flyers serviced by the Shuttle.” Sortie mission using orbiter as platform for short-duration experiments was among most promising shuttle operating modes. Mission would use advantages of shuttle in payload design, development, and operation, and, “for the first time, permit the investigator to accompany his experiment into space.” Sortie missions would be modeled after arc Airborne Research Program in which Convair 990 aircraft was used as airborne laboratory. “The goal in developing procedures for managing the Space Shuttle Sortie Missions will be to retain the relatively simple, flexible and highly responsive aspects of the ‘990’ program.” (Transcript)
NASA spokesman said agency was tightening flight rules for Apollo 17 mission scheduled for Dec. 6, following commercialism of souvenir articles carried on previous missions. Personal preference kits in which astronauts carried articles to distribute to family and friends might be eliminated. (AP, W Star & News, 7/22/72)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “The Apollo missions are still high adventure. And if the firing sequence is now familiar, there was still suspense yesterday as the huge Saturn V rocket engines lifted another brave crew of American astronauts .... But as the thunder faded away . . . there was the same old question every recent space probe has inspired: What is to be the future of U.S. space research when the Apollo missions are completed?” (P Bull, 4/17/72) New York Times: “The Apollo effort began in 1961 in an aura of cold war Soviet-American rivalry. But yesterday the Moscow television news gave the Apollo 16 launch equal time with events in Vietnam. Soviet-American space cooperation—perhaps a prelude to truly international team-work—could help greatly in easing world tensions. It would be an unexpected but welcome by-product of the Apollo program.” (NYT, 4/17/72, 33)
Crew compartment fit and function test of Skylab airlock module (am) and multiple docking adaptor (mda) was completed at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. in St. Louis, Mo. Astronauts had activated am and mda to demonstrate that modules would support all activities planned for Skylab mission in 1973. They worked with experiments, installed and Stowed hardware to verify mechanical and electrical functions, and verified on-orbit operations. Skylab crew members participating in test included Charles Conrad, Jr., Paul J. Weitz, Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, Russell L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Musgrave, Bruce McCandless II, and Dr. William B. Lenoir, (msfc Release 72—72; msfc, Skylab ,Chron, 83)
Congress received Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas Mattingly II. In welcoming speech Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) said, “The trail they took into space has further inspired all of us to reach for greater accomplishments.” Astronauts urged continued support of space program. Astronauts earlier in morning reported preliminary results from April 16-27 lunar landing mission to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Slides shown included first photo showing intensity of ultraviolet light around earth and also aurora belts, including magnetosphere on equator never seen before [see May 12]. They also showed photo of geocorona protecting earth from uv rays from sun. Mattingly said of lunar exploration. “I think as we go further . . . into our exploration of the moon, we’ll find it more and more complex than we suspected it would ever be. In our fondest dreams, I believe we never suspected the hidden treasures that are buried underneath the lunar soil.” (CR, 5/16/72, S7839-40; W Post, 5/17/72, Al; Hearing transcript)
First Skylab command and service module (CSM—116), which would transport astronauts to and from Skylab orbital workshop in 1973, was shipped by aircraft from North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant to Cape Kennedy, Fla., for start of prelaunch operations. Other Skylab segments—including Orbital Workshop, multiple docking adapter, airlock module, and Apollo Telescope Mount —were undergoing final checkout at contractor plants and at Manned Spacecraft Center, (msc Release 72-144)
Soil sample collected by Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., from natural hole beneath 3-m (lO-ft)-high “Shadow Rock” on moon had been found to have characteristic resonance identical to that of sunlit soil near by, Naval Research Laboratory announced. Scientists were agreed that sample had not been in direct sunlight since being buried by rock propelled by ancient meteorite collision creating North Ray Crater on moon, nrl investigators were considering two explanations for similarity between soil under rock and exposed soil. Either North Ray Crater had been formed relatively recently or tens of millions of years of solar heat had not affected characteristic resonance. Either way, experiment had revealed that resonance of North Ray Crater soils probably contained fossil record of thermal and weathering histories of those soils during or immediately after North Ray collision, (nrl Release 53-72—9)
Senate confirmed nomination of Apollo 10 Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford as U.S. Air Force brigadier general. {CR, 2/18/72, S2125)
Apollo 16 astronauts attended state dinner at White House honoring Mexican President Luis Echeverria Alvarez. (PD, 6/19/72, 1060)
Federal Grand Jury in Dallas, Texas, indicted General Dynamics Corp. and four officials for conspiring to defraud Government by charging Air Force for defective parts for F—111 fighter-bomber aircraft. Indictment said defendants had concealed from Air Force unauthorized production procedures by subcontractor Selb Manufacturing Co. Dept, of Justice said defective parts—carry-through plates for center sectioir of wings and longerons or main fuselage braces—had not been turned over to Air Force. (AP, B Sun, 5/31/72, A9) May 31:	NASA announced completion of major preflight verification test of Skylab Workshop at McDonnell Douglas Corp. Huntington Beach, Calif., plant. Two teams of six astronauts each had performed checkout activities in two six-hour shifts daily for three days, activating Workshop to demonstrate that it could support all activities planned for missions. Test was one of last two major tests for Workshop, 14.6 m (48 ft) long, 6.7 m (22 ft) in diameter, and scheduled for launch in early 1973. Flight demonstration would be conducted before spacecraft was shipped to Kennedy Space Center during summer, (nasa Release 72-117)
Federal Aviation Administration announced publication of 1972 edition of National Aviation System (NAS) Ten Year Plan and Policy Summary. Summary detailed FAa’s long-range program for development of balanced airport-airways system to meet projected demand for air transportation through 1982. Plan objectives included: completion of semiautomation of en route air-traffic control facilities; provision of basic automation equipment for radar-equipped terminal facilities and automatic metering and spacing of approaches in medium- and high-density terminal areas; increase in instrument-landing-system (ils)-equipped runways and installation of improved ILS at high-density airports; introduction of microwave ILS; investigation of use of satellite technology for air-traffic control communications, navigation, and surveillance and implementation of satellite communications in oceanic areas; expansion of designated area navigation routes to shorten en route and terminal flight paths; and plans for landing facilities and systems for vertical or short takeoff and landing (v/stol) aircraft. (faa Release 72-63) April 15:	Apollo 16 preflight briefing was held at Kennedy Space Center. Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager James A. McDivitt said Apollo 16 countdown was “probably the smoothest” to date. McDivitt announced that Apollo 16 would be last flight with which he would be associated: “I really don’t have any plans for the future because I’ve really been concentrating on Apollo 16, and while I made the decision that it would probably be a good time for me to leave the program, I have not had time to really sit down . . . [and] think through what my future would be.” Primary reason for leaving program after Apollo 16, rather than after Apollo 17, was so that if change meant move to new location McDivitt’s children could enter new schools at beginning of new school year. McDivitt was Air Force brigadier general and had been commander of Apollo 9 mission (March 3—13, 1969) and command pilot of Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) during seven years as NASA astronaut. (Transcript)
Dept, of Justice Criminal Div. was studying report submitted to it by NASA and transcript of Aug. 3 closed hearing by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Houston Chronicle reported. Study was to determine' whether Apollo 15 astronauts had violated any Federal law in carrying unauthorized stamp covers to moon. Senate Committee spokesman had told Chronicle Committee had no plans for open hearing on incident. (H Chron, 8/25/72)
Edwin E. Aldrin, Apollo 11 astronaut and second man to set foot on the moon, announced he was retiring from Air Force in summer. Col. Aldrin had been Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilots School at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., since he retired from NASA July 1, 1971. He said he was leaving usaf because his 10 yrs with space program had hurt his chances for promotion. (W Post, 1/15/72, A9)
Astronauts’ image was discussed in New York Times Magazine article. Of 73 pilots and scientists selected for astronauts corps only 39 remained active, and corps faced future cuts. Three astronauts had died in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire; five others in aircraft and auto accidents. Of 25 who had left corps, “many have followed the conventional paths of glory into business and Government.” But “in the behavior of others there is more than a touch of the eccentric, and a large dose of trouble, almost a mythological element: the wandering hero back among his tribe, after stealing the sacred fire and grappling with terrifying demons, condemned to ask tough questions.” World might regard some astronauts as “Byrds and Lindberghs of our time.” As space program emphasis shifted, “they may be an endangered species. For the hotshot pilot seems destined to he replaced in the space stations of the near-future with scientists given training of shorter duration for their flight duties.” Astronauts had been “wandering heroes who tried to unite us with their vision of earth as a small ball floating in an oceanic universe, with all men as passengers. But they weren’t really poets, and they flew at a time of bitter earthly quarrels, with many resentful of the price tag on their odyssey.” Like most heroes, “they were magnified versions of all of us, men of great daring and courage whose competitiveness was no doubt fierce, whose outlook was often corporate and even corny, whose ingenuousness was at times profound. But their image as a comforting symbol to Middle America did them an injustice.” (Muson, NYT Magazine, 12/3/72, 37, 142)
San Jose [Calif.] Mercury editorial, commenting that Apollo 16 astronauts were safely on their way home “after a hugely successful exploration of the highlands of the moon,” said: “Space exploration should continue to command a relatively high place in the nation’s list of priorities; five trips to the moon have only served to whet the appetite for more and better knowledge of the earth’s nearest neighbor.” (San Jose Mercury, 4/26/72) April 27:	President Nixon telephoned Apollo 16 astronauts aboard U.S.S. Ticonderoga following splashdown, to offer congratulations on successful completion of mission. He invited astronauts to be special guests at state dinner for Mexican President Luis Echeverria Alvarez in June and said he would nominate L/Cdr Thomas K. Mattingly II (usn) for rank of commander and l/c Charles M. Duke, Jr. (usaf), for rank of colonel. President then issued statement from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “The journey of Apollo 16 has ended, but the contributions of this mission to scientific progress have only begun. Rarely if ever has so much new information been made available to science in such a brief period. As the work of evaluation and analysis goes forward, the impact of Apollo 16 will be felt for many years to come. “On behalf of all Americans, I am pleased to welcome Astronauts Young, Duke, and Mattingly back to earth and to salute them for a job well done. Their skill, their courage, and their enthusiasm have written another proud chapter in the stirring story of mankind’s struggle to unlock the mysteries of the unknown.” White House press officer later said President had asked possibility of promoting Capt. John W. Young to admiral. He was told Capt. Young had received two recent promotions and Navy would not permit third at this time. {PD, 5/1/72, 796; NYT, 4/28/72, 22)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II began three-week preflight quarantine at Kennedy Space .Center to minimize exposure to disease or illness that could delay launch toward moon, scheduled for April 16. (AP, B Sun, 3/28/72, A6)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden and Manned Spacecraft Center Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, were named by National Aeronautic Assn, to receive 1972 Robert J. Collier Trophy May 31. (AP, W Star, 3/22/72, A25)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had designed and built compact shower assembly for use on Skylab earth-orbital missions beginning in 1973. Astronauts would step inside ring on floor and raise fireproof beta cloth curtain on hoop and attach it to ceiling. Flexible hose with push-button shower nozzle could spray 2.8 liters (3 quarts) of water from personal hygiene tank during each bath. Used water would be vacuumed from shower enclosure into disposable bag and deposited in waste tank, (msfc Release 72-38)
Boston Globe editorial commented on Apollo 17 splashdown. It was “little short of astounding. After a trip of about 500,000 miles [800 000 kilometers], the astronauts brought their command module safely home just a half mile [0.08 kilometer] from the planned splashdown point and within one second—repeat, one second—of the time scheduled when it blasted off two weeks ago. It would be unbelievable if it hadn’t happened.” (B Globe, 12/22/72)
Dr. William W. Duke, twin brother of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., replied in letter published by Washington Post to April 26 article by Post columnist Nicholas von Hoffman that criticized astronauts and Apollo 16 mission. “My brother stated publicly that he would go to the moon anonymously. He sought no personal gain. No one will recall the names of these space explorers, but each time one mission is completed, the next is easier. I am sure the second, third, or one hundredth man to sail around the world found it easier than the one preceding. Who is to judge what is to be gained now or one hundred years hence in and from space?” (W Post, 5/10/72, A15) May 10—24:	Committee on Space Research (cospar) held 15th meeting in Madrid. First firm indication of water ice on Mars from photos returned by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) was announced by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Dr. James A. Cutts. He and team had noted that residual south polar cap 320 km (200 mi) wide was unchanged throughout southern summer but was hidden by thin carbon dioxide frost that covered region 3200 km (2000 mi) in diameter during winter. In spring, it appeared that dry ice again evaporated and cap shrank to 320-km zone of water ice. Working sessions on terrestrial planets and outer planets were held by NASA and Soviet scientists to discuss programs for exploration of Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter. Discussions fulfilled recommendation of August 1971 nasa-U.S.S.R. Working Group that planetary exploration be discussed jointly at international colloquia. Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council submitted United States Space Science Program: Report to COSPAR. Report, covering 1971, summarized analyses and observations from experiments on board spacecraft, sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft. (Miles, LA Times, 5/11/72; Text; NASA Int Aff; NASA Release 72—106; W Post, 5/23/72, A10)
Pravda published description by correspondent Pavel Barashev of his flight aboard first serial Tu-144 Soviet supersonic transport aircraft. Aircraft had reached speed of nearly 2500 km per hr (1500 mph). “When the engine started I expected a roar but even when all four of them were working it was unusually quiet in the cabin even for a jet plane.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 8/7/72, LI) August 8:	Skylab medical experiments altitude test (smeat) crew press conference was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronauts Robert L. Crippen, Dr. William E. Thornton, and Karol J. Bobko answered press questions from inside chamber they had entered July 26. Chamber had atmosphere of 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen and pressure of 34 500 newtons per sq m (5 psi). Astronauts said they missed wives, families, and variety of outside life most. They had not experienced any stress from close confinement and had no trouble sleeping, but had recommended minor changes in food, waste collection system, and some medical equipment. Dr. Thornton said he was surprised at crew’s physiological condition: “There has been literally no change worth mentioning during this period, either physiological or psychological.” One ot two items “might have even shown a little improvement. There was a sniffle or two when we came in, and this atmosphere seems to have . . . cleared it up.” Dr. Thornton said $3-million cost of test was justified and was “a very, very small part of what could be considered insurance and success of the Skylab program.” Money being spent on Skylab medical research could build a number of medical institutions with “a great deal of short-term benefits, properly utilized. But . . . what we’re seeing in Skylab, from a medical viewpoint, is the first opportunity to medically study man in space. If the medical scientists that are assigned to Skylab obtain the data that they need and do their job properly, this is literally a building block for space medicine .... Regardless of what happens in the short run . . . the human race is going to be in space more and more as time goes on.” (Transcript)
Skylab medical experiments altitude test (smeat) to collect medical data and evaluate medical equipment hegan at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronauts Robert L. Crippen (commander), Karol J. Bobko (pilot), and Dr. William E. Thornton (science pilot) entered altitude chamber 6 m (20 ft) in diameter with atmosphere 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen at 34 500 newtons per sq m (5 psi), where they would live and work for up to 56 days. Skylab, scheduled for launch in April 1973, would support three-man crews in earth orbit for total of 130 days. (nasa Release 72-131; upi, NYT, 7/27/72,18)
Washington Evening Star article cited results of “intolerable pressure” on astronauts’ domestic life. Of 73 original astronauts, 2 had remained bachelors and 6 had received divorces. Astronauts were away from families on average three out of four weeks. As mission time approached they were away continuously. Danger in training and “almost constant cross-country flying” added to pressures; 8 married astronauts had died in accidents. (Recer, W Star, 4/18/72, Cl)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to walk on moon, was made honorary Freeman in Langholm, Scotland, ancestral home of Armstrong family. Armstrong, now professor of aerospace engineering at Univ. of Cincinnati, had been invited to Langholm by town council after July 20, 1969, moonwalk. (AP, W Star, 3/13/72, A3)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 11487, bill that would authorize sale of land at Kennedy Space Center for Chapel of the Astronauts. (CR, 1/26/72, D28) January 27:	High-speed interferometer (hsi) developed for NASA at Jet Propulsion Laboratory would be used by JPL engineers to record levels of chemical components of Los Angeles smog, NASA announced. California Div. of Highways had requested JPL assistance in monitoring trace constituents of city’s atmosphere to help fight air pollution. Data gathered would also be given to Los Angeles Air Pollution Control District, hsi, designed for use on future NASA spacecraft, could detect five parts of carbon monoxide per billion parts of atmosphere. Instrument would monitor Santa Monica Freeway, particularly during traffic peaks, (nasa Release 72-15)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., successfully completed countdown demonstration test at KSC on board unfueled spacecraft. Final countdown would begin April 10 in preparation for April 16 launch to moon, (ksc Release 55-72)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. space mission scheduled for 1975 would include 48-hr linkup of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and crew exchange, Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov said in report released by Tass. Coyuz spacecraft, manned by two cosmonauts, would be launched first. “In seven and a half hours, Apollo spaceship manned by three astronauts will be launched from Cape Kennedy. In 24 hours, Apollo will approach the Soyuz ship and link up will be made. The system that will be formed will be operated as a single spacecraft. Within two days, spacemen will move from one ship to another, scientific and technical experiments will be made and there will be television transmissions to the earth. At the end of the third day, the spaceships will be undocked and will soon land on their respective territories.” Shatalov said he hoped manned Mars mission before end of 20th century would be international flight—“Possibly it will be the Soviet-American flight.” (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, L2)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin were received by Vice President Boris Bakrac of the Assembly of Croatia and met with President of Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts, Dr. Grga Novak, during two-day visit to Zagreb, Yugoslavia. Astronauts were touring Europe to discuss Apollo 15 mission with scientists. (FBis-Yugoslavia, 2/4/72, 112)
Third anniversary of first manned landing on moon. NASA’s Apollo 11 mission had proved that man could carry out scientific and technological work on another planet and had fulfilled U.S. goal established in 1961 of developing technology to transport man to moon and return him safely to earth within 1960s. Since Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., spent 2 hrs 31 min on moon’s Sea of Tranquility July 20, 1969, NASA had launched five more Apollo missions. Eight men had explored moon at four different sites for 55 hrs 34 min. Four geophysical stations placed on moon were transmitting scientific data, 272 kg (600 lbs) of lunar samples had been brought to earth, 16 different scientific experiments had been conducted on lunar surface 48 times, and 17 different experiments had been conducted in lunar orbit 41 times. Apollo 17, last mission in program, was scheduled for launch Dec. 6. Manned Spacecraft Center expanded regular public open house activities with special Mission Control Center program re-creating radio transmissions between Apollo 11 crew and Mission Control Center during lunar landing, duplicating flight controller displays, and showing motion pictures taken during mission. Neil Armstrong Air and Space Museum in Wapakoneta, Ohio, home of Apollo 11 astronaut who was first man on moon, held informal opening to mark anniversary. President Nixon’s daughter, Tricia N. Cox, presented moon rocks to museum, which would be formally dedicated in early autumn when all exhibits had been completed. (nasa Release 72-144; msc Release 72-151; Wapakoneta Daily News, 6/16/72; H Post, 7/21/72)
New York Times editorial asked, “Which America?” In same week Apollo 17 astronauts fired their spacecraft home from moon, “American pilots fired bombs that broke through the heavens over a peasant nation in Asia. America the ingenious and America the vengeful had both struck.” U.S. and its people were being judged “for what our Government is doing with its mighty technology. Are we now the enemy—the new barbarians?” (NYT, 12/24/72) December 26:	Cosmos 540 was launched from Plesetsk by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 805-km (500.2-mi) apogee, 785-km (487.8-mi) perigee, 74° inclination, and 100.7-min period, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)	#
Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan announced that command module had been named “America” and lunar module “Challenger,” during Apollo 17 press briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. “We have never turned our backs on a challenge and the name The Challenger fits into the theme of what made America what it is today.” Mission scientist, astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, said he was confident that Apollo 17 findings would “help us understand that moon so it can start telling us what happened in the early history of the earth.” (W Post, 11/11/72, A12; Wilford, NYT, 11/12/72, 24)
New York Times editorial commented on discovery by Apollo 17 astronauts of orange dust on moon: Discovery had “astonished the scientific world. Nothing similar had been previously seen on the moon. It is premature, though tempting, to conclude that this is evidence of relatively recent—in geological terms—volcanic activity. Final judgments have to await analysis of this strange material .... Nevertheless, it is already evident that Apollo 17 is turning out to be the most productive of the moon visits; and the probability seems higher than ever that the crew will bring back both the oldest and youngest lunar rocks yet to be found. It is already indisputable that the Taurus-Littrow site was an excellent choice for an Apollo landing since much of the terrain material there is quite different from that found on earlier trips.” (NYT, 12/4/72, 46)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics would sponsor U.S. aerospace industry trade exhibit in Moscow in early spring 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Exhibit would center on air traffic control equipment but probably would include other aviation and avionics gear. U.S.S.R. was expected to purchase $10 million to $20 million worth of equipment but total orders might exceed $1 billion. (Av Wk, 12/18/72, 30) December 19:	Following successful splashdown—after Dec. 7 launch on longest lunar mission—Apollo 17 astronauts were greeted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga by 12 Congressmen. President Nixon telephoned his personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said Apollo program results would “give us such scientific values that we will be required to have another lunar program before the end of the century.” (AP, NYT, 12/20/72, 30; PD, 12/25/72, 1789)
Science article commented on renaming of Jet Propulsion Laboratory in honor of retiring California Congressman: Rep. H. Allen Smith’s closest association with aerospace had come in late 1940s when he was security manager for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. “During his years in the House, Smith distinguished himself as a quiet, unwavering conservative dedicated to economy in government.” He had voted against supersonic transport “and on at least three occasions opposed the space authorization bill, the ultimate wellspring of JPL’s money.” No one had asked JPL, California Institute of Technology, or NASA what Ihey thought of redesignation. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had approved but “was not in a position to object gracefully.” Rep. Miller, too, was retiring and House Committee on Public Works had decided to affix his name to Federal building in Oakland, Calif. Article suggested solution might be “for JPL to acknowledge its new name with a small sign behind a fast-growing evergreen and let time take its course.” (Gillette, Science, 12/15/72, 1178) December 16—January 22, 1973: West Germany’s Aeros Aeronomy Satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 3:25 PST by four-stage, solid-fuel Scout D vehicle. Spacecraft was placed in planned orbit with apogee of 864.4 km (537.1 mi); perigee, 218.1 km (135.5 mi) • period, 95.47 min; and inclination, 96.95°. Primary objective was to place 127-kg (277-lb) payload in nearpolar orbit to measure main aeronomic parameters of upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation in wavelength band of main absorption. By Jan. 22, 1973, all five experiments were performing satisfactorily and spacecraft housekeeping operations were normal, except that problem with synchronization of data rate to spin rate might degrade data from NASA’s neutral atmosphere temperature experiment Satellite, cylinder 71 cm high and 91 cm in diameter (28 by 36 in) with four telemetry antennas, would contribute to understanding of thermal, chemical, and dynamic processes governing atmospheric behavior. Instruments included mass spectrometer, retarding potential analyzer, impedance probe, extreme-ultraviolet spectrometer, and NASA’s neutral atmosphere experiment. December 16:	Apollo 17 surface science press briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center as astronauts headed toward home from moon. Stanford Univ. seismologist Dr. Robert L. Kovach described results to date from lunar seismic profiling experiment. Experiment had recorded impact of lunar module (lm) on lunar surface 9 km (5.6 mi) southwest of landing site “right on target where we wanted it.” Kinetic energy at impact was comparable to “1 ton of tnt going off.” Signal was “very clearly recorded on the geophone array and we’ve acquired an extremely important data point; . . . we’re effectively getting a depth sample down to 3 to 4 kilometers [1.9 to 2.5 miles] in the Moon. And ... we should get some very important information about the underlying highland type materials.” Data point was “in critical distance range to answer one of the mysteries . . . of the shallow Lunar interior. We’ve been very much concerned about the enormous change in physical properties by terrestrial standards, . . . velocity changes by enormous percentage over a very small pressure range.” Data point should provide “answers as to just how these properties are changing.” First two explosive charges deployed had not shown significant differences in subsurface of Apollo 17 landing site and those of Apollo 15 and 16 but Apollo 17 site appeared to be “underlined by definitely more competent materials and they quite probably could be volcanic flows.” Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for passive seismic experiment, said Apollo 17 data, when compared with previous data, suggested possibility of new interpretation of lunar structure. “We do find evidence for lunar crust as we did in the past, but we may have to thin it considerably.” Velocity of seismic waves in crustal material and velocity of material underlying crust might also have to be lowered. “We’re not dealing with pure anorthosite anymore. We’re dealing perhaps with gabbros . . . and so we have ... to review all of the data and to reconsider our interpretations some, not just the seismologist, but the geochemist and geologist, as well.” Dr. Marcus E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, principal investigator for heat flow experiment, said Apollo 17 experiment had “more than doubled” lunar heat flow data to date. “We’ve got a very successful emplacement in the operation of our instrument. It has been perfect.” Lunar surface temperature recorded Dec. 14 had been about 360 K (189°F). At about 15 cm (6 in), it had dropped to 280 K (45°F). At about 65 cm (26 in) temperature dropped to 254 K (—2°F). “Below that depth, the temperature begins to increase again. It’s about 257 degrees [3°F] at the bottom of the probes.” Data indicated that heat flow at Apollo 17 site would resemble that observed at 15 cm (6 in). If so, it would “give support to the kind of growing model of a warmer interior to the Moon” and “would require that there be a total gradient abundance of radioactive isotopes in the Moon as compared to Earth. So, there would be implication here for fundamental difference in composition, between the Moon and the Earth.” Dr. Langseth also reported data from traverse gravimeter experiment had supported thesis that “high gravity anomalies associated with the mare basin—the so called mascons”—probably had been created by slab of basalt or lavas which had flooded into previously excavated basins. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas, principal lunar geology investigator, said Apollo 17 had provided “most exciting few days of my scientific career. This mission is truly the fitting climax to the whole Apollo program. The landing site held great promise that we were going to get a good chance to unravel much of the earlier lunar history as well as the sample and study of what appeared to be very young vulcanism .... And I think this promise was fulfilled.” Orange materials at Shorty Crater had been “a spectacular plus.” Scientists hoped “returned material will tell us that that was young vulcanism in volcanic alteration of Shorty Crater. There’s still a possibility it could be an impact crater, however.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., discussed Dr. Latham’s suggestion that lunar crust might be thinner than originally expected: “I will certainly defend the proposition that the crust is made of a very aluminum plagioclase-rich rocks, . . . anorthosite gabbro or gabbroic anorthosite, . . . far from a basalt. I think that the chemistry of the surface rocks, . . . and the returned rocks bear this out and if the crust is thin, it reduces the likelihood that it is any different composition than what we see at the surface.” (Transcript)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden visited President Nixon at White House to report on their 16-day goodwill tour to Poland and Yugoslavia. (PD, 2/7/72, 196)
Interview with Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Director of Equal Employment Opportunity, was published by Washington Sunday Star. Mrs. Harris had adopted as her philosophy phrase, “We are all fellow astronauts on Spaceship Earth.” She had said, “My position is to make sure the space program is for everybody. We have to get the alienated minorities into every NASA level, especially space exploration.” (Trescott, W Star, 1/9/72, Cl) January 10:	European participation in space shuttle development was discussed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers during press briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. European space officials had released to European industry “fairly extensive study . . . leading to the definition of the tug that the Europeans might build for the shuttle to carry.” Tug was 3rd stage of shuttle transportation system. Myers said NASA had examined three possible areas for European participation: “One would he in elements, physical pieces of the shuttle that would be managed ... as the prime contractor manages a subcontractor. We will expect the prime contractors to Work directly with the European industries in that case.” Europeans would supply money for parts developed by Europe. Second area Was tug. “If the tug were developed, we would expect it to be paid for by the Europeans.” Third area was sortie can, “experimentcarrying device to be carried in the payload compartment,” which would give them “an opportunity to enter into the use of the shuttle very extensively.” European space officials would meet with NASA within two months to respond on interest in participating. Timetable called for selection of industrial contractors in summer 1972, with subsonic and suborbital test flights beginning in 1975, manned orbital tests in 1978, and first fully operational mission by 1980. Site evaluation board would make its next report to NASA within few weeks, and site for shuttle launch and recovery would be selected by spring. One site would be selected initially, with another or others selected later according to program needs. “We don’t see the shuttle as a highly limited operation. And, I think that eventually there will be more than one site.” Location depended on mission. “Today . . . there is a preponderance of due-east missions out of ksc [Kennedy Space Center!, and . . . different azimuths out of the West Coast. We can’t go due east out of the West Coast very well . . . because of the populated areas east . . . and we can’t get as efficient in polar orbits out of Kennedy ... so there is a tendency to ... go to the two coasts. Now whether that really ends up being that way in the shuttle system, we don’t know yet.” (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., was inducted into Aerospace Primus Club of Air Force Systems Command by Gen. George S. Brown, AFSC Commander, in ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, Md. Aldrin, retired Air Force colonel, became 28th member of club restricted to military and civilian members of Air Force who had accomplished significant aerospace firsts. He was recognized for his historic flight to moon as pilot of Apollo 11 lunar module Eagle July 16-24, 1969. (afsc Newsreview, 10/72/16)
National Public Affairs Center for TV began poll of 223 public TV station managers at request of Corp. for Public Broadcasting, to determine response to CPB proposal to show up to 21 hrs of live coverage from moon during Apollo 17 moonwalks Dec. 11, 12, and 13. Washington Post said later that NASA had offered public broadcasting opportunity to cover past Apollo missions but cpb had declined, to avoid conflict with commercial networks. TV coverage of astronauts’ extravehicular activities (eva), however, had been declining. During Apollo 16 mission (April 16-27), American Broadcasting Co. had shown 6 of estimated 21 hrs of eva, National Broadcasting Co. had shown 8 hrs, and Columbia Broadcasting System, 6% hrs. (Carmody, W Post, 11/10/72, Bl)
Belgium released annual Postage Day stamp, depicting Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott postmarking U.S. lunar rover stamp on moon Aug. 2, 1971. (AP, P Bull, 4/23/72) April 23—29:	Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner and Soviet Tu144 supersonic transport were displayed at Hannover Air Show in West Germany. Reportedly they would not appear at U.S. transpo ’72 exposition scheduled to be held at Dulles Airport in Virginia in May. (W Star, 4/30/72, C12) April 24:	Second set of reports by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences Working Groups which met in Moscow Nov. 29 to Dec. 6, 1971, had been approved by NASA and Soviet Academy, NASA announced. Meetings, to define technical requirements for rendezvous and docking of U.S. and U.S.S.R. spacecraft, had not resulted in definite decision to commit either U.S. or U.S.S.R to joint manned space mission. Reports indicated Working Group 1 had completed general documentation on life support systems, coordinate systems, and constraints on spacecraft configuration and had agreed on objectives and preliminary documentation for possible test mission, exchanges on test windows, program elements, and required communications channels. Working Group 2 had listed guidance and control systems and onboard spacecraft equipment to he compatible and had nearly completed documentation on lights, docking targets and contact conditions, control systems, and radio tracking. Working Group 3 had agreed on basic values for compatible docking system, including diameter of tunnel, and to create scale model of docking system that would verify parameters and ensure compatibility in early development stage. (NASA Release 72-88)
Large storage battery at Manned Spacecraft Center exploded, killing one man and seriously injuring another. Battery was near underwater tank where astronauts trained in simulated weightlessness. Training Supervisor Kirby C. Dupree, who was killed, and James E. Scott—both employed by Brown & Root-Northrop—apparently had been performing routine maintenance on the 240-cu-m (64 000-gal) tank. No astronauts were in the huilding. (W Post, 3/1/72, A4; Reuters, NYT, 3/1/72, 24)
Twenty-First Annual Report of the Activities of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, Congress of the United States was transmitted to Congress. Report said U.S. might soon be entirely dependent upon U.S.S.R. and Japan for titanium used in jet aircraft construction. Last titanium plant in U.S.—Reactive Metals, Inc., in Niles, Ohio—had closed Dec. 13. It was third plant to go out of business in 1971 because of lack of titanium market, oversupply of titanium sponge, increased foreign competition, and critical financial losses. U.S. Bureau of Mines later reported that two U.S. titanium plants reopened during February 1972.	(Text; Bureau of Mines pio) February 22:	Apollo 16 press conference was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Manager, said Apollo 16 lunar landing site would consist of volcanic highland material. “The highlands which we are landing on . . . are composed of two types of units. One type is material formed early in lunar history and subsequently fragmented and redistributed by the numerous meteorite impacts which have scarred the lunar highlands. These units are predominantly ejecta deposits now. And on Apollo 15 with the genesis rock we hopefully have sampled some of these early deposits. The second major unit ... is materials which have modified these early deposits by flooding them or building up on top of them predominantly by volcanic processes. The primary objective of Apollo 16 is the exploration and sampling of this lighter type of highland terrain with hopefully a fragment or two of the old original stuff brought in by impact from . . . the old original crust which is probably still exposed down in the lower southern hemisphere.” Dr. M. E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory explained changes in drill design, with joints to permit core samples to be brought out more readily. Dr. H. J. Moore of U.S. Geological Survey described orbital science experiments, including photographic system to determine moon’s geometric shape. Apollo 16 cm would also photograph floor of Alphonsus Crater—where Ranger 9 impacted March 24, 1965—to provide positive identification of Ranger 9’s impact. Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., said astronauts would begin lunar surface extravehicular activity (eva) as soon after landing on moon as they could complete postlanding checkout. They would conduct 7-hr EVA, and reenter LM about 17 hrs after previous sleep period. Crew would conduct three evas On first, primary objective was to deploy Apollo lunar surface experiments package; on second, to sample as high on Descartes and Stone Mountains as possible; and, on third, to reach North Ray Crater. (Transcript)
President Nixon issued memorandum disapproving H.R. 56, bill to establish National Environmental Data System and create environmental centers in each state: “While both these titles sound desirable in theory, they would in reality lead to the duplication of information or would produce results unrelated to real needs and wasteful of talent, resources, and the taxpayers’ money.” {PD, 10/30/72, 1549) October 22:	Construction at United Nations Hq. in New York of “Hall of Fame for all spacemen—those who already have voyaged, or someday will voyage, in outer space” was proposed by Parade magazine. Hall would “underscore our need for international cooperation in space.” Magazine said U.N. Secretary General Kurt M. Waldheim had endorsed proposal because “it is a practice of most of the astronauts to visit the U.N. when they return from their moon flights.” {Parade, 10/22/72, 7)
Apollo 16 astronauts’ electrocardiograms would be transmitted from space to heart specialists at Stanford Univ. and Univ. of Wisconsin if astronauts experienced irregular heartbeats and potassium loss during mission, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Chief of Life Sciences, said in interview. Dr. Berry said he would stop extravehicular activity if Apollo 16 astronauts developed symptoms experienced by Apollo 15 crew. (Altman, NYT, 4/19/72, 1)
Documentary film “Moonwalk One” was reviewed by New York Post. Film traced Apollo 11 lunar landing and first moonwalk by Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong “from Stonehenge to Africa, Cape Kennedy to Houston, to the sun and its mighty flame-storms to camper-sightseers on the Florida shore, to the moon itself and the return.” It was “documentary so vast and so beautiful and fascinating that its opening outside the big commercial theaters is a shocking sin of omission.” Film, made by Francis Thompson Inc., was highlight of “New American Filmmakers Series” at Whitney Museum in New York. (Winsten, NY Post, 11/14/72) November 14^17:	Dept, of Transportation held conference at its Systems center in Cambridge, Mass., to discuss plans for stratospheric observations, laboratory experiments, and computer simulations in program to assess impact of supersonic air traffic on climate and life. Emphasis was on argument by Dr. Harold S. Johnston of Univ. of California at Berkeley and Dr. Paul J. Crutzen of Univ. of Stockholm that nitrogen oxides from supersonic transport exhaust could seriously deplete stratosphere ozone that absorbed much of harmful ultraviolet rays. Some scientists and engineers attending conference had agreed with theory but many had said it was essential to prove theory wrong. Dr. Harold F. Blum of State Univ. of New York at Albany had said that if additional UV got through stratosphere increase in skin cancer would occur, but he could not estimate amount of increase. Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, sst assessment program manager, said if chain reaction in which nitrogen oxides continuously removed ozone according to Johnston-Crutzen theory was very slow effect might escape notice. sst program studies would include use of high-flying U-2 and Concorde supersonic transport aircraft to make stratospheric observations and quick-freeze samples of air in stratosphere for laboratory analysis. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/72, 50; dot pio) November 15:	Apollo 17 astronauts began three-week preflight quarantine at Cape Kennedy while launch crews started final major rocket and spacecraft tests for scheduled Dec. 6 launch. Isolation was to minimize exposure to disease or illness that could delay mission. Week-long rocket and spacecraft tests would duplicate every phase of final countdown. Countdown would start Nov. 30. (AP, B Sun, 10/16/72, A9)
Lunar Nomenclature Committee of International Astronomical Union, meeting in Paris, decided to name lunar crater after internationally known astrophysicist Dr. Charles G. Abbot to honor Abbot’s 100th birthday May 31. Abbot became 13th exception to rule that lunar sites must be named only for persons deceased. Other 12 exceptions were astronauts and cosmonauts. Soviet members of Committee had proposed Abbot’s name in 1967 under mistaken impression he had died. (Casey, W Post, 5/11/72, Cl) May 1:	Ames Research Center C—8A Buffalo augmentor-wing research aircraft completed first flight from Boeing Co. Seattle, Wash., plant. Aircraft, piloted by Boeing test pilot Thomas E. Edmonds and equipped with wing planned for use on short takeoff and landing aircraft, reached 1980-m (6500-ft) altitude during 51-min flight. Primary objectives—■ to functional checkout and evaluate systems operation, aircraft’s structural integrity, and flight characteristics—were achieved. Aircraft would he used in cooperative project between NASA and Canadian Dept, of Industry, Trade and Commerce, (arc Astrogram, 5/11/72, 1; AF Mag, 8/72, 46)
NASA issued technical memorandum “Description, Dissection and Subsampling of Apollo 14 Core Sample 14230,” describing techniques used to preserve lunar sample intact. Techniques—developed originally by Dr. Roald Fryxell of Washington State Univ. to preserve sediments surrounding bones of “Marmes Man,” oldest well-documented human remains in Western Hemisphere—had produced first permanent record of layering in dust that covered lunar surface. Scientists first removed 55 tiny subsamples from core length, working through rubber gloves in sealed nitrogen cabinets to protect samples from earth atmosphere. They then impregnated with resin three successive thin strips of lunar core with all layers intact and grains undisturbed. Stabilized deposits were then mounted on plexiglass as first permanent record of deposits beneath moon’s surface, (nasa Release 72-30; NASA pao) February 16:	nasa announced selection of moon’s Taurus-Littrow region as site for Apollo 17 manned lunar landing in December. Region, named for Taurus Mountains and Littrow Crater and located just beyond southeast edge of Mare Serenitatis (one of largest mascons), had been selected to help fill in major gaps in development model of moon based on data from previous Apollo missions. Lunar Module landing point 20° north’ and 30° east of moon’s center as viewed from earth would be one prime sampling objective. It contained very dark nonmare material believed to have eroded off mountains and volcanic-looking cinder cones which suggested material was explosively produced volcanic ash. One sampling site would be rock slide containing debris that had fallen into valley from high up on 2000-m (7000-ft) mountain. Astronauts would travel over surface on foot and on lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover. They would deploy advanced Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep), containing heat flow experiment similar to that on Apollo 14 and four new experiments, and two new surface traverse experiments not powered by alsep central station. Experiments were traverse gravimeter to measure vibrations in and provide data on subsurface, seismic profiling and surface electrical properties investigations to measure physical properties of lunar interior down to depth of one kilometer (six tenths mile) and indicate subsurface electrical and mechanical properties, tidal gravimeter to study response of moon to earth’s tidal pull and its response to gravity waves, mass spectrometer to measure constituents of lunar atmosphere, and lunar ejecta and meteorite experiment to determine frequency and energy of small meteorites impacting moon. Orbital science payload would include three new experiments: laser lunar sounder would identify electrical properties and layering of lunar crust overflown by spacecraft, infrared scanning radiometer would provide high-resolution thermal map of portions of moon for first time, and far-ultraviolet spectrometer would measure compositional and density variation of lunar atmosphere, (nasa Release 72-33)
Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Paul J. Weitz, and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin —prime crew for first Skylab mission—checked out Skylab airlock module (am) and multiple docking adapter (mda) in vacuum chamber at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co.’s St. Louis, Mo., facility. Crew, wearing pressurized spacesuits, entered chamber and took positions in AM and mda. One hour after pumpdown began, chamber pressure was less than 138 newtons per sq m (0.02 psi)—equal to that at 45 700-m (150 000-ft) altitude. Pressure inside am and mda was held at 34500 newtons per sq m (5 psi), high enough for crew to remove spacesuits and work in constant-wear garments. Crew connected biomedical equipment and sensors for repressurization but did not put on suits, (msc Release 72-176)
Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum completed first year under new Director, former astronaut Michael Collins. Major emphasis was on preparation for new museum to be opened in U.S. Bicentennial year, 1976. Domed planetarium chamber 9 m (30 ft) high was being constructed as laboratory for experimentation and design of programs and equipment for Spacearium in new museum. Museum library was being reorganized to standards of other Smithsonian Institution libraries. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (sao) progress and plans were being assessed against standards recommended by Astronomy Survey Committee of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council [see June 1], (Smithsonian Year 1972, 61, 62)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced it was negotiating parallel contracts for space-walk studies with ltv Aerospace Corp. and Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. Contracts were to investigate emergency, contingency, and normal extravehicular and intravehicular activities by astronauts and protective equipment required. Firm-fixed-fee con' tracts would amount to $126 000 for ltv and $98 511 for Hamilton Standard, (msc Release 73-78)
Astronaut John W. Young had not had “command pilot syndrome”— fastest peak heart rate of crew at launching—when Apollo 16 was launched, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said in interview. “The commander has the greatest responsibility and . . . usually has the fastest rate.” During Apollo 16 launch lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., had fastest peak rate, 130 beats per min. Command module pilot Thomas K. Mattingly II registered 115 heats per min, and Young—who was making fourth space flight and second trip to moon—registered 108 beats per min. Record had been set by Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., whose rate had reached 166 beats per min just before launch of Gemini 11 Sept. 12, 1966. (Altman, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)
Newspapers commented on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement. Wall Street Journal: “Whereas past space efforts have been an extension and symbol of Soviet-American competition, the proposed new effort will attempt to extend and symbolize cooperation.” Question was “whether this change is contrived and doomed to fail as an expression of national needs and attitudes or whether it signifies the dawning of a new era in the progress of man. A case may be made either way. . . .” {WSJ, 5/26/72) Christian Science Monitor saw agreement as “commitment to peace, to friendly relations in the years ahead on the part of the world’s two superpowers.” Agreement meant extension of Apollo program to bridge gap between last Skylab mission in 1973 and 1978 space shuttle flights. “It will mean an estimated 4,400 more jobs in the aerospace industry. It will mean that Soviet space crews will come to the United States for training and vice versa. And once the rendezvous is made televiewers in both countries will be able to watch their astronauts moving from one spacecraft to another and conducting joint scientific experiments.” (CSM, 5/25/72) Miami Herald: “Both sides may learn a bit from each other .... What most people will learn is likely to be more meaningful because emotions are the mainspring of human attitudes and actions. National prestige has been a foremost consideration in space for more than 15 years. Preparation for the joint flight promises to remold the effort into a symbol of international cooperation.” (M Her, 5/26/72) Washington Post: “The promise is that this first docking and the steps that lead to it may be the key to a new coordinated joint effort to explore and exploit those parts of the universe within man’s reach.” If mission was successful, “it ought to be possible for [U.S. and U.S.S.R.] to cooperate on most other aspects of space operations. The benefits to each country from such an arrangement would be great. By curtailing both competition and duplication in space activities, scientists on both sides would be able to do in good time the things that ought to be done without straining the financial resources of their governments nearly as much in the process.” (W Post, 5/26/72) May 27:	Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, said in telephone interview with New York Times that NASA astronaut corps would be cut because it had “three times as many people as are needed.” If all astronauts had stayed in program, many “would just be on dead-end streets. There have been retirements right along, and there will be further reductions. . . . It’s just a fact of life that we have only one Apollo, three Skylab and one ‘ren-dock’ flights ahead of us, and our manpower is over our known requirements by a factor of three.” Of 27 astronauts who had flown on Apollo missions, 12 had already left flying status. As many as 10 astronauts reportedly already had been asked to find other employment as soon as possible, Washington Post said astronaut corps had confirmed. Two had recently resigned— Edgar A. Mitchell and James B. Irwin—and many more of the 43 astronauts remaining were planning resignations. Philip K. Chapman would join staff of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Anthony W. England would join Science and Applications Directorate at msc. Donald L. Holmquest and John S. Bull, both on temporary leave to universities for past year, were also expected to resign. According to one unidentified astronaut, “Slayton really feels that he doesn’t need any more than 15 men” for shuttle and joint Soviet missions. In 1967 and 1968, astronaut total had reached peak of 63 men. (Lyons, NYT, 5/28/72, 1; O’Toole, W Post, 5/28/72, A14)
Envelopes carried to moon aboard Apollo 15 and later sold to stamp dealers had been ordered by Harold G. Collins, Chief of Kennedy Space Center Mission Support Office, Manager John H. Jacobs of Brevard Printing Co. told press. Collins had asked that bill be sent to Hughes Enterprises in Las Vegas, Nev. Associated Press said Collins and NASA officials and astronauts at Manned Spacecraft Center had declined to comment on Jacobs’ statement because matter was under investigation by Dept, of Justice. (AP, W Post, 9/19/72, A3)
Apollo 16 Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II received Distinguished Service Medal and astronaut wings from Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Mattingly was Navy commander, (dod Release 526-72)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced appointment of l/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of National Security Agency, effective Aug. 1. Gen. Phillips, assigned to NASA in 1964, had been Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. until Sept. 1, 1969, when he became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization. He would replace Adm. Noel A. M. Gayler (usn), who would become U.S. commander in chief in Pacific area. (W Star, 4/27/72, A2) April 28:	Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny sent message congratulating President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 16 mission and safe return of astronauts. He asked President to convey “best of wishes to the members of the spaceship crew, courageous cosmonauts John Young, Charles Duke and Thomas Mattingly.” (fbis-Sov, 4/28/72, G2)
Trailer in which NASA formerly quarantined astronauts returning from moon was being used by Air Force Military Airlift Command, St. Louis Post-Dispatch reported. Trailer was positioned at McGuire Air Force Base, N.J., and could be airlifted by Air Force C-141 cargo aircraft to transport patients with communicable diseases. Previously aircraft had to be decontaminated after carrying contagious patients. {St. Louis P-D, 11/26/72)
SNAP-27 radioisotope thermoelectric generator completed third year of continuous operation on lunar surface. Atomic battery had been deployed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts Nov. 19, 1969, to power scientific experiments. SNAP-27, which had one-year life requirement of 63.5 w, was supplying more than 69 w. Generator, developed by Atomic Energy Commission, was fueled with plutonium 238 isotopes, (aec Release P-372)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 15 astronauts’ carrying unauthorized postal covers on mission. Baltimore Sun said their actions in “novel attempt to capitalize” on mission could not be excused. “From the start of the nation’s space program, astronauts have become instant celebrities and in some cases instant millionaires through endorsements, publications and investments. We’re not opposed to a little free enterprise, but the space program, as envisioned by the late President Kennedy, was a noble exercise in exploration not exploitation.” If space program was to be exploited at all, “profits should go back into the national treasury.” (B Sun, 7/14/72, A12) Chicago Tribune: “It is disappointing to realize that man has already tainted the moon with moral pollution, but we are impressed less by the gravity of the crime than by the debasement of the stamp collection business which it reflects. If stamp collectors were more discriminating, and stamp dealers less greedy, the moon might not have been contaminated so soon.” (C Trib, 7/14/72)
French scientist Michel Siffre emerged from cave beneath Edwards Plateau near Del Rio, Tex., after six-month experiment to determine whether human time cycle was product of planetary system or of man’s physiology. Results of experiment sponsored by NASA, French Speleological Institute, and French Defense Ministry would be used to serve astronauts on long-duration missions, jet pilots crossing time zones, and nuclear submarine crews on long cruises. Siffre told news conference that he had achieved 48-hr-day cycle twice, though average daily cycle underground had been 25 hrs. (Anderson, W Post, 9/5/72, A3)
First successful experimental demonstration in U.S. of magnetic levitation system (maglev) was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. maglev—system for suspending vehicle above guideway with power supplied by supercooled magnets—would permit trains to travel at speeds up to 480 km per hr (300 mph) without physical contact with rails or guideway. Test was performed in Menlo Park, Calif., by Stanford Research Institute under contract to Dept, of Transportation, (dot Release 100-72) November 22:	Deputy Director James A. Lovell, Jr., of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Science and Applications Directorate announced intention to retire from space program to press at Msc. As astronaut he had spent more time in space than any other U.S. astronaut. Lovell had been Gemini 4 backup pilot, Gemini 7 pilot, Gemini 9 backup command pilot, Gemini 12 command pilot, Apollo 8 command module pilot, Apollo 11 backup command pilot, and Apollo 13 commander. Lovell told press he was examining offers from New York and Chicago business firms. “This is not something that I would choose to do under other circumstances but . . . there are not enough slots for us guys who want to remain in the operations end of space flight.” Lovell said he would remain with NASA until completion of Apollo 17 mission, (upi, W Post, 10/24/72, A5)
NASA Space Shuttle Technology Conference was held in San Antonio, Tex., in conjunction with 13th Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and Society of Automotive Engineers. Topics discussed included aeroelasticity and loads, structure and liquid interactions, vehicle dynamics test and analysis, thermal protection systems, and structural design. Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was member of panel for high school students that discussed benefits to be derived in space shuttle use. (aiaa Release)
Pan American World Airways’ waiting list for reservations on first commercial flight to moon contained names of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong—first man to walk on moon during July 16-24, 1969, mission—Edwin A. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. List had been closed after 90 000 reservations had been accepted. Pan Am spokesman had said flight would not be possible before 21st century, but most applicants had paid $10 or $25 as reservation fee. (M Her, 11/30/72)
John N. Wilford contrasted U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs in New York Times article: “As American astronauts prepare for another Apollo voyage to the moon . . . their counterparts in the Soviet Union are training for long-duration flights in earth-orbiting laboratories, leaving their own lunar exploration to automatic probes. As the American Pioneer 10 heads for Jupiter, a Soviet spacecraft, Venus 8 is traveling toward a planned softlanding on Venus. As American engineers design a reusable shuttle for ferrying men and satellites into space, the Russians apparently are still trying to develop a giant rocket to give them lifting power as great or greater than the Saturn V. As American launchings run about 30 a year and the space budget is under public attack, the Russians are launching nearly three times as many spacecraft and, if anything, are expanding their space program.” Contrasts had been highlighted in interviews with space officials during Wilford’s month-long visit to U.S.S.R. during March. According to Dr. Boris N. Petrov, director of Soviet Academy of Sciences Intercosmos Branch, “the priorities of the Soviet space program will remain the systematic research of near-earth space with the help of automatic stations, manned spaceships and orbital stations. For the moon and the nearest planets, the priority will continue to be research with the help of automated means.” (NYT, 4/14/72, 10)
Dismantling of Saturn Launch Complexes 34 and 37, sites of Saturn I and IB launches at start of Apollo program, was begun at Kennedy Space Center by Southern Contractors Service. Firm had hid $15 051 for structures built at cost of $147 990 581. Dismantling would he completed within seven months. NASA spokesman had said total of $53 856 403 had been saved in equipment and structures from complexes, “one of the highest returns ever” for such a program. NASA Centers would receive salvaged equipment for active programs. Equipment valued at $5 891 866 would he given to Atomic Energy Commission; Depts. of Commerce, Interior, and Agriculture; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; and universities with Government research grants. Launch control rooms in Launch Complex 34 and 37 blockhouses would be retained in launch configuration for historical and public information purposes. Historical marker outside would inform visitors of past events. Seven Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Complex 34 culminating in Apollo 7, first manned command and service module launch, Oct. 11, 1968. Complex also had been scene of tragic Jan. 27, 1967, fire that took lives of three astronauts. Eight Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Pad 37B, terminating with Apollo 5, first Apollo lunar module launch, Jan. 22, 1968. (M Her, 4/29/72; ksc Release 88-72; ksc Hist Off; ksc memo to NASA Hist Off)
Astronauts Robert L. Crippen, Dr. William E. Thornton, and Karol J. Bobko emerged from Skylab simulator at Manned Spacecraft Center, where they had been isolated since July 26. They had conducted Skylab medical experiments altitude test (smeat) to gather medical data to compare with data from actual missions. Astronauts said that, although they were very glad to be out, confinement had not been as difficult as expected. Astronauts were slightly weaker and their muscles were slightly smaller, but they had experienced no changes that would affect Skylab plans. Crew had been on space food diet during test and would remain on same diet for two weeks while doctors evaluated effects of diet. (AP, B Sun, 9/21/72, A3; AP, C Trib, 9/21/72,1)
Germ-control and dust-purging techniques developed for spacecraft sterilization were being used in St. Luke’s Hospital in Denver, Colo. Below, a surgery team performed a hip-joint replacement in a new clean-room facility that could be folded for storage when not in use. Air was forced in a gentle breeze from the rear of the room to the open front. Team members “'upwind” of the patient wore astronaut helmets and garments impermeable by bacteria, while air around the downwind team members was carried away from the patient. Application of the technique was developed for NASA by the Martin Marietta Corporation’s Denver Division. System ordered materials classified Top Secret, Secret, or Confidential only if their unauthorized disclosure “could reasonably be expected” to cause exceptionally grave damage, serious damage, or damage to national security. NASA, Atomic Energy Commission, Dept, of Defense, and United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency were among Government departments whose heads and their senior deputies were empowered by order to classify material or information as Top Secret. (PD, 3/13/72, 542-50)
StarQuest Ltd., nonprofit firm to promote values of space exploration to U.S. public, had rented $350 000 ocean liner for cruise off Cape Kennedy during Apollo 17 launch Dec. 6, Chicago Sun-Times reported. Firm’s honorary board included science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke and former astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell. Firm intended to make motion picture of Apollo 17 launch. (Ziomek, C Sun-Times, 10/2/72)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin arrived in Belgrade from Warsaw, Poland, for tour of Yugoslavia. They would meet with Yugoslav scientists to discuss Apollo 15. (AP, W Star, 1/23/72, All)
NASA announced it would reprimand Apollo 15 crew for carrying 400 unauthorized postal covers on July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Astronauts’ actions would be considered in future assignments. Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin had acknowledged giving 100 covers to acquaintance, currently in Germany. Covers later were sold to stamp collectors for $1500 each. NASA inquiry had shown astronauts had at one time agreed to accept “trust fund” for their children in return for the 100 covers but had later realized impropriety of transaction and had voluntarily declined to accept fund or alternative offer of stamps. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in release to press: “Astronauts are under extreme stress in the months preceding a flight to the Moon and their poor judgment in carrying the unauthorized covers must be considered in this light. Nonetheless, NASA cannot condone these actions.” (nasa Release 72-140)
Senate passed and sent to House H.R. 11487, Chapel of the Astronauts bill, after amending it to restrict authority to sell land at Kennedy Space Center for chapel to two years after act’s enactment date. {CR, 2/3/72, S1097-8)
Apollo 17 astronauts were examined on hoard recovery ship U.S.S. Tieonderoga by Dr. Charles K. La Pinta, Apollo medical team leader. He pronounced them “as good as any crew of astronauts that I have ever seen. They appear to be one of the more well-rested crews to have returned from a space flight.” (Reuters, W Post, 12/21/72, A17)
Astronauts Edgar D. Mitchell and James B. Irwin announced plans to resign from NASA and military. Mitchell, Navy captain, had been lunar module (lm) pilot on Apollo 14 (Jan. 31—Feb. 9, 1971). Irwin, Air Force colonel, had been lm pilot on Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) and was backup pilot for Apollo 17, scheduled for launch in December. Because of Irwin’s plans to retire, new backup crew for Apollo 17 had been named, effective July 1: John W. Young, Stuart A. Roosa, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Original Apollo 17 backup crew was David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and Irwin. Scott, Worden, and Thomas K. Mattingly II had been assigned to Space Shuttle Program in Manned Spacecraft Center Astronaut Office. Mattingly, who recently had become a father, had requested' assignment which would allow him more time with his family during next six months, (nasa Release 72-110)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told press in Washington, D.C., he believed U.S. and U.S.S.R. would sign agreement during 1972 for joint mission in which Apollo spacecraft would dock with Soviet Salyut orbiting laboratory in 1975. At dinner party for seven newsmen Dr. Fletcher said: “We certainly don’t believe that the first mission of American and Soviet astronauts together will be the last.” Mission would “take a lot of planning and some hardware changes. ... I also think the crews will need time to train together for the first flight.” Crews would be bilingual and familiar with each other’s spacecraft. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Donald K. Slayton were already studying Russian. First joint docking mission would cost U.S. as much as $300 million, most of it to keep manned flight facilities intact after conclusion of 1973 Skylab mission. Dr. Fletcher foresaw series of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. missions, each longer and more ambitious. U.S.S.R. was emphasizing space station while U.S. emphasized shuttle. “I think it only logical that the two hook up together, especially since the shuttle will have rescue capability.” U.S.S.R. was expected to continue Lunokhod lunar rover and lunar sample return programs and “probably marry the two some time in the next two years. I also think they will attempt a manned lunar landing, but not until late in the ’70s, perhaps 1977.” (O’Toole, W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
Overview of Apollo 17 mission, scheduled for Dec. 6 launch, was given by Mission Director Chester M. Lee at nasa Jdq. press briefing. Mission experiments would include lunar surface gravimeter to detect possible lunar surface deformation from pull of earth and sun and to confirm existence of gravity waves; lunar ejecta and meteorite experiment to determine mass, velocity, and frequency of meteorite impacts on moon and nature of their ejecta; lunar seismic profiling experiment to acquire data on lunar near-surface structure and layering; lunar atmospheric composition experiment (masspec) ; experiment to measure solar flares; and lunar traverse gravimeter with receiver carried on lunar roving vehicle Rover to survey anomalies of gravity at all science stops. Among major new experiments on Apollo 17 mission would be surface electrical properties experiment to determine lunar surface layering and measure electrical properties of material; lunar neutron probe to measure capture rate of low-energy cosmic ray secondary neutrons and neutron energy spectrum as function of depth; and medical experiment biocore to be carried in command module (cm), biocore would carry six pocket mice in environmentally controlled situation. On return to earth, mice would be returned to principal investigators for examination for effects of high-Z particles. New experiments to be carried in scientific instrument module (sim) bay were far-ultraviolet spectrometer to determine composition density of lunar atmosphere; infrared scan radiometer to obtain data to correlate and confirm earth-produced thermal maps; and lunar sounder module to probe lunar near subsurface to depths of 1 to 1.05 km (0.6 to 1 mi). First Apollo 17 launch window would open at 9:53 pm est Dec. 6 and close at 1:31 am est Dec. 7. Alternate launch windows would occur in January and February. To reach moon at optimum sun angle, Apollo 17 would be launched at night; entry into trajectory toward moon would be made over Atlantic rather than over Pacific as on previous Apollo missions. “This means the TLI [translunar insertion] will occur about 45 minutes later than ... in the past.” Countdown preparations were proceeding normally. Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt were scheduled to land Dec. 11 on flat valley 9.7 km (6 mi) wide near southeastern edge of Sea of Serenity on northeastern side of moon’s front face. Landing site was more difficult than that of previous Apollo missions, Lee said, because “here we’re faced with a scarp that is a number of kilometers down.” Site was surrounded with “sculptured hills at the east, the north massif and the south massif; you are coming into a little tighter valley, but we have . . . plenty of clearance.” Astronauts would remain on moon for record 75 hrs, would make three traverses in Taurus-Littrow valley during three 7-hr extravehicular activity periods, and would drive electrified, four-wheeled Rover record 33.8 km (21 mi), including one drive that would take them almost 8 km (5 mi) from lunar module. Astronaut Ronald E. Evans would remain in lunar orbit in command module. Cernan and Schmitt were to rejoin cm at 5:56 pm est Dec. 16. Splashdown was scheduled for 2:24 pm est Dec. 19 in Pacific 560 km (350 mi) southeast of Samoa. Recovery ship would be U.S.S. Ticonderoga. (Transcript)
U. Alexis Johnson, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on space agreements with U.S.S.R. signed in May, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ special hearing. Johnson said agreement signed May 24 endorsed at highest level understandings reached over past 18 mos between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences for cooperation in space science and applications such as meteorology, study of earth’s environment, further exploration of moon and planets, and space biology and medicine. It permitted development of compatible rendezvous and docking systems which “should enhance safety and value of space flight” and opened possibility of further areas of cooperation. It demonstrated “in full view of the world that the two great space powers have both the will and the capability to work together on important and difficult tasks. We have high hopes . . . that this agreement will be a milestone in our relationship with the Soviet Union. ... It serves our broad national purposes, as well as our specific foreign policy objectives.” Dr. Low outlined earlier agreements and gave details of joint rendezvous and docking mission agreed on for 1975. During April visit to Moscow, agreement had been reached that astronauts must understand Russian to extent normally used in both regular and contingency operations. Soviet cosmonauts also would need to understand other language and be able to respond. Dictionary would be.developed of commonly used phrases. Some astronauts, all interested in flying this mission, had begun studying Russian on their own. Astronauts selected would take formal language training. Others in NASA would also learn Russian. (Transcript)
Associated Press reported Apollo 15 crew had been favored to receive Air Force Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy but that trophy would be withheld because of unauthorized postal cover incident [see July 11]. Trophy was awarded annually for most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress. AP said Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin also had been invited to annual meeting of Federation Aeronautique Internationale in Parts in October to receive other awards with Soviet cosmonauts and that Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, had advised Fai that efforts would be made to have astronauts accept invitation. (AP, W Star & News, 7/23/72, A23) * Federal Aviation Administration announced award of $119 249 contract to Parsons, Brinckeroff, Quade and Douglas, Inc., for architectural and engineering plans for 600-by-90-m {2000-by-30Q-ft) elevated STOLport for short takeoff and landing aircraft. Exterior design of structure supporting STOLport would be planned to provide approaching pilot with realistic cues resembling those included in actual landing facility on top of a multilevel structure, (faa Release 72-142)
Findings to date of investigations into Apollo 15 commercialism were released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and by NASA. Senate Committee reported on Aug. 3 closed hearing that received testimony from NASA management and Apollo 15 astronauts on commercialization of postal covers and replicas of “Fallen Astronaut” sculpture that was carried to moon during mission. Hearing had revealed “no basic new facts” on incidents, nasa had disciplined astronauts for carrying unauthorized covers. There was “no indication at this time that the Apollo 15 crew either profited or intended to profit from” sales of sculpture. Sale of sculpture by artist Paul Van Hoeydonck “appears to be a direct contradiction of the intent of the Apollo 15 astronauts.” Committee said Dept, of Justice had requested copy of hearing transcript and was reviewing situation for possible violation of Federal statutes. Committee said its continuing investigation had determined, after Aug. 3 hearing, “that several astronauts had accepted payment for autographing blocks of stamps. NASA was “continuing its investigation of this latest incident and is determining what management actions it will take as a result.” Committee expressed concern “with the adequacy of NASA management procedures which would permit such incidents to occur or create an atmosphere or an environment which might encourage misconduct.” It also was concerned with “awareness of responsible management personnel as to their responsibilities for the recognition of and need for initiation of timely and appropriate action on sensitive events coming to their attention.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, released report on Apollo 15 commercialism and disciplinary actions taken by NASA. Investigations and reviews had revealed weaknesses in NASA’s administrative procedures, management communication channels, and internal operating relationships. Actions were under way to remedy weaknesses, including revision of policy and procedures on articles to be carried on manned flight missions. No more than 12 personal items weighing no more than 0.2 kg (0.5 lb) would be carried by each flight astronaut. All personal items would be approved by NASA Administrator. Items that could be commercially exploited by recipients were prohibited. List of items would be publicized no later than 30 days after flight’s completion. Future missions would carry official flight kit containing items appropriate for official presentation by Government. Items would be approved by Administrator and announced before launch. Commercialism of flight kit was prohibited. NASA pao stated in response to inquiries about sale of autographs by astronauts, “nasa has determined . . . autographs were signed by the astronauts on their own time while not on duty, that no misuse of Government property or personnel was involved, but that a procedural infraction did occur in that no NASA management advice was sought prior to these actions.” NASA employees had been “personally admonished . . . for this infraction of NASA procedures” and facts had been reported to Dept, of Justice. (Texts; NASA pao)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, told press at Manned Spacecraft Center briefing Apollo 16 astronauts had returned from mission in excellent condition. “They could walk well. And there wasn’t any obvious effect ... on the ability to stand up well without having blood pressure drop. And . . . there was no motion sickness” even though astronauts had spent about 30 min in spacecraft in fairly rough sea after splashdown. All three astronauts had minor irritation around sensor attachments on the skin. All three had normal white blood cell counts rather than increased counts usually seen on previous missions. Their response to postflight tests showed they were in “better shape” than Apollo 15 crew had been. Cardiac silhouette size appeared to have decreased; only astronaut to have cardiac ar-rythmic contractions was Charles M. Duke, Jr., who had three. Data on potassium levels was not yet available. Astronauts would be on rigid diet and undergo extensive tests for three days so doctors could compare postflight medical measurements with those taken during three-day preflight controlled diet period. (Transcript)
President Nixon signed H.R. 11487, Chapel of the Astronauts bill, which authorized sale of land near Kennedy Space Center Visitor Bureau to private corporation for construction of chapel. Bill became P.L. 92-227. (PD, 2/21/72, 448)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell described tests of extrasensory perception (esp) he made during Jan. 31-Feb. 9, 1971, mission at 15th annual conference of Spiritual Frontiers Fellowship in Chicago. Mitchell had attempted to send messages from spacecraft to four “receivers” on earth and had reported later that some “exchanges” had been made. (C Daily News, 5/13/72; A&A 1971; msc pao)
President Nixon spoke at White House ceremony before his departure for state visit to People’s Republic of China: “. . . if there is a postscript that I hope might be written with regard to this trip, it would be the words on the plaque which was left on the moon £y our first astronauts when they landed there. ‘We came in peace for all mankind.’ ” (PD, 2/21/72, 443^)
Attorney for widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, said Mrs. Betty Grissom had agreed to $350 000 out-of-court settlement of her $20-million suit against North American Rockwell Corp. and three subsidiaries for negligence in construction of spacecraft. (AP, W Post, 3/9/72, A17)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1971 was presented by National Aeronautic Assn, to Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden and former Manned Spacecraft Center Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, during Washington, D.C., ceremony. (Abrams, W Post, 6/1/72, Dl)
Impact of large meteorite on moon’s far side had provided first evidence suggesting moon still had molten core, Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo seismic experiments, said in press interview at Univ. of Texas. Data were preliminary and fragmentary but “I hope we’ll be able to confirm or reject this core hypothesis in a month or so.” Impact had been recorded July 17 by all four seismometers left on moon by Apollo astronauts but had not been discovered until recently because of delays in examining telemetry reports from instruments. Meteorite’s size had not yet been determined but it “probably was larger than the ‘whopper’ recorded in May.” Meteorite which impacted moon May 13 had been largest since seismometers began functioning in 1969. Seismic signals from July 17 impact had had “funny focusing effect that could be explained by a core.” (Rossiter, W Star & News, 11/10/72, A3)
Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin said in telephone interview with Baptist Press that Apollo 15 crew “thought they were doing the best for our families” in carrying unauthorized postal covers to moon. Their decision not to accept share of proceeds from sale of covers had come about eight months before incident was reported in press [see June 18]. “We acted in haste and under the terrific pressures of the pre- and post-flight schedule—but that does not excuse it.” nasa had had “no choice but to reprimand us.” (AP, B Sun, 7/24/72, A5)
Detroit News editorial commented on Apollo 15 astronauts’ carrying unauthorized postal covers on mission: “The trio did not follow through with the script but for the men to even contemplate the scheme was dead wrong. The nation has expended considerable money on them, trained them for national duty and paid them well. No one doubts their courage and skill but the spirit of the whole enterprise is tainted now the truth is out.” Paper said NASA should cancel astronaut privilege of carrying personal items to moon on condition they not be used later for commercial purposes. (D News, 7/17/72)
U.S. patent No. 3649 921 was issued to Langley Research Center technician David F. Thomas for backpack harness that future astronauts could fasten with one hand, leaving other hand free for stabilization purposes in zero-g environment. Harness was pressure plate device with reinforced straps that encircled user’s body automatically when his back was pressed against plate. Commercial applications might include use as safety belt in automobiles and aircraft and use by handicapped persons. (Biggins, Newport News, Va, Times-Herald, 4/6/72; Pat Off Pio) March 15:	Cosmos 478 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters: 282-km (175.2-mi) apogee, 176-km (109.4-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 65° inclination. Satellite reentered March 28. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/72; SBD, 3/17/72, 98)
Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Samford Univ. in Birmingham, Ala. (Birmingham News, 5/14/72) May 27—June 4: U.S. International Transportation Exposition transpo ’72 was sponsored by Dept, of Transportation at Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va. More than 400 exhibitions from 10 countries included military and civil aircraft and aerial demonstrations, experimental safety vehicles developed by automobile industry, Apollo 12 command module with Apollo 12 moon rocks, and four working models of independently powered 6- and 12-passenger “people movers” operated by pushbutton for urban mass transportation. NASA theme, “Aviation Serves the Community and the Nation,” was illustrated with exhibits on aviation passenger growth, airport planning, aircraft noise reduction, pollution control, aircraft safety, long-haul aircraft for 1980s, new vehicle technology, general aviation, nagivation and communications, and equation of ecology with technology. Exhibition was marred by three accidental deaths during aerobatic and precision flying demonstrations. (Langley Researcher, 5/12/72, 1; Grubisch, W Post, 5/4/72, HI; Transpo 72 News) May 28:	President Nixon discussed Moscow summit meetings and resultant agreements in radio and TV address to Soviet people from Kremlin in Moscow. He said: “We have agreed on joint ventures in space. We have agreed on ways of working together to protect the environment, to advance health, to cooperate in science and technology.” Most important agreement was “historic first step in the limitation of nuclear strategic arms.” By settling arms limitation, “people of both of our nations, and of all nations, can be winners. If we continue in the spirit of serious purpose that has marked our discussions this week, these agreements can start us on a new road of cooperation for the benefit of . . . all peoples.” (PD, 6/5/72, 939-41)
Newspaper editorials praised Apollo 17 performance as astronauts worked on moon’s surface following Dec. 11 touchdown: Cleveland Plain Dealer: “On time and on target, the Apollo 17 mission has made it to the moon and provides further proof of excellence in American space technology. The temptation is to dismiss such performance as routine, but there is nothing at all routine about the assignments of the men and equipment on this far journey.” Apollo 17 was “establishing even more clearly the high degree of expertise and • perfection that is built into the American space exploration effort. It is doing so, however, with Schmitt and Cernan continuing the very unroutine work begun by astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin Jr. on the moon three years ago.” (Cl PD, 12/12/72) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “With all the other firsts of this last Apollo mission to the moon, there is tinge of sorrow mingled with the superlatives of performance.” To realize this was “last time humans will visit the moon in the foreseeable future is to feel a certain loss along with the sense of accomplishment.” (P Bull, 12/12/72) Miami Herald: “Knowledge gleaned from the Apollo program . . . is upsetting long-held theories. The venture thus is contributing to the demise of dogmatism, and encouraging open-mindedness which may lead mankind to many new truths.” (M Her, 12/12/72)
National Science Foundation announced issuance of Solar Energy in Developing Countries: Perspectives and Prospects. Report of NAS Board on Science and Technology for International Development said solar energy had “capability to meet energy needs substantially beyond the applications now being made.” But best course was to study general energy needs of developing nations and methods of satisfying these needs without placing excessive hope in promising but unproved applications of sun’s energy. Report recommended establishment of regional centers in developing nations to evaluate supplies and uses of all kinds of energy and to begin research and development efforts on applications suitable to local conditions, (nas Release) April 13:	Soviet and NASA scientists exchanged lunar soil samples in ceremony at Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow. NASA representatives Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., and Dr. Michael B. Duke, Lunar Sample Curator at msc, presented Soviet scientists with 1 g (0.04 oz) of soil brought to earth by Apollo 15 astronauts. Exchange brought total weight of Apollo 15 lunar material given to Soviet scientists to 3 g. Soviet scientists gave NASA representatives 2 g (0.07 oz) of soil brought to earth by Luna 20, several photos of Luna 20 landing site, and pictures of separate rock fragments, (nasa Release 72—77; fbis—Sov, 4/13/72, L4; nasa omsf)
Dr. John Teegan, Chief of Launch Site Medical Operations at Kennedy Space Center, announced his resignation to press at Cape Kennedy. Dr. Teegan, who would return to private practice, said he had resigned because his patients—astronauts-—were too healthy. Astronauts were unusually healthy because they were in excellent physical condition when they were chosen and made it a point to stay that way. “I was educated to care for people who were ill and I want to get my feet wet again in clinical medicine. This chapter in space history was a very valuable experience that few people have had the opportunity to experience.” (Reuters, B Sun, 2/13/72; ksc pao) February 14^-25: U.S.S.R. launched Luna 20 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 8:28 am local time (10:28 pm est Feb. 13). Tass said objective of mission was “further exploration of the moon and near lunar space.” On Feb. 18 Luna 20 entered near-circular lunar orbit with 100-km (62-mi) altitude, 1-hr 58-min period, and 65° inclination. Engine firing on Feb. 19 placed spacecraft in elliptical orbit with 100-km (62-mi) apolune and 21-km (13-mi) perilune. Main retroengine burn for 267 sec on Feb. 21 thrust spacecraft toward moon and Luna 20 free-fell to 760-m (2490-ft) altitude. Spacecraft was then guided by braking rocket to softlanding northeast of moon’s Sea of Fertility at 12:19 am Bay-konur time Feb. 22 (2:19 pm est Feb. 21). Landing coordinates were 3° 32' north latitude and 56° 33' east longitude. Spacecraft began transmitting radio signals and conducting experiments. After drilling lunar rock, collecting lunar samples, photographing lunar surface, and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna 20 lifted off moon at 3:58 am Baykonur time Feb. 23 ( 5:58 pm est Feb. 22), after 27 hrs 39 min on lunar surface. Tass said samples had been obtained with earth-operated, percussion-rotary drill designed to handle hard and loose rock samples simultaneously. Luna 20 reentered atmosphere Feb. 25 and parachuted to landing at 12:12 am Feb. 25 Baykonur time (2:12 pm est Feb. 24) 40 km (24 mi) northwest of Djezkazgan, Kazakhstan, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered despite “extremely unfavorable weather conditions—strong wind, blizzard, and low clouds.” Luna 20 was second unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. First had been U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (Sept. 12-24, 1970). Luna 17 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and had released Lunokhod 1 lunar rover. Luna 18 (launched Sept. 2, 1971) had crashlanded on moon Sept. 11, 1971, and Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) was still in lunar orbit on photography and mapping mission. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 2/14/72, LI; 2/22-24/72, LI; 2/28/72, LI; SBD, 2/15/72, 226)
Skylab crew press conference, with prime and backup crewmen, was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said preparations were on schedule for April 1973 launch. Contractor checkouts and tests of hardware were expected to be completed for delivery to Kennedy Space Center in July. Skylab would carry some 20 000 pieces of stowage equipment on board to provide life support for nine men for 140 days. “So it all goes up at one time, and we’ve got a great deal of work to do, not only to learn how to operate this vehicle but also all the experiments in it. It became apparent that we could not be 100 percent cross-trained as we had been in Apollo, so we’ve . . . defined some areas for each guy to become expert in ... . That allowed us to balance out the training hours. Right now ... we have some 2000 training hours per man defined. We’ve been working on the basic training for the past year.” Training hardware would be available about February 1. Commander would have overall responsibility for mission and would be command and service module expert. Science pilot would be expert in all medical equipment and in Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) and its associated hardware. Pilot would be expert in Orbital Workshop systems and electrical systems. Remaining experiments would be divided among crewmembers according to availability and choice. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said photographic data returned from Skylab would be “far superior” to previous data because actual film would be returned to earth. To return film, crews would conduct two extravehicular activities (eyas) on first mission, three on second, and two on third. “We’re going to be moving . . . 240 pounds [109 kg] worth of film, in canisters, magazines, in and out of the cameras. We’ll have to remove the used exposed film and replace it with new film. It’s going to take about 3 hours.” Experiments were described by Astronaut Gerald P. Carr. They included EREP earth resources experiment containing five sensors to calibrate earth’s atmosphere, corollary experiments submitted by high school students, engineering experiments to study effects of zero g on metal alloys and flammability of certain items, habitability experiments to study noise levels and atmospheric composition, and scientific experiments. Scientific experiments would include studies of effect of zero g on single human cells, studies of circadian rhythm of pocket mice and vinegar gnats, ultraviolet stellar astronomy and x-ray astronomy. Technological experiments would include crew vehicle disturbances, manual navigation sightings, and “a study of the little contamination cloud that we carry around with us . . . kind of like Pigpen in Peanuts.” In response to question on illness during missions, Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin said NASA would provide equipment and training on board to take care of most illnesses and injuries that could be handled in a doctor’s office. Science pilot would be able to provide emergency care for illnesses “up to and including quite severe. We have quite a package of drugs on board, administrable by all routes; we have tracheotomy equipment and equipment for maintaining an airway for stopping bleeding. We are attempting to develop in time for the flight intravenous fluids. We feel that, almost regardless of the severity of the injury, we will at least be able to stabilize the patient.” (Transcript)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans passed final four-hour physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, Dr. W. Royce Hawkins, told press astronauts were “well rested, in good spirits, and physically in excellent shape.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/2/72, 58)
Families of Astronauts Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chaffee—who lost lives in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire—received awards totaling $300 000 from spacecraft manufacturers. North American Rockwell Corp. and former North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell-Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. had been charged with negligence in suits filed by Chaffee’s widow Nov. 6 and White’s widow Nov. 7. In out-of-court settlement, Mrs. Patricia White Davis would receive $50 000 for herself and $50 000 for each of two children; Mrs. Martha Chaffee Canfield would receive $70 000 and $40 000 for each of two children. Widow of Virgil I. Grissom, third astronaut killed in fire, had won $350 000 settlement from NR March 8. (W Star & News, 11/8/72, A4; AP, NYT, 11/11/72, 7)
Collection of 28 paintings by artist-architect-astronomer Chesley Bonestell and 3 original drawings by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, were placed on exhibition at American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in New York for indefinite period. Bonestell paintings of early 1950s depicted future space explorations. Von Braun paintings suggested suit for astronaut extravehicular activity on moon. (Am Mus Release)
NASA had definite plans for international rendezvous and docking mission to link three Soviet cosmonauts with three U.S. astronauts in 1975, Washington Post reported. Tentative date was June 14, four days after U.S.S.R. orbited Salyut station and three days after cosmonauts docked Soyuz spacecraft at one end of Salyut 15 m (50 ft) long. Apollo spacecraft would dock with orbiting Salyut on 15th Apollo orbit of earth, day following Apollo launch. For 56 hrs astronauts and cosmonauts would work and live together under guidance of mission control centers in Houston and in Baykonur. There were “no longer any technical doubts that the feat of flying an American and a Russian spacecraft together can be accomplished.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Manned Spacecraft Center, had said, “We haven’t seen anything in a technical sense that says we should stop.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/7/72, B2)
Achievements of U.S.-U.S.S.R. summit meetings in Moscow to date were summarized in New York Times article by Max Frankel. U.S. and Soviet officials had “duly signed the agreements that had been specially packaged for the occasion. Some, on cooperative ventures in health research, environmental control, scientific cooperation and a link-up of astronauts in space, had been merely rewritten or upgraded from earlier agreements, to add to the cumulative sense of achievement. One of the accords, to avoid naval harassment and incidents at sea, had been negotiated under the deadline of the summit.” Another, on trade, had become “too complicated to resolve” and was “earmarked for energetic followup this summer.” Agreement to limit construction of defensive and offensive nuclear weapons “was finally finished in a whirlwind round of all-night sessions.” Main premises behind summit meeting were “that the two superpowers are now truly strategic equals, that they both have enough invulnerable weapons to deter nuclear attack, that they need to stop adding more weapons before they can reduce the number of weapons, that they both can use the money they might eventually have for better purposes, that they must avert even indirect conflicts that might draw them into war, and that they must collaborate more broadly in other fields to avoid the intrusions of inevitable conflicts of interest and conflicts among smaller nations.” (NYT, 5/28/72, 4:1)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., completed 13 days of postflight debriefing at Manned Spacecraft Center and prepared to spend first weekend in seven weeks with their families. (Reuters, NYT, 5/13/72, 33)
Sky lab medical experiments altitude test (smeat), begun July 26, was progressing satisfactorily. Richard S. Johnston, Director of Life Sciences at Manned Spacecraft Center, said astronauts Robert L. Crippen, Karol J. Bobko, and Dr. William E. Thornton were in good spirits and good physical condition after seven days inside msc chamber 6 m (20 ft) long. Minor equipment and procedural problems had been solved quickly without disrupting test timeline. Astronauts were scheduled to remain in chamber for up to 56 days, (msc Release 72-170)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., blamed pressures of public life following participation in first lunar landing July 20, 1969, for mental condition that had forced him to seek psychiatric help. In interview published by Los Angeles Times, Aldrin—who had announced retirement as Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., effective March 1—said he was writing book about “personal experiences.” {LA Times, 2/27/72, Al)
Germ-control and dust-purging technique developed by NASA and aerospace industry was being used by St. Luke’s Hospital in Denver, Colo., to lower infection risk in surgical procedures. Concept, based on technique to sterilize spacecraft assembly and self-contained life support systems, used portable equipment to remove dust and germs continually from surgical area. Equipment included helmets like those worn by astronauts and specially treated surgical garments that bacteria could not penetrate, collapsible plexiglass and aluminum enclosure, and air-circulating units that forced air through filters before air flowed from rear of enclosure to front. Enclosure fitted inside conventional surgical room, (nasa Release 72-47)
New York Times science reporter John Nobel Wilford toured Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), near Moscow, as first Western correspondent to be invited to center of U.S.S.R. cosmonaut activities. Guide for visit arranged by Soviet Novosti News Agency was Soyuz Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training. Shatalov said U.S.S.R. did not announce space mission dates “because we don’t want to bind the people who are preparing the flight.” Cosmonaut flight training areas were closed to most visitors “because we just don’t want journalists to interfere with the working atmosphere of the cosmonauts.” Area contained medical center with centrifuge that cosmonauts called “Devil’s merry-go-round.” From size and number of apartment buildings, Wilford estimated Star City population at 1500 to 2000, City was “smaller than Houston space center because it does not also serve as the mission control complex and apparently has no primary responsibility for the management of spacecraft design and development.” Like NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Star City contained facilities for premission training of cosmonauts and postmission physical examinations and recreation. Like U.S. astronauts, Soviet cosmonauts were trained in aircraft “that make deep dives to simulate weightlessness.” Parachuting tested ability to handle high-stress situations. First simulator for Salyut orbiting laboratory was being installed in new building to be completed at year’s end. Wilford said that “this could mean that no major advance beyond the present version of Salyut should be expected until well after the simulator is ready.” Of about 50 cosmonauts in Soviet space program, one third were civil engineers living in Moscow, Shatalov said; remainder were Soviet air force pilots who lived in Star City. No women were preparing for space missions but U.S.S.R. had “many women who specialize in meteorology and medicine, which are professions necessary on the orbital stations.” From descriptions by Shatalov and Cosmonaut-engineer Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, Wilford had constructed outline of preparations for Soviet space mission: Cosmonauts were assigned to mission one year in advance of launch date by commission of medical and engineering experts and Shatalov. There were two backup crews. After learning spacecraft mechanics and electronics and practicing in spacecraft simulator at Star City, crew went to Baykonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan three weeks before launch. There they completed training in actual spacecraft, checked instruments, stocked food, adjusted couches, and recommended minor changes in housekeeping. “Unlike Cape Kennedy,” Baykonur had no simulators for last-minute practice. For two days before launch, “after the state commission approves the spaceship’s readiness,” crew relaxed. On launch morning cosmonauts were examined physically and biomedical sensors were attached to their bodies before they donned spacesuits. Traditionally, cosmonauts then gathered in quarters for few moments of silence broken by shouts of “off we go!” They signed their names on door before leaving for launch pad. Between missions, cosmonauts were expected to devote time each month to “social work”—visits to schools, collective farms, and factories. Shatalov had suggested that new Soviet manned missions were possible within months and that U.S.S.R. was studying mission longevity in preparation for earth-orbiting laboratories. Of next Salyut mission, Shatalov said: “We are going to make it better .... We will prolong the visits of men, and the number of expeditions will grow. This is the difference now between our program and yours.” Yeliseyev had said his countrymen would “probably” be on the moon by 1975. At tour’s completion, Shatalov had offered toast: “To cooperation between our peoples, to working together in space, which is our future and the future of the world.” (Wilford, NYT, 3/22/72, 30 ; 3/26/72, 7; Huntsville Times, 4/2/72, 17)
Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne had record 608 000 visitors— increase of about one third over 1971. Museum was considered most active museum in Switzerland and Europe’s most popular transport museum. Planetarium rated second to New York’s American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in number of annual visitors. Swiss Transport Museum’s Air and Space Wing was dedicated July 1. Dedication ceremonies were attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. During year, James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator, officially presented model of Goddard Space Flight Center’s computer facility to Museum. (Dir Swiss Trans Museum letter to nasa Hist Off, 2/19/72; A&A 1972)
Chicago Tribune editorial said there was still “a lot of studying to be done” on U.S. conversion to metric system [see Aug. 18]. Question of financing was “sticky” one. “Many of the countries which have gone or are going metric have provided some sort of government help to finance the changeover.” U.S. estimated conversion cost at between $10 billion and $40 billion. “Both labor and industry—especially small business—have been leery of undertaking this expense without government help. But the government is in no position at the moment to give much help; and if it were to convert its purchases to the metric system quickly, the result would be favorable to foreign manufacturers already on the metric system and detrimental to our own.” (C Trib, 8/21/72) August 22:	NASA announced preliminary timeline for Apollo 17 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt—would be launched from Kennedy Space Center at 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. Lunar module would land on moon’s Taurus-Littrow region at 2:55 pm est Dec. 11 and two crewmen would explore lunar surface for three extravehicular activity periods before lm lifted off moon at 5:56 pm est Dec. 14. Spacecraft would splash down in Pacific at 2:24 pm est Dec. 19, after 304-hr 31-min mission, (nasa Release 72-169)
Apollo 17 astronauts began final week of training at Kennedy Space Center for Dec. 6 mission. NASA spokesman said countdown test begun Nov. 15 had proceeded so smoothly that launch pad technicians had “only to monitor the systems.” Other technicians installed batteries and water in lunar landing vehicle and checked backup flight systems. (Wil-ford, NYT, 11/28/72)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on Apollo 15 astronauts’ carrying unauthorized postal covers on mission: It was to crew’s credit that they withdrew from plan to profit from venture. “But recognition of their original mis judgment . . . does not completely erase the taint of commercialization in an otherwise heroic venture.” (P Bull, 7/13/72)
President Nixon signed ratification of Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation and urged prompt action on other measures to combat international terrorism. Convention required extradition or prosecution of persons committing sabotage or violence against international civil aviation. Other measures were draft convention for prosecution or extradition of persons who attacked foreign officials, convention suspending air service to countries who failed to punish or extradite aircraft hijackers or saboteurs, and convention requiring prosecution or extradition of persons who injured, kidnaped, or killed innocent civilians to blackmail any state or international organization. (PD, 11/6/72, 1608) November 2:	American Astronautical Society presented its 1971 awards and honored newly elected fellows at Washington, D.C., luncheon. Flight Achievement Award was presented to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar B. Mitchell for “achievements in flight testing which have contributed significantly to the advancement of manned space flight.” Lloyd V. Berkner Award was presented to Willard F. Rockwell, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of North American Rockwell Corp., for “outstanding contributions to the commercial utilization of space technology.” Space Flight Award went to Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., Grumman Aerospace Corp. President, for “outstanding efforts and achievements which have contributed significantly to the advancement of space flight and space science.” Victor A. Prather Award was presented jointly to Robert E. Breeding of United Aircraft Corp. Space Systems Dept, and Leonard F. Shepard of ilc Industries, Inc., for “outstanding contributions in . . . extravehicular protection in space.” Randolph Lovelace II Award went to Dr. Maxime A. Faget, Manned Spacecraft Center Director of Engineering and Development, for “outstanding contributions in space technology.” Melbourne W. Boynton Award for “significant research contributions to space flight safety” was presented to Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director for Medical Operations at msc, and Dr. Harald J. von Beckh, Naval Air Development Center Director for Medical Research. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan were among newly elected Fellows. (aas Release)
Honorary lifetime membership in Auto Body Assn, of America was granted to Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt for fender repair work done on lunar rover on moon. Reg Predham, president of national organization of auto repairmen, said astronauts would be sent lapel pins and membership certificates. Boeing Co. would receive certificate for manufacturing “vehicle that can be repaired 250 000 miles [400 000 kilometers] from a part supplier.” (AP, C Trib, 12/15/72)
Astronaut James A. Lovell—holder of record for hours logged in space [see Nov. 22]—had been elected to the board of American Bakeries Co., Chicago Daily News reported. (C Daily News, 12/15/72)
Faulty design of water-tight battery enclosure used in underwater astronaut training at Manned Spacecraft Center had been primary contributing factor to February 29 explosion which killed one man and injured another, msc announced. In report to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, accident investigation board said explosive mixture of hydrogen and oxygen in battery was detonated when switch was closed. It recommended use of power supplies other than batteries, (msc Release 72-133)
Newspaper editorials continued comment on Apollo 16 mission, as astronauts headed back to earth from lunar surface. Christian Science Monitor commented on efficiency with which emergencies had been handled: “We very much appreciate the fine job the Apollo 16 crew has done. Nevertheless, for us, the star of the mission has been the impersonal intelligence expressed throughout the Apollo program. This is what underlies Apollo 16’s success and has added another important reference point to our growing knowledge of the moon.” (CSM, 4/25/72) Chicago Daily News: “This expedition, the fifth and next to last of the moon landings, revealed growing confidence and ability to improvise, and an increasing breadth of engineering genius that will carry over into many Earthbound projects. The advance in ‘pure science’—mainly in knowledge as to how the universe is put together—• is impossible to estimate. Somewhere down the line, whatever is learned on the moon trips should add to man’s ability to cope with his environment. Once more, gratitude is due to the courageous astronauts . . . who carried out their assignment so superbly.” (C Daily News, 4/25/72)
Newspaper editorials commented on successful launch of Apollo 17: New York Times: “It is still a breathtaking concept, though five teams of astronauts have successfully accomplished similar feats since Apollo 11 made its historic breakthrough in July 1969. The nearcatastrophe which forced abortion of the Apollo 13 mission provides a useful reminder of the dangers involved despite all the exquisitely painstaking care taken before blast-off.” Astronauts had “special qualities which set them apart. Some day . . . taking a rocket to the moon will be as common as taking a plane to London is today. But the Apollo pioneers who have blazed the way had to have a special degree of competence and courage to embark on this extraordinary journey.” {NYT, 12/7/72)
President Nixon sent United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: The Emerging Structure for Peace to Congress. Third annual report on U.S. foreign policy analyzed world situation. Of space, President said; “As our astronauts have seen, the unity of the Earth is experienced most vividly from outer space. And conversely, seen from our planet, space itself is a frontier to mankind as a whole, not merely to individual nations. Space is, therefore, an unparalleled field for cooperation among nations. “As we move into the second decade of space exploration, the U.S. is committed to work with others in space for the benefit of all mankind. We are taking whatever steps can reasonably and properly be taken to work with other countries in the development of their space skills. “Specifically, we have assured the European Space Conference that its member countries may obtain our assistance in launching satellites which are for peaceful purposes and which are consistent with international obligations embodied in such agreements as the Outer Space Treaty and the arrangements for the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat). We are prepared to consider such assistance to other interested countries. In addition, we are working closely with the Europeans on the concepts and design of a reusable space transportation system. “Over the past year, NASA has agreed with the Soviet Academy of Sciences to significant cooperation in specific space tasks, and in the exchange of information and plans concerning our respective space programs. We have exchanged samples of lunar soil. We are examining together the means to enable Soviet manned spacecraft and our own to rendezvous and dock in space. Joint expert groups have been meeting to arrange details of further collaboration in space meteorology, biology, and medicine, in the study of the natural environment, and in exploration of the moon and planets. “In 1971, after years of negotiation in which the United States has played a leading role, the United Nations General Assembly approved an Outer .Space Liability Convention. . . . “Last year also brought a new definitive charter for the operation of INTELSAT. . . .” President said NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences space cooperation had been among series of U.S.—Soviet agrements, “striking both in their diversity and in their promise of mutual advantage.” But in “changed world” conditioning U.S. foreign policy, President noted “the end of an indisputable U.S. superiority in strategic strength,” and its replacement by a strategic balance in which the U.S. and Soviet nuclear forces were comparable. U.S.S.R. had continued to improve its capability in “virtually every category of strategic offensive and defensive weapons. . . . Soviet strategic forces, even at current levels, have the potential of threatening our land-based ICBMs if the Soviets choose to make certain qualitative improvements. They have the necessary technological base.” People’s Republic of China Was “continuing to, develop a strategic offensive capability. The possibility of accidental attacks remains.” President said it was wise for U.S. to begin Safeguard abm deployment, but “we may soon complete a salt agreement with the USSR which will limit abm deployment.” President commended 1970 Hague and Montreal International Civil Aviation Organization conventions to deter aircraft hijacking and sabotage: “These two conventions will increase the likelihood that hijackers, saboteurs, and persons committing other attacks against civil aircraft will be punished. . . . Universal ratification would ensure that air pirates could find no place to hide. “We intend to press for wide adherence to these agreements and for continued international cooperation, including exchanges of information on security measures. We will also continue to urge international agreement to suspend air service to countries which refuse to cooperate in the release of hijacked aircraft and in the punishment of hijackers.” (PD, 2/14/72, 235-411)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo program day after Apollo 17 astronauts lifted off moon’s surface: “Over the long term the chief product of Apollo is likely to be in man’s consciousness, not only in scientific thinking. Man’s entire perspective on the universe and on his place in it has been radically changed. Man evolved on the earth, but he is no longer chained to it. Man has walked on another planet and returned to tell the tale. The impact on the future must be enormous. Yesterday’s farewell to the moon was certainly not a farewell to space.” (NYT, 12/15/72, 46)	_	_
Reassignment of Apollo 15 Astronaut Alfred M. Worden from Astronaut Office at Manned Spacecraft Center to Airborne Science Office, Space Science Div., at Ames Research Center became effective, (msc Release 72-197)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, was promoted by Air Force to rank of brigadier general. At 42 he was youngest officer of flag rank in any U.S. service and third astronaut to attain flag rank. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had been promoted to rear admiral by Navy in December 1971 and James A. McDivitt to brigadier general by Air Force in March. Stafford had been Apollo 10 commander and Gemini 6 pilot. (nasa Release 72-235)
Selection of Dr. Manson Benedict, Massachusetts Institute of Technology nuclear physicist, to receive Enrico Fermi Award for 1972 was announced by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Chairman of Atomic Energy Commission. President Nixon had approved nomination. President had informed Dr. Benedict that award was being given “in recognition of your pioneering leadership in the development of the Nation’s first gaseous diffusion plant, while paying equal tribute to your imaginative contributions in the development of the nuclear reactor and its safe use for generation of electrical power.” (aec Release P-366) November 4:	President Nixon, in foreign policy speech over nationwide radio, referred to U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements signed during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings: “We agreed ... to cooperate in protecting the environment, explore in space, fight disease. This means the day is fast approaching when a Russian cosmonaut and an American astronaut will shake hands in space, when a Russian chemist and an American biologist will work side by side to find a cure for cancer, and each time our nations join hands in the works of peace, we advance the day when nations will no longer raise their hands in warfare.” {PD, 11/13/72, 1639-41)
Swiss Transport Museum inaugurated its Air and Space Wing in Lucerne with ceremonies attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. (Swiss Transport Museum)
rca announced it had received NASA contracts totaling nearly $1.5 million for four Skylab color tape-recording systems. Recorders— similar to those on Erts 1 (launched July 23)—would help provide home viewers with color TV coverage of astronauts conducting experiments. Contracts had been awarded to rca Government Communications Systems by Marshall Space Flight Center, (rca Release) August 10:	International Institute for Strategic Studies in London released Reconnaissance, Surveillance and Arms Control. Study found that verification by observation satellites and electronic reconnaissance systems of adherence to terms of Strategic Arms Limitation agreements had greatly reduced possibility of one nation’s cheating on another. “Therefore the risk of the Soviet Union achieving a strategic advantage as a result of a . . . treaty is a very low one.” (upi, NY News, 8/11/72, 6)
Tracks attributed to spontaneous fission of plutonium 224 and uranium 238 had been detected in large whitlockite crystal in lunar breccia No. 14321 from Fra Mauro formation brought to earth by Apollo 14 astronauts, Univ. of California at Berkeley physicists reported in Science. It was first time evidence for decay products of plutonium 244 had been detected in objects other than meteorites and indicated age of rock could be 3.95 billion yrs, No positive evidence of terrestrial or lunar rocks with antiquity comparable to that of meteorites had yet been found. (Hutcheon, Price, Science, 5/26/72, 909-11)
Two press briefings were held at nasa Hq., Apollo 16 Mission Director’s press briefing and press conference on medical aspects of Apollo 15 and 16. In first, press was told hypergolic loading of propellants had begun and countdown demonstration test with fueled spacecraft would begin March 29. msc was continuing simulations, and prime recovery ship would leave San Diego March 23 and Pearl Harbor April 8 to take position. Launch preparations were proceeding on schedule toward liftoff at 12:45 pm est April 16. Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee said one purpose of microbial ecology evaluation device (meed; experiment to carry fungi and bacteria) on Apollo 16 was to prepare for future Skylab missions. In Skylab “we are going to have some evas and some of these bacteria, fungi, are on the suit before they go out. So the idea is to find out is there anything when we bring those suits back in and stow them for long periods of time like we are going to have on Skylab, do we have anything that we should be considering or concerned about as far as mutants and so forth.” Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover had been improved with new seatbelts that could be hung up out of way when not in use and with extra circuit breaker to permit deployment of TV after third extravehicular activity period, lrv would not cover as much distance on Apollo 16 as on Apollo 15. “We are planning 25.2 kilometers [15.7 miles] . . . because that gets us to our primary objectives,” not including 10% wander factor for missing craters. (Transcript) In second briefing, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, explained medical problems and procedures on Apollo 15 and changes for Apollo 16. Major concerns on Apollo 15 were cardiac arrhythmia—irregular heart rhythm—and fluid-electrolyte imbalance, with severe loss of potassium. Cardiac arrhythmia occurred occasionally in normal persons and frequently in college students, apparently as a result of fatigue from all-night studying, adrenalin increase from apprehension about grades, drug effect from drinking coffee to stay awake, and heavy workload. Fatigue, adrenalin increase, drug effect, and heavy workload also acted on astronauts. Fluid-electrolyte imbalance was dependent upon intake in food and drink and output in breath, sweat, and body wastes. In space, balance was affected by weightlessness, acceleration, 100%-oxygen atmosphere, abnormal work-rest cycle, and sustained work loads. Countermeasures that could be taken were better control of intake, supplementing electrolytes with intravenous fluids, coordinating exercise, providing lower body negative pressure, and optimizing work-rest cycles. Medical objectives for Apollo 16 were essentially same as for Apollo 15: to ensure crew safety medically, to improve probability of mission success by providing necessary medical information, and to detect and understand changes incident to space flight and learn more about effects of space flight on man. To improve medical wellbeing of Apollo 16 astronauts, 72-hr preflight controlled-diet period would determine amount of potassium needed by each crew member. Since potassium could not be preloaded, small amounts of extra potassium would be given in daily diet in flight to ensure adequacy. In addition to regular preflight cardiovascular examination, x-rays of astronauts’ hearts would be taken before and after mission to determine whether heart size decreased during flight. Skylab equipment would be used in flight for electroencephalogram, electrocardiogram, and electro-oculogram. Other inflight medical changes were daily sample of improved electrocardiogram data, option to alter bioharness wearing schedule, expansion of crew status report, high-potassium diets with potassium-enriched beverages and snack supplements, measurement of food and fluid intake and urine and fecal output, return to earth of urine and fecal samples for analysis, and provision of anti-arrhythmic drugs lidocaine, procainamide, and atropine. Dr. Berry also announced that Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who had been removed from Aurora 7 mission (May 24, 1962) and NASA flight status 10 yrs ago because of possible heart malfunction, had been returned to NASA and Federal Aviation Administration flight status. Evidence of atrial fibrillation found in 1959 and treated until 1969 had disappeared and tests completed recently had shown “perfectly normal cardiac function and cardiac anatomy.” First space flight for which Slayton could be eligible would be proposed joint mission with U.S.S.R. (Transcript)
Newspaper editorials commented on successful conclusion of Apollo 17. New York Times:	“Astronauts Cernan, Schmitt and Evans returned safely to earth yesterday in a splashdown that miarked the brilliantly successful end of one of the most successful series of scientific experiments in history. Less than four years ago men had never been even in the vicinity of the moon. Now about two dozen men have orbited the satellite, and a dozen have walked and ridden on its surface. Hundreds of pounds of lunar rock and soil are now ... on earth, available for study, while instruments planted on the moon give daily reports of lunar conditions, and will do so for years. The moon is now a distant but accessible outpost of earth, better known now than the North Pole was before Admiral [Robert E.] Peary discovered it in 1909. Project Apollo may be ended, but man’s interest in the moon is still very much alive.” (NYT, 12/20/72, 42) Baltimore Sun: “No doubt the success of the $25 billion Apollo program will encourage astronauts of the future to hurtle far past the moon to the solar planets, and perhaps beyond. But the immediate significance of Apollo is much closer to home. We are today much more aware of the fragility of our spaceship earth and of the unique chance mixture of elements that sustain life as we know it. If this vision of 'a rather small but infinitely precious planet can inspire us to take better care of it, Apollo will have produced its greatest dividend.” (B Sun, 12/20/72, A12) Pittsburgh Press:	Apollo program demonstrated “that the U.S. is still a will-do, can-do nation rather than a won’t-do, can’t-do has-been. In the days ahead we must hold fast to this national legacy of pioneering—and continue to nurture among our people the spirit of adventure, the quest for knowledge, the drive to explore the unknown, whether it be in the vast vacuum of space or in the tiny test tube of a laboratory. For therein lies our future, and the future of all mankind.” (Pittsburgh Press, 12/20/72) St. Louis Post-Dispatch:	“So let Apollo’s epitaph be that the program was magnificent but that it is also done. The evils that Apollo was never intended to cure remain and deserve—as they have all along—attention. If money is to be spent on further space projects such as the shuttle and the skylab, let Congress insist first that funds go where they are needed most. And that, as 1972 ends, is not out among the stars but in America. The moon, after all, can wait for its next human visitor. But for the poor, the hungry and the dispossessed, time wasted is misery compounded. The measure of our greatness will be found in how quickly the nation turns to them.” (St. Louis P—D, 12/20/72) Washington Post:	At outset of Apollo program “we spoke glowingly of the challenge but we were principally in a ‘race’—one that the cynical conventional wisdom of the time had it we would lose.” Apollo had ended “with the prospect of the joint Apollo-Soyuz testing mission. Somewhere in all this . . . mixed in with the great political trends and the particular political accidents that have contributed to the altered relations among the world’s super powers, the technology of Apollo itself played a part. You do not have to be a sentimentalist or a hopeless romantic to acknowledge that manned space flight in general and the successful moon landings in particular have had at least a subliminally humbling and unifying impact upon people, that the first astronauts to land on the moon were seen to be proxies for humankind, that their bravery and their achievement were regarded as human triumphs and that the first photographs of earth taken from the moon conveyed a unique and invaluable sense of planetary vulnerability and openness.” (W Post, 12/20/72) Detroit News:	“Today we know that the dream was not an impossible dream. And there will be more dreams to come and new worlds to conquer, all of which is, in essence, the true purpose of civilization, provided all men share the knowledge acquired and thus reap the harvest of benefits.” (D News, 12/20/72) Chicago Tribune:	“Welcome home. . . . The trail you helped to blaze will be used again some day.” (C Trib, 12/20/72)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) press conference was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Participants were Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director; Glynn S. Lunney, astp Director for U.S.; Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Intercosmos Council of Soviet Academy of Sciences; and Konstantin D. Bushuyev, astp Director for U.S.S.R. Lunney said that during series of meetings that had begun July 6, U.S. and U.S.S.R. had discussed and agreed on “the technical content of three very important project level documents”: project technical proposal that described mission and hardware elements, organizational plan that described how countries would work together in controlling project before and during flight, and schedule of activities. Officials had also concluded “technically detailed documents describing the agreements that we’ve reached on various systems,” such as docking aids, docking targets, control systems, and docking mechanism. Further technical discussions would be held in U.S.S.R. in fall. Preliminary plans called for launch of Apollo spacecraft carrying three astronauts 7% hrs after launch of Soyuz with two cosmonauts. Second Soyuz would be ready as backup if Apollo could not be launched during one of three launch opportunities. On Apollo’s 14th revolution spacecraft would rendezvous and dock, using U.S.-built docking mechanism on Apollo. After docking, two astronauts would pass through airlock into Soyuz and spend several hours with cosmonauts before returning to Apollo for night. Next day one astronaut and one cosmonaut would exchange places for whole day. After returning to own spacecraft, crews would undock vehicles and complete separate missions. Apollo would probably remain in orbit nine more days and Soyuz about one more day. Docking would be televised. Bushuyev praised “friendly atmosphere” and “wonderful conditions” of meetings and said friendliness was “the greatest achievement and the most important assurance for the success in our future work. The difficult tasks that we are called upon to solve . . . would be impossible unless these conditions existed. We are on the first stage of a very long and difficult journey. I believe that the most important thing that we succeeded in achieving so far is the following: We succeeded in identifying and solving those basic and important problems without the solution of which further work . . . would be impossible. These various problems which we have now solved will permit us to start the planning, design, and actual construction and manufacture of the various assemblies . . . necessary for the realization of our project.” (Transcript; nytns, W Star, 7/18/72, A4)
Robert Stern of Bellcomm, Inc., said in Washington, D.C., that his studies “tended to agree” with those of Rice Univ. scientists who had reported on Oct. 15, 1971, detection of possible water vapor being vented from lunar surface. Reuters had reported release March 2 of Bellcomm computer analysis suggesting vapors could have come from urine dumped .into lunar orbit by Apollo 14 astronauts. {NYT, 3/4/72)	.
Apollo 17 experiments were discussed by Apollo Lunar Exploration Director William T. O’Bryant at NASA Hq. press briefing. Mission astronauts would perform “more scientific investigation than on any other Apollo mission.” Experiments originally planned for Apollo 18, 19, and 20 would be aboard Apollo 17, last mission in Apollo series. (McGehan, B Sun, 11/21/72, A8)
Apollo 17 astronauts flew proficiency runs in NASA T-38 jet aircraft from Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., while at Kennedy Space Center five mice were selected to fly on mission experiment. Mice had been selected from 40 small rodents brought from California desert as candidates for mouse-to-the-moon mission. They would remain in orbit around moon when lunar module descended to surface. (AP, B Sun, 12/3/72) December 2—3:	Chicago Daily News editorial commented on impact of Apollo program: “The costly moon race may have helped distort American thinking in a damaging way. If we can go to the moon, so the slogan ran, we can do anything—wipe out poverty, eradicate racism, guide the economy, cure every evil of society. The euphoria created by the burgeoning space program and the crowning successes of the landing may have contributed to the rise of expectations in other fields beyond any solid hope of their realization. Science and technology can do wonders, but social problems do not yield so readily to electronics or telemetry.” (C Daily News, 12/2-3/72) December 3:	Kennedy Space Center technical writers, members of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees, agreed to accept 44% pay increase, ending threat of strike that might have delayed Apollo 17 launch [see Nov. 5]. (Auerbach, W Post, 12/4/72, A20)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., passed final physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said results showed astronauts “in good shape and ready to fly.” (AP, W Star, 4/11/72, A3)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 16 mission as astronauts conducted second extravehicular activity (eva) on lunar surface. New York Times commented on April 20 decision to continue Apollo 16 mission despite technical problems: “Thursday’s dilemma and its solution were particularly useful in reminding all concerned that there are two kinds of errors that can be made in situations of this type.” There was possibility of mission directors “deciding to continue the journey in the face of a danger that brings disaster. Against that is the alternate risk of being overly cautious and aborting a mission unnecessarily, at huge financial and scientific loss.” It was “delicate dilemma” and “tribute to the Project Apollo leadership and organization that to date these voyages have foundered on neither rock.” (NYT, 4/22/72, 30)	' Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Science has been well served. Mankind has made its giant steps. The pure, fresh enthusiasm of Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., with his ‘Yahoo!’ and his ‘Fantastic!’ is infectious, but it cannot waken again the public’s wonder over the first moonwalk.” Everyone wished Apollo 16 well but “they have seen this show before. What refinements have been added in this latest version are obscurely technical. The Apollo program is aging, and the American public ... is quite willing to see it come to a close.” (Cl PD, 4/22/72)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell retired from NASA and Navy to form Edgar D. Mitchell & Associates, Inc., organization to study psychic potential of man and other forms of life. (NASA pao; AP, NYT, 10/3/72, 45) October 1—7:	Federation Aeronautique Internationale held annual general conference in Paris, fai Gold Space Medal—Federation’s highest honor —was presented to Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Scott also accepted V. M. Komarov Diploma on behalf of Apollo 15 crew. (NASA Activities, 11/15/72, 235; nasa Int Aff)
New satellite Hot Line between White House and Kremlin was targeted to begin operation in 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. President Nixon’s approval had been announced Sept. 24, 1971, of U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on direct communication link using two satellite circuits, one established by each country. Agreement had been signed Sept. 30, 1971. (Av Wk, 1/17/72, 9; A&A 1971) January 17-19:	American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) held 10th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in San Diego, Calif. Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey reviewed space activities for local high school students. Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates, delivered Dryden Research Lecture “Atmospheric Turbulence.” Lecture had been named in honor of late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first NASA Deputy Administrator, in 1967. It succeeded Research Award established by aiaa in 1960. Dryden Lecture award, sponsored by General Electric Co., carried $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for repetition of lecture before selected aiaa sections. Dr. Houbolt reviewed latest data on atmospheric turbulence and its influence on aircraft design and flight. Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was installed as 1972 aiaa President at Jan. 19 Honors Banquet. aiaa presented Goddard Award to Gary A. Plourde, project engineer at United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and Squadron Leader Brian Brimelow (raf) and Howard E. Schumacher, both of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Trio was honored as team for original research leading to first understanding of gas-turbine compressor stalls induced by turbulent inlet flow conditions. Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Dr. Max M. Munk, retired engineer, for “enduring contributions to the science of aerodynamics.” Robert M. Losey Award was given to Dr. David Q. Wark, Senior Scientist with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “in recognition of outstanding contributions to the science of meteorology as applied to aeronautics.” Edward W. Price, Head of Naval Weapons Center Aerothermochem-istry Div., received G. Edward Pendray Award for “continued outstanding contributions to the literature of solid rocket internal ballistics and combustion, particularly for his contributions on combustion instability and ignition.” Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics, for “significant contributions to the description and understanding of the interplanetary medium and the interactions of this medium with the earth and other large bodies.” (aiaa Releases 1/10/72, 1/13/72; A1AA Bull, 1/72, 2/72, 67) January 17-21:	Fourth Annual Earth Resources Program Review was held by NASA at Manned Spacecraft Center. Scientists from foreign nations and organizations, Government, universities, and private institutions attended. Reports were presented on 1971 research and analysis of aircraft and spacecraft remote sensing data. In Jan. 18 press briefing NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said pollution monitoring was natural activity for global surveillance capability because atmospheric pollution was potentially global problem. Not well understood were manner in which pollutants were dispersed throughout globe or manner in which earth corrected itself. “There’s a lot of work to be done in this area.” In Jan. 21 briefing Dr. John M. DeNoyer, NASA Director of Earth Observations, said program was moving from exploratory to flight phase, from learning to applying techniques. Among applications was spring Arctic ice survey, in which some 80 scientists would be on ice measuring strain rates, meteorological conditions, and ice types, supported by Convair 990 aircraft from Ames Research Center. Also microwave techniques in remote sensing could identify ice-free lanes in Great Lakes region, making possible efficient shipping much earlier in spring than at present. Soo Canal into Lake Superior, which carried more tons of freight than any other canal in world, was now open only one half of year. Weather and cloud cover made aircraft surveillance inefficient; microwave techniques from satellite altitude was more practical in this instance. Another important program would be thermal mapping by remote sensing to permit better industrial planning from knowledge of how development would actually affect environment. Land-use planning also would be greatly aided by remote sensing data processed by computerized inventory system being developed at msc. (msc Release 72—11; MSC PAO; Transcript) January 18—20:	Opening hearings on aeronautical research and development, Chairman Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology announced Subcommittee name had been changed to Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Change followed receipt of Jan. 14 letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announcing change in NASA office name from OABT to OAST. On first day of hearings Dr. Fletcher testified on “steady increase” in NASA funding for aeronautics: Funding had grown from $42 million in FY 1966 to $110 million in FY 1972, “a doubling in terms of constant dollars. When you add the funding for salaries and other in-house costs related to supporting the aeronautics programs, the total . . . has grown from 1.6% of the total NASA budget in fiscal year 1966 to 7.1% in fiscal year 1972.” Number of NASA personnel members working in aeronautics research and technology had grown from 2600 in 1966 to 5300. Increase had occurred while NASA staff had been reduced from 34 000 to 27 500. Dr. Fletcher said joint Dept, of Transportation and NASA Study on Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) had “forced the establishment of new and more effective coordination mechanisms between NASA and DOT.” Mechanisms were being used “to develop a formal card Policy Implementation Plan to specify clear goals, responsibilities, planned achievement milestones, and projected resource requirements for dot and NASA jointly.” card policy study had caused “better focus on the priority problem areas of aircraft noise . . . and terminal congestion” and directed more specific attention to role R&D might play in developing better total operating system for low-density aviation market so that civil aviation might be used more economically as tool for regional development. Focus did not compromise “ability to continue a comprehensive research and technology program in all the aeronautical disciplines to provide a technology base for the future.” Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson of Ames Research Center outlined general recommendations of CARD study: scope of civil-aviation R&D programs should be expanded to emphasize nontechnological factors; economists and social scientists should be assigned to NASA and dot staffs, r&d staffs of Dept, of Defense, NASA, dot, and Civil Aeronautics Board should be interchanged to provide broad systems background for more effective Government action in civil aviation programs. cab should explore policy of allowing intermodal mergers of airlines for expanded use of air cargo to encourage innovative industry R&D in this area. Dept, of Commerce should refine and monitor measurable indicators of U.S. progress in civil aviation industry. National Aeronautics and Space Council should review and recommend national policies guiding civil aviation that embraced several agencies. George W. Cherry, Deputy Administrator for Programs in oast, reported “considerable ongoing activity abroad in designing, building and selling new, small economical aircraft for the world’s low-density short-haul market. This raises the questions: Where will replacement aircraft come from? Can the U.S. industry compete with the foreign manufacturers to fill the market?” Answers required “fundamental policy decisions by the United States with regard to the desirability of providing continuing or expanded public-need air service, and also . . . to whether Government support can or should be given to the manufacturer.” U.S. needed to know more about market and economics of operating in low-density area to write specifications for aircraft and operating system. “If industry designs fall short of meeting the economic specifications, there should be enough information available to determine if Government assistance . . . could result in the operator providing viable service. If subsidy is necessary, subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of manufacture, rather than the recurring costs of operation, might make good sense.” NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson described questol project plans for two quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (stol) transport research aircraft: “The experimental airplanes will function as a versatile facility for NASA flight research programs developed in cooperation with other Government agencies and interested industry groups, including the airlines. The information provided will reduce the technical risk associated with development, by industry, of both civil and military STOL transports” and “provide a comprehensive technical foundation on which Government regulatory agencies can establish realistic criteria for certification of commercial subsonic stol transport aircraft and for en route and terminal area operations.” (Transcript) January 19:	NASA announced selection of flight crews for Skylab missions. Prime crewmen for first, 28-day flight were Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot), and Paul J. Weitz (pilot). Backup crewmen were Russel L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Mus-grave, and Bruce McCandless II. Crewmen for second, 56-day mission were Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Third mission, for 56 days, would be flown by Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue. Backup crew for second and third missions was Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind, (nasa Release 72-12)
Sixty-ninth anniversary of first flight by Wright brothers was celebrated in Kitty Hawk, N.C., as Apollo 17 astronauts headed home from sixth manned landing on the moon. (AP, NYT, 12/17/72, 42)
Apollo 17 crew had selected mission emblem to emphasize beginning of golden age of space flight that final Apollo flight would usher in Dec. 6, NASA announced. Emblem showed Apollo gazing toward planet Saturn and a galaxy, symbolizing that man’s goal in space would someday include planets and even stars. Suspended behind Apollo image was American eagle with four red bars on wing, representing U.S. flag. Three white stars represented Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt. Eagle’s wing overlying moon suggested moon had been conquered by man. (nasa Special Release)
Man’s lunar theories were undergoing major revision because of Apollo 17, Wall Street Journal said. Observations by astronauts of orange soil on moon—clue to past volcanic activity—had promoted review of Apollo 14 color photos. Review had disclosed brown and orange discolorations on dome in crater Langrenus. Orange soil meant there might be other relatively young volcanic features. Discovery could result in major revision of thermal theories of moon. {WSJ, 12/19/72) December 20:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite by Atlas-Agena booster from Eastern Test Range. Satellite entered orbit with 40 728km (25 307-mi) apogee, 31 012-km (19 270-mi) perigee, 1440.4-min period, and 9.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 1973; Sheldon, Sci Policy Research Div, Library Congress; SBD, 12/26/72, 245)
President Rickard Nixon and Premier Alexsey N. Kosygin in Moscow signed the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. The agreement included a prefect to rendezvous and dock an American and a Soviet spacecraft in earth orbit and exchange astronaut and cosmonaut visits in each other's spacecraft during }975. In the photo of the docked model, the first two segments at lower left are the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, the cylindrical structure in the center is the docking module, and the Apollo command and service module is at the upper right, such other ways as may he mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation. “Article 3. The Parties have agreed to carry out projects for developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flights in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of the United States Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of Astronauts in each other’s spacecraft. The implementation of these projects will he carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the Summary of Results of the Meeting Between Representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on Question of Developing Compatible Systems for Rendezvous and Docking of Manned Spacecraft and Space Stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. dated April 6, 1972. “Article 4. The Parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field. “Article 5. The Parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. “Article 6. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.” Plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission were outlined in Fact Sheet issued by White House Press Secretary in Moscow: “Under today’s agreement both sides commit to the development of a complete project schedule, and to meeting that schedule. Arrangements will be made for the necessary contact and understanding between specialists. . . . Training exercises will be conducted in [each] country for the other country’s flight crew and ground operations personnel.” Working groups would meet in July to plan engineering aspects of mission. Persons directly participating in flight operations of test mission would be included in working groups two years before mission. During mission each country’s control center would be expected to control its own craft, but on decisions affecting joint elements of program—including countdown coordination—consultations would occur with other country. “There will be preplanned contingency courses of action. Television down-link will be transmitted to the other country’s control center, and voice communications between vehicle and ground will be available to the other country’s control center on a pre-planned basis.” Flight crews would be trained in other country’s language at least well enough to understand it and act in response during normal and contingency courses of action. Apollo command and service module (csm) and Saturn IB booster would be used. Additional cost of mission to U.S. would be about $250 million. Project Directors would be Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center, and Soviet Academician K. D. Bushuyev. (Texts)
Nearly half billion dollars worth of equipment, mostly junk, had been left on lunar surface during six Apollo landings, Chicago Tribune reported. List included rocket engines, electronic devices, golf ball driven by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., feather left by Apollo 15 commander David R. Scott (who had dropped feather and hammer simultaneously during televised extravehicular activity to show that they both fell at same rate in vacuum), and 12 prs of hoots costing $4000 a pair. Boots included those that Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong had used to make first footprints on moon. Technological items left on moon included 5 S—IVB rocket engines costing $20 million each, 6 $40-million lunar modules, 3 lunar rovers at $2 million each, TV and photography equipment costing $5 million, 12 backpacks costing $3.6 million, and assorted tools valued at $600 000. Still operative on moon were five nuclear-powered scientific stations costing $25 million each and three laser reflectors costing total $2 million. (Kotulak, C Trib News Service, C Trib, 12/16/72) December 17: Apollo 17 orbital science briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center while astronauts continued flight homeward from moon. Data from laser altimeter and S-band gravity experiments were described by Dr. Wilbur R. Wollenhaupt, Chief of msc Experiments Support Section and S-band transponder coinvestigator. Profiles of near-side lunar basins appeared to be flat and depressed with surrounding terrain. Far side appeared mountainous. Copernicus Crater was deficiency region; Sinus Aestuum, Mare Serenitatis, and Mare Crisium were high regions; and Littrow landing site was low. Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey, member of Apollo Orbital Science Photographic Team, said panoramic camera aboard Apollo 17 had “acted better than on the two previous flights [Apollo 15 and 16], and we essentially accomplished the tasks assigned to it.” During Apollo 17 mission “we saw the successful rectification of the 15 and 16 panoramic photographs, and they looked very good indeed. So, hopefully, we will have the rectification of 17 done shortly and put out a series of photomosaics, putting the high-resolution panoramic frames together into what we think will be the best series of maps that we have developed for the Moon.” Correlation of photography with gravity tracking and laser altimetry had produced “a great deal of data” to confirm earlier interpretations from Apollo 15 that lunar front side was low and that “largest area of mare material on the front side is an ocean basin floor, . . . not a result of the impact as the large gravity anomalies indicate in the impact basin.” Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Walter E. Brown reported lunar sounder experiment had “behaved about as we expected except that there were a couple of surprises.” Experimenters had expected that “over the Mare, the smooth areas, . . . we’d have a reasonably smooth, well-behaved echo, and over the mountainous area it might bounce around a little bit.” Sounder data had shown “it was fairly smooth over the mountains and it bounced around over the Mare.” Until mission film was returned, “we won’t know . . . just exactly what is going on, but it’s . . . extremely interesting.” Dr. Frank J. Low of Univ. of Arizona and Rice Univ. said scanning radiometer experiment performance “was essentially perfect.” It produced coverage of about one third of the surface area of the moon and made some 100 million independent temperature measurements. With “beautiful Atlas of thermal measurements generated by this magnificent flight,” scientists had “foundation of a new technique for exploration of planetary surfaces without atmospheres.” Johns Hopkins Univ. scientist William E. Fastie said far-ultraviolet spectrometer had “performed perfectly . . . and all of the observations that were intended were accomplished.” Experiment had detected neither major nor minor constituents of atmosphere. “And, pending further analysis, we have . . . identified only one trace constituent of the lunar atmosphere. The immediate conclusion ... is, that the Moon is not outgassing, because the only other possible gases that could be in the lunar atmosphere are neon and argon, and neither of them are the primordial atmosphere of the Moon.” Mood of briefing was conveyed by Apollo orbital science program scientist Floyd I. Roberson: “I think we’ve got a lot of tools in our hands now and we sit up here and we’re all tired and we talk about the results of our experiments and maybe we don’t convey the excitement that’s upon us. But, we really feel that this is a beginning as far as lunar science is concerned, as far as the Apollo data is concerned, and we’re really going to get there now.” (Transcript)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, appraised scientific contributions of Apollo program in testimony during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill. “. . . Apollo 11 crew crossed over four hundred thousand kilometers (250,000 miles) of space to touch another planetary body. Four teams of astronauts, from Apollos 11, 12, 14 and 15 . . . have now made the epic journey and walked the lunar surface. They have returned some 176 kg (388 lbs.) of lunar rocks and soils for analysis in earth-based laboratories and have established scientific stations on the moon that are continuously transmitting scientific and engineering data back to earth.” Apollo data, with information expected from continued sample analysis and lunar data analysis in the post-Apollo period, “surely will be of practical value to man, even helping him to cope with current environmental problems on earth.” NASA sample analysis program had “required unprecedented advancement in instrumentation and techniques to perform multiple element and isotope analyses with extreme precision on minute amounts of sample.” Improved high-resolution instruments made “detailed investigations of surface features and internal structure of materials.” Other related important breakthroughs had been computer hardware and software for processing and reducing large amounts of analytical data in a very short time. “These advances, in large part stimulated by NASA-funded meteorite studies, were absolutely essential, because of the scientifically unique, but limited, lunar materials. . . . these high precision research methods can now or will soon be routinely utilized in industrial processes and laboratories.” They could also “be immediately applied to a variety of environmental and biomedical problems by providing the capability to check and monitor levels of pollutants and toxic elements in our atmosphere, water, and foods.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider outlined program’s progress: “During the coming fiscal year testing and checkout will be completed and operation of Skylab will have started. Within 2 years, the first Skylab . . . will have become part of history, having contributed new knowledge in many fields.” Skylab offered “an earth observation capability never before available” to U.S. manned spacecraft. During eight-month mission, Skylab would fly over entire U.S. except Alaska, over much of Europe, all of Africa, Australia, China, and almost all of South America—covering 75% of earth’s surface and passing over each point every five days. By end of 1971, 288 investigations requiring Skylab data had been submitted, 249 U.S. and 39 foreign. Of these, 164 had been identified for further study. Skylab was “first manned space flight program designed specifically to carry activities and equipment explicitly aimed at improving man’s life on earth. It will contribute significantly to the increase of knowledge of pure science and is also an experimental space station; a forerunner of permanent space stations of the future.” Earth-oriented sensors would test technology for synoptic surveys of many environmental and ecological systems. Solar and astronomical observations and other science experiments would expand knowledge of solar system, universe, and near-earth space. Biomedical experiments would inform how man’s well-being and ability to function were affected by living in space. Harry H. Gorman, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on $305-million FY 1973 budget request for development, test, and mission operations in manned space flight research and development program: “This is the first year in which this activity is presented as a separate item. . . With near-completion of Apollo program, “we believe it iinportant to separately identify and control this basic capability which has been built up. . . . This work is essential to the support of the Nation’s space programs for the 1970’s and beyond.” Requested funding would provide for contractor support of in-house capabilities for Apollo and Skylab programs; for definition, design, development, and subsystem testing activities in shuttle program; and for pre-definition and definition of future programs, including High Energy Astronomy Observatory, Stratoscope 1 and 2, and Earth Observation Satellites. (Transcript)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford made joint “flight” with Soviet Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev in Soyuz spacecraft simulator at Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), cosmonaut training center near Moscow. Stafford was member of NASA delegation to Oct. 9-19 Moscow meetings on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), joint rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. (upi, W Star & News, 10/18/72)
Houston, Tex., public TV station kuht—tv announced it had been only TV station to carry entire coverage of Apollo 17 extravehicular activity. On Dec. 11, 12, and 13 station had shown uninterrupted coverage of Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt on moon. On Dec. 17 station had carried Astronaut Ronald E. Evans’ space walk live from earth orbit, kuht eva coverage had totaled 25 hrs. British Broadcasting Corp. had sent 13 hrs of Apollo 17 programming through kuht’s facilities to United Kingdom via satellite. (kuht Release)
Belgian artist Paul Van Hoeydonck, who had sculpted small statue “Fallen Astronaut” that was left on moon by Apollo 15 astronauts [see April 18], was selling 950 copies of statue at $750 each through New York art dealer Waddell Gallery, Washington Evening Star and Daily News reported. NASA spokesman had said that astronauts had carried statue to moon with agency’s approval and felt they had “gentlemen’s agreement” with Van Hoeydonck that precluded any commercialization of venture. Spokesman said he knew of no regulations violated by astronauts in moon sculpture incident. (Delaney, W Star & News, 7/21/72, 1)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., were honored during Astronaut Day celebration in Chicago. They rode in tickertape parade, attended ceremonies at City Hall escorted by Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley, and visited Michael Reese Hospital. At hospital they met Dr. Samuel Natelson who had invented instruments and techniques by which astronauts’ body fluids were monitored by Manned Spacecraft Center Mission Control. (C Daily News, 5/17/72)
Former astronaut James A. McDivitt—Special Assistant to Manned Spacecraft Center Director for Organizational Affairs since May—announced his resignation from NASA and Air Force, effective Sept. 1, when he would become Senior Vice President of Consumer Power Co. in Jackson, Mich. He would be on terminal leave from July 1 until Sept. 1. McDivitt, Air Force brigadier general, had commanded Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) and Apollo 9 (March 3-13, 1969) and had left Astronaut Office in June 1969 to become Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA Release 72-131)
Astronauts Philip K. Chapman and Anthony W. England announced their resignations from NASA. Dr. Chapman, Apollo 14 mission scientist, had accepted position as Principal Research Scientist for Avco Research Laboratories in Everett, Mass., and would also work as senior research associate in Measurement Systems Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His resignation was effective immediately. Dr. England, Apollo 13 and Apollo 16 mission scientist, would accept position with U.S. Geological Survey Regional Geophysics Group in Denver, Colo., Aug. 14. He would assist in developing techniques using radar from aircraft and spacecraft to learn about surface and subsurface structure of earth and other planets. (NASA Release 72-142)
Two volunteers began pilot investigation at U.S. Public Health Service Hospital in San Francisco to retrace Apollo 15 mission profile and determine cause of astronauts’ slower-than-usual return to physiologic norm. Program, conducted for Manned Spacecraft Center, included set periods of vigorous physical exercise, bed rest, and posttest analysis. Bed rest portion was considered analogue of weightlessness. Potassium intake would be closely controlled because NASA doctors postulated Apollo 15 crew had not consumed enough potassium for their workload and adjustment to weightlessness. Program consisted of 9-day equilibration, 7-day control phase, 12-day bed rest, and 14-day recovery period, (msc Release 72-39; msc pao)
Senate received President Nixon’s nominations of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., for promotion from lieutenant colonel to full colonel in Air Force and of Apollo 16 Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II for promotion from lieutenant commander in Navy to permanent grade of commander. Senate confirmed both nominations May 16. (CR, 5/2/72, S7135; 5/16/72, S7969) May 3:	Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., held press conference at Manned Spacecraft Center and showed films and still photos taken during April 16-27 mission. Crew’s physical condition was already back to normal. Mattingly’s exercise-response tests had been normal one day after landing, and Young’s and Duke’s had been normal two days after landing. Tests to determine potassium levels were still under way. Young said engine problem that had delayed lunar landing six hours had made Apollo 16 “a cliff-hanger of a mission from where we were sitting in the cockpit; but the ground came through . . . with a couple of clutch hits and put us right back in the ball game. I know there was a lot of work being done on the ground and, speaking for the flight crew, we certainly appreciate it.” Young also praised lunar roving vehicle which carried him and Duke over lunar surface. “The suspension system on the Rover is absolutely remarkable. We never had the feeling of spinning out or anything, but sometimes we went in some deep holes and sometimes the vehicle bounced up in the air and came down on a rock . . . [but] it didn’t seem to affect the performance of the machine.” Duke said lunar surface was so clear that “features look almost like you’re right next door to them,” like a clear day in western U.S. desert. “Some mountains you think are right next to you and [they] end up 20 miles [32 km] away. You have the same feeling on the lunar surface. Looking out the window from the lunar module . . . South Ray Crater . . . looks like it’s just right next to you, but it was 6 kilometers [3% miles] away.” (Transcript)
Belgian artist Paul Van Hoeydonck had sculpted small statue “Fallen Astronaut” that was left on moon by Apollo 15 astronauts during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission, New York Times reported. Name of artist had not previously been disclosed, but Smithsonian Institution recently had asked Van Hoeydonck for replica. (NYT, 4/18/72, 51; Smithsonian nasm)
President Nixon and Secretary General Leonid I. Brezhnev of Soviet Communist Party’s Central Committee signed “Basic Principles of Relations” outlining agreements made between U.S. and U.S.S.R. during May 22-29 summit meetings in Moscow. They then released joint communique at conclusion of President’s visit to U.S.S.R. Communique described agreements on cooperation in science and technology and space: “It was recognized that the cooperation now underway in areas such as atomic energy research, space research, health and other fields benefits both nations and has contributed positively to their over-all relations. It was agreed that increased scientific and technical cooperation on the basis of mutual benefit and shared effort for common goals is in the interest of both nations and would contribute to a further improvement in their bilateral relations.” In peaceful exploration of space, “both Sides emphasized the importance of further bilateral cooperation.... In order to increase the safety of mam’s flights into outer space and the future prospects of joint scientific experiments, the two Sides agreed to make suitable arrangements to permit the docking of American and Soviet spacecraft and stations. The first joint docking experiment of the two countries’ piloted spacecraft, with visits by astronauts and cosmonauts to each other’s spacecraft is contemplated for 1975.” NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences would plan and implement flight “according to principles and procedures developed through mutual consultations.” (PD, 6/5/72, 945-51)
Reassignment of Apollo 15 Astronaut Alfred M. Worden from Astronaut Office at Manned Spacecraft Center to Airborne Science Office Space Science Div. at Ames Research Center was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Worden would use astronaut experience in developing and evaluating systems and procedures for arc airborne science and space-shuttle-vehicle simulation studies and in earth resources surveys and high-altitude astronomy using NASA aircraft, (msc Release 72-197)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
Newspaper editorials commented on close of Apollo program with Apollo 17 launch. Los Angeles Times: “Thanks to the marvels of satellite communications, 3,000 European doctors were able recently to ‘attend’ a medical meeting in San Antonio via television. A computer designed for the space agency is helping Detroit design safer steering linkages in cars and trucks. A technique for clarifying spacecraft photos of the moon is being used by hospitals to provide much sharper x rays. The thousands of men and women who have participated in the Apollo program, and the American people who supported it, have all cause for great pride in Apollo. It has been one of the best investments this country ever made, one of the most rewarding adventures it ever undertook.” (LA Times, 12/6/72) Christian Science Monitor: “To the layman, what has been learned about the moon and space has been an extension of our knowledge of the universe, not a radical departure. In this light, it is comforting to think that the Apollo program, remarkable though it has been historically, may illustrate that even the farthest reaches of today’s unknown may prove to be no more than the captive of tomorrow’s familiar.” (CSM, 12/6/72)	_ New York Times: “Even as the world awaits this final launch, debate continues about the wisdom of the entire Apollo project. Some consider the moon landings the most brilliant scientific achievement in history; others still look at the whole venture as a waste of resources needed for urgent requirements here on earth. Yet one fact about the venture is beyond dispute: in the years 1969-72 men landed on another celestial body for the first time and showed they could live and work in the bizarre and literally inhuman conditions on that foreign planet. Long after most other developments of the twentieth century are forgotten, future generations will recall this as the century in which men broke the bonds of terrestrial gravity and began their cosmic destiny.” (NYT, 12/6/72, 42) Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (command module pilot), and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt (lunar module pilot and geologist)—was launched at 12:33 am EST Dec. 7, with illumination from S-IC 1st stage creating brilliance of morning sun. Liftoff, witnessed by crowd estimated at 500 000 and by nationwide and foreign TV viewers, was visible to naked eye as far as South Carolina to north and Cuba to south. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 170-km (105.6-mi) apogee and 168-km (104.4-mi) perigee. Following checkout, spacecraft was inserted into trajectory lor moon at 3:13 ground elapsed time (get) as planned, csm separation from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:42 GET and docking with lm at 3:57 get were shown on TV. During docking possible ring latch malfunction was indicated. Troubleshooting revealed latches 7, 9, and 10 were unlocked. Latch 10 was locked by pushing on handle; latches 7 and 9 were locked and manually fired to lock handles. Following hatch replacement, csm/lm combination was ejected from S-IVB stage at 4:45 get. S-IVB lunar impact maneuver targeted stage to strike moon’s surface Dec. 10. Midcourse correction (MCC-1) was not necessary because of nominal trajectory. MCC—2 maneuver was performed on time at 35:30 get, changing velocity 3 m per sec (9.9 fps). Cernan and Schmitt entered LM at 40:10 get and discovered docking latch 4 improperly latched. Evans moved latch handle 30°^t5°, disengaging hook from docking ring. Mission Control and flight crew decided to wait until second LM entering at 59:59 get for further action on latch. Remainder of LM housekeeping was nominal and LM was closed out at 42:11 GET. Heat flow and convection demonstrations were conducted as planned; results were satisfactory. MCC-3 and -4 were not required because of near-nominal trajectory. LM housekeeping was resumed at 59:59 get and completed at 62:16 get with all systems nominal. Evans, following ground instructions, stroked docking latch 4 handle and succeeded in cocking latch. Latch was left in cocked position for csm-lm rendezvous. Planned trajectory was modified continually because of late liftoff; coast toward moon was accelerated to ensure arrival of spacecraft at lunar orbit insertion (loi) at scheduled GMT time. GET clock was updated 2 hrs 40 min at 65:00 get to place all events on original flight plan schedule. Crew began one-hour visual-light-flash phenomenon observation at 68:19 GET and reported seeing bright to dull light flashes. Cernan reported continuing gas pains during private consultation via separate radio link with Dr. W. Royee Hawkins, Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations. He was told to continue taking antigas pills and to alter diet. Crew jettisoned scientific instrument module (sim) door at 84:12 GET and said SIM bay looked good. S-IVB 3rd stage impacted on lunar surface at 89:39 GET (3:32 pm EST Dec. 10) at 4° 12' south latitude and 12° 18' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 seismometers. Evans described crew’s excitement at reaching vicinity of moon: “We’re breathing so hard, the windows are fogging up.” Schmitt interrupted running commentary on lunar topography with shout: “Hey I just saw a flash on the lunar surface!” When assured by Mission Control that impact of possible small meteor would have been masked on seismometers by S-IVB 3rd-stage impact, Schmitt groaned: “Just my luck.” Cernan—who had orbited moon during May 18-26, 1969, Apollo 10 mission—described sight as “still just as impressive.” Descent orbit insertion (DOI-1) was performed at 90:31 get. CSM and LM undocked and separated on schedule at 107:48 get. Circularization maneuver placed csm in orbit with 129-km (80.2-mi) apolune and 100-km (62.1-mi) perilune. DOI-2, at 109:50 get, inserted lm into orbit with 111-km (69.0-mi) apolune and 11-km (6.8-mi) perilune. Powered descent was initiated and Challenger touched down on Taurus-Littrow site at 113:02 get (2:55 pm est Dec. 11). Cernan descended lm ladder four hours later, at 117:02 get, and said: “As I step off at the surface at Taurus-Littrow, I’d like to dedicate the first step of Apollo 17 to all those who made it possible.” Schmitt, first geologist to walk on moon, followed and asked, “Hey, who’s been tracking up my lunar surface?” Cernan said surrounding hills looked like “wrinkled skin of an old, old, 100-year-old man.” Astronauts deployed lunar roving vehicle. Cernan made short test drive and said, “Hallelujah, Houston! Challenger’s baby is on the roll.” As Cernan and Schmitt set up TV equipment, Cernan called to Schmitt: “Hey, Jack, just stop. You owe yourself 30 seconds to look up over the South Massif and look at the Earth.” Schmitt replied: “What? The Earth? You seen one earth, you’ve seen them all.” Cernan unfurled U.S. flag on lunar surface while Schmitt took his picture. Cernan said, “It’s got to be one of the most proud moments of my life.” Flag had “flown in the mocr [Mission Operations Control Room] since Apollo 11. And we very proudly deploy it on the Moon, to stay for as long as it can, in honor of all those people who have worked so hard to put us here and to put every other crew here and to make the country, the United States and mankind, something different than it was.” While preparing to traverse to Apollo lunar surface experiment package site, Cernan inadvertently knocked extension off of lrv right rear fender and repairs were made with tape. Astronauts crossed to alsep site, where they deployed alsep. Color TV camera beamed live telecast to earth. LRV fender again fell off during traverse to Steno Crater, lunar station 1A. Crew deployed surface electrical properties experiment and explosive packages during 7-hr 12-min lunar surface exploration. First eva ended at 124:13 get. Second eva began 1 hr 20 min late, at 140:35 get (6:28 pm est Dec. 12). Cernan and Schmitt, on instructions from Mission Control, improvised replacement for lost lrv fender extension. Four chronopaque maps were taped together and held in place by two portable utility lamp clamps. “Call me the little old fender maker,” Cernan said. Cernan and Schmitt visited lunar stations 2, 2A, 3, 4, and 5. They deployed explosive packages, obtained photos, and collected and documented soil samples. At station 4, Shorty Crater, Schmitt shouted: “There is orange soil! It’s all over! Orange!” Cernan confirmed finding: “Jack that is really orange. It’s been oxidized.” Schmitt dug trench and extracted sample which he described to Mission Control: “An essential portion of the zone . . . actually has a crimson hue, or red hue. Outside of that it’s orange. And outside of that, it’s gray.” Scientists on ground immediately speculated that soil might have originated from volcanism on moon as recently as 100 million yrs earlier. If so, it would contradict “dead moon” theory that moon had always been cold and inert. Dr. Robin P. Brett, head of MSC Geochemistry Branch, told press, “What we have been witnessing may be one of the most significant finds of Apollo geology.” Schmitt revisited ALSEP site to verify that lunar surface gravimeter had been leveled properly. EVA-2 ended at 148:35 get (2:05 am EST Dec. 13), after 7 hrs 37 min. Total distance covered during second eva was 19 km (12 mi). Third eva began 50 min late at 163:35 GET (5:26 pm est Dec. 13). Cosmic ray detector was retrieved before start of traverse to prevent exposure to low-energy solar protons from small solar flare. Cernan and Schmitt took black and white and color photos and collected 66 kg (145.9 lbs) of samples. Samples included blue-gray breccias, finegrained vesicular basalts, crushed anorthositic rocks, and soils. EVA-3 ended at 170:48 get {0:41 am est Dec. 14), after 7 hrs 16 min. During EVA—3 Evans, orbiting in CSM 113 km (70 mi) above lunar surface, identified series of volcanic domes in Aitken Grater, on moon’s far side. Before entering Challenger for last time, Cernan and Schmitt stepped before TV cameras. Cernan said: “To commemorate not just Apollo ITs visit to the Valley of Taurus-Littrow but as an everlasting commemoration of what the real meaning of Apollo is to the world, we’d like to uncover a plaque that has been on the leg of our spacecraft.” He read inscription: “Here man completed his first exploration of the Moon, December 1972 A.D. May the spirit of peace in which we came be reflected in the lives of all mankind.” Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, congratulated astronauts from Mission Control at msc and conveyed Godspeed message from President Nixon. As astronauts boarded LM, Cernan said: “I believe history will record that America’s challenge of today has forged man’s destiny of tomorrow. And, as we leave the moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came and, God willing, as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind. God speed the crew of Apollo 17T Total time for three EVAs was 22 hrs 5 min 4 sec, during which Cernan and Schmitt traveled 35 km (22 mi) in LRV, collected 115 kg (250 lbs) of samples, and took 2120 photos. Good-quality TV transmission was received throughout evas. Astronauts depressurized lm and discarded excess equipment, im lifted off lunar surface at 188:02 get (5:55 pm EST Dec. 14). TV cameras in CSM provided excellent picture in Mission Control as lm approached. Cernan in lm said, “Good to see you .... It’s been a good trip.” Evans replied, “Good to have you all back up here.” Observing that “America and Challenger are . . . good tight Navy formation,” Cernan told Evans, “Command module looks as good as the day they put it on the pad.” Evans answered, “And, you know, so does Challenger.” CSM and lm docked in lunar orbit at 190:17 get and Cernan and Schmitt transferred to csm with samples and equipment, lm ascent stage was jettisoned as planned. Impact of stage on lunar surface at 195:57 get was recorded by four Apollo 17 geophones and Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 alseps. Explosive packages were detonated and events were picked up by lunar seismic profiling geophones. Flash and dust from EP 7 explosion were seen on TV. Insertion into trajectory for earth began at 236:42 get, after csm’s 147 hrs 48 min in lunar orbit. December 17-19:	Spacecraft left moon’s sphere of influence at 250:40 get, traveling at 1173 m per sec (3851 fps). Evans left CSM at 257:34 get (3:27 pm est Dec. 17) for 1-hr 7-min inflight eva to retrieve lunar sounder film and panoramic and mapping camera cassettes in three trips to sim bay. TV pictures relayed to Mission Control showed him cavorting in weightlessness in stiff white pressure suit and attached to 7.6-m (25-ft) line. Following space walk, astronauts settled down for final two days of mission. cm separated from sm at 304:04 get, 15 min before entry interface at 121 920 m (400 000 ft). Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and cm splashed down in mid-Pacific 6.4 km (4.0 mi) from prime recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 304:31 GET (2:25 pm est Dec. 19). Recovery helicopter dropped swimmers, who installed flotation collar and attached life raft. Astronauts were transported to recovery ship for postflight examination. They would be flown to Houston via Samoa the following day. CSM was retrieved by recovery ship for transport to San Diego, Calif. Apollo 17 achieved primary objectives—to make selenological survey and sampling of materials and surface features in preselected area of Taurus-Littrow region, emplace and activate surface experiments, and conduct inflight experiments and photography. Launch vehicle and spacecraft system performances were near nominal throughout mission. Only minor discrepancies occurred, with no effect on safety or mission objectives. Flight crew performance was good. Mission was judged officially to be “a great success.” Accomplishments included sixth manned lunar landing and return, first geologist-astronaut on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (74 hrs 59 min 38 sec), longest single lunar surface eva (7 hrs 37 min 22 sec), longest total lunar surface EVA time (22 hrs 5 min 4 sec), longest total lunar distance traversed with LRV (35 km; 22 mi), longest Apollo mission (12 days 13 hrs 51 min), most samples returned (115 kg; 250 lb), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Apollo 17 was 14th and last scheduled mission in Apollo series and 11th manned Apollo mission. Apollo 16 had flown April 16-27. Highlights of Apollo program had been first manned orbit of moon by Apollo 8 (Dec. 21-27, 1968), first landing of men on moon during Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969), and first use of lunar roving vehicle on moon during Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug 7, 1971). Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-220K; msc Transcript 07629; NYT, 12/8-20/72; W Post, 12/8-20/72; nasa pio) December 7:	President Nixon sent message to Apollo 17 crew following successful launch: “With the final mission of the Apollo lunar exploration series man completes another step in his quest for knowledge of his universe and of himself. Those who come after will stand on the shoulders of the men of Apollo and their dedicated support team. I wish you good luck and Godspeed.” {PD, 12/11/72, 1734-5)
Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the last Apollo mission: A lot was riding on Apollo 17 “in its attempt to unlock the moon’s most ancient secrets and thereby perhaps the earth’s. Those three astronauts, with their record-size cargo of instruments, have the trickiest landing and the hardest lunar tasks in this whole program ahead of them.” (W Star & News, 12/5/72, A12)
Display of sculpture “Scott and Irwin on the Moon” by Red Grooms opened at Guggenheim Museum in New York. Diorama showing moon, Apollo 15 lunar roving vehicle Rover and huge figure of astronaut had been commissioned as part of NASA-National Gallery of Art “Eyewitness to Space” program but Grooms had paid all of his own expenses. Washington Post art critic Paul Richard later said work managed “to capture something of the scale, something of the heroism and the hubris, of man’s exploration of the moon.” It should “move to some public place, the National Portrait Gallery, perhaps, after it leaves the Guggenheim on Feb. 27.” (W Post, 1/19/72, Bl)
Apollo 7 Astronaut Donn F. Eisele was sworn in as a Peace Corps director. He would supervise 315 volunteers and 14 paid staff members in Bangkok, Thailand, beginning assignment in mid-June while on terminal leave from Air Force. His retirement from Air Force, after 20 yrs service, would be effective July 1. (W News, 5/23/72; NYT, 5/23/72, 27) had said that “decade ended with an adventure so fantastic as almost to overshadow and redeem all the turmoil that had scarred it.” Redeeming adventure had been Apollo 11 moon landing, which Dr. Fletcher called “the one great event of the decade that gave the American people renewed faith in their destiny.” William M. Magruder, special consultant on technology to President Nixon, said U.S. had lost any chance of competing for first airline supersonic transport orders. He predicted U.S. would produce “second generation” SST that would begin carrying passengers in a decade. l/g Otto J. Glasser (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff, Research and Development, said in speech that U.S. aerospace industry had become “overbuilt, overmanned, and overmanaged. Not only are there too many companies, but collectively they have more production capacity than we have any conceivable future need for. The passing of relatively ineffective . . . DC-3s and P—51s has gradually rendered obsolete and archaic our production oriented industry.” Gen. Glasser recommended that U.S. firms follow European approach of “very small, tightly integrated design teams manned by top-of-their-graduating-class engineers.” (Texts; NYT, 5/23/72) May 23:	Scientists	at Manned Spacecraft Center detonated by radio command three of four explosive mortar charges left on moon by Apollo 16 astronauts. Fourth grenade was not detonated because data indicated attitude sensor might have been knocked out of position by previous firings. Analysis of data on pitch sensor was under way to determine if sensor had failed or if mortar package had shifted its position. First grenade contained 270 g (0.6 lb) of explosive with predicted range of 910 m (3000 ft). Second had 45 g (0.1 lb) and 150-m (500-ft) predicted range. Third had 140-g (0.3-lb) charge and 300-m (1000-ft) predicted range. Signals from three explosions, recorded by geophones left on lunar surface, indicated that moon’s surface layer was at least 50 m (164 ft) thick, (msc Release 72—112; O’Toole, W Post, 5/24/72, A3; upi, C Trib, 5/24/72)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans participated in final prelaunch test aboard spacecraft. Astronauts wore spacesuits for simulated liftoff of Saturn V rocket. Following test, launch crew began to ready command module “America” and lunar module “Challenger” for start of actual countdown scheduled for Nov. 30. (AT, B Sun, 11/22/72, A5)
Prospects of U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts “chummily tooling around” in orbit had “hardly raised a ripple when it was announced at the Moscow Meetings,” author Robert Sherrod commented in New York Times article. But attempts of President John F. Kennedy to “cooperate with the Soviets in space nine years ago” had failed. Failure showed “differing methods of Kennedy the idealist and Nixon the pragmatist.” President Nixon had “smoothed the way” with seven meetings between U.S. and Soviet engineers, beginning with April 24, 1970, meeting between then NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, and Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov. President Kennedy’s attitude toward space program had been “ambivalent” until Sept. 20, 1963, when he proposed “joint expedition to the moon” in speech before United Nations. Proposal had come as surprise and had “staggered” anti-Soviet space supporters in Congress, who proceeded to pare NASA budget. House had voted 125 to 110 against using NASA funds for joint lunar landing with Communist country. Kennedy had “forgotten that politics is the art of the possible, forgotten that a leader should never surprise his own close support,” Sherrod said. “In the sunnier climate of 1972, Richard Nixon duly observed the axiom and the rule.” (NYT, 6/17/72)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Ronald E. Evans would receive promotion from commander to captain in Navy despite Government freeze on promotions, Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim told press in Washington, D.C. Exemption had been granted specifically for Evans. Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan had received promotion to captain in Navy for previous space exploits. (W Post, 12/16/72, A4)
Senate received nomination of Apollo 10 astronaut Col. Thomas P. Stafford (usaf) to be brigadier general. Col. Stafford was Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center. (CR, 1/31/72, S824; A&A 1971)
Apollo 15 astronauts had been “disciplined out of the astronaut corps” for ignoring warning by Chief of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton not to carry items to moon for commercial gain, Washington Post said. Slayton’s warnings had been in personal briefings to crew and memorandum to all astronauts. Warnings had been inspired by discovery that Franklin Mint had profited from melting down coins taken to moon by Apollo 14 astronauts during Jan. 31-Feb. 9, 1971, mission, mixing their molten silver with other metals, and producing 130 000 coins for sale. (O’Toole, W Post, 8/1/72, A8)
Leesburg, Fla., high school students Dale Delpit and Mike Holloway emerged after 6 days and 16 hrs in capsule built by their science class to simulate spacecraft. They had walked and slept on waterbed to simulate weightlessness and had eaten pre-prepared foods. Both boys, aged 14, emerged with wobbly knees and with charcoal on faces to look like astronauts’ beards. (W Star, 6/12/72, 20) April 12:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other NASA officials testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science-Veterans Appropriations during hearings on NASA FY 1973 appropriation. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, demonstrated model of space shuttle and explained configuration and costs. Dr. Fletcher said that in halving cost of original plans main sacrifice was that “we are not reusing all the parts. We use this expendable gas tank to supply the orbiter. . . . That, however, had an enormous effect on the size. We were able to bring the size of the orbiter down so that we were able to use solid fuel rockets.” Dr. Low added, “We sacrificed nothing in terms of what kinds of satellites, what kinds of payloads we can put into orbit.” Estimates of larger costs by shuttle opponents had been derived by adding in cost of “all the satellites it will carry, the weather satellites, the communications satellites, and all of those things that would be carried anyway, whether there is a Shuttle or not,” Dr. Low said. “And this could be likened to charging to the cost of a freight train the cost also of all of the freight that it is going to carry.” In reply to question on cooperation with U.S.S.R., Dr. Low cited decision to build docking and rendezvous systems compatible between U.S. and U.S.S.R. manned spacecraft. Shuttle “will have a system on it so it can attach to another satellite and we will make that system so it is the same as the Russians will use on their satellites, so that if we need to rescue each other ... or if we want to conduct joint experiments in space, we can do that.” Queried on comparison of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs, Dr. Fletcher said, “It is quite apparent that over the last 3 or 4 years, the Soviet space effort has grown in dollar volume and in number of launches per year, during the period that ours has declined. So that . . . they are spending quite a bit more in space than we are. It is estimated that perhaps 2 percent of their gross national product is spent for space, whereas a half of a percent of our GNP is spent on space. . . . Our number of launches per year has steadily declined from a peak of something [like] almost 80 in 1966, down to . . . the order of 30 or 35 in 1970 and 1971; whereas, the number of their launches has steadily climbed . . . and is now higher than even our peak. In 1971, they launched over 80 spacecraft, whereas our launches were down to less than half that.” (Transcript)
Scientist-Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt was calmest of Apollo 17 astronauts at launch time, United Press International reported. His heartbeat at liftoff was 115 beats per minute, with 130 for Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Ronald E. Evans. Apollo 16 rates had been 108 for Astronaut John W. Young, 115 for Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II, and 130 for Astronaut Charles M. Duke. Launch Director Walter J. Kapryan had said Apollo 17 crew was more tense because of liftoff delay. (C Trib, 12/8/72)
Apollo 17 astronauts arrived at Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., after flight from Samoa, via Hawaii, aboard Air Force C—141 jet transport. After reception at airport by crowd of 5000, they went to Manned Spacecraft Center for debriefings that would continue through Dec. 23. (Wilford, NYT, 12/22/72, 15; WSJ, 12/22/72)
New York Times editorial commented on plaque launched on Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe March 2:	“Despite the uncanny >mastery of celestial laws that permits man to shoot his artifacts at the stars, we find ourselves still depressingly inept at ordering our own systems here on earth. Even as we try to find a way to insure that sapient man will not consume his planet in nuclear fires, a rising chorus warns us that man may very well exhaust his earth either by overbreeding or by inordinate demands on its resources, or both. “So the marker launched into space is at the same time a gauntlet thrown down to earth: that the gold-plated plaque convey in its time the message that man is still here—not that he has been there.” (NYT, 3/4/72, 26) March 5:	Apollo Program Director Rocco A. Petrone, in interview published by Washington Post, described Apollo 16 experiment to determine whether moon had its own magnetic field. Apollo 16 astronauts would carry to moon a magnetic rock collected by previous Apollo landing to see if it changed when returned to moon. “We want to see if the magnetism that we have found in moon rocks was not somehow picked up on the voyage back to earth. The whole purpose of this exercise is to prove the existence of a magnetic field on the moon, which in effect proves that the moon was once hot like the earth. Most scientists believe there will be no change, that the magnetism was locked forever into these rocks when they solidified in the moon’s magnetic field.” Astronauts would also set up magnetometer on moon and place a moon rock on head of instrument for instant reading of its magnetism. When rock was brought to earth, it would be read again for comparison with reading on moon. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/5/72, A3)
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)
NASA announced publication of The Experiments of Biosatellite II (NASA SP-204), edited by Joseph F. Sanders. Book described first successfully completed Biosatellite mission, which carried plants, frog eggs, amoeba, and seeds on earth orbital mission Sept. 7-9, 1967, to determine effect of space flight on living organisms, (nasa WR, 5/1/72, 5; A&A 1967) May 1—4:	Fourth meeting of Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Editorial Board for preparation and publication of space biology and medicine review convened in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Dr. Melvin Calvin of Univ. of California at Berkeley and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Ministry of Health. Under Oct. 8, 1965, Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Board reviewed research from the two countries for publication, (nasa Release 72-89) May 2:	Apollo 16 rock and photography briefing was held at Manned ' Spacecraft Center. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said first few weeks of preliminary examination of Apollo 16 samples would be occupied with opening bags and weighing, dusting, photographing, and examining rocks. Catalog, including photos, of all samples should be completed by end of May. Rocks examined to date appeared to be breccias. One rock—collected during third extravehicular activity and described on moon by Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., as “an honest to goodness igneous rock”—was different in texture and appearance from other typical breccias, but had not yet been precisely classified. “Zap pits” on the surface indicated rock had been lying on one side. It was flattish with very fine, silverish crystals in finer grain matrix with no vesicules. Dr. Gast said rock could be rapidly crystallized igneous rock, very-high-grade metamorphic rock, or metamorphic rock that had been at temperatures of 1000°C (1300 K) long enough to be completely recrystallized. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas and U.S. Geological Survey expressed surprise at “the tremendous number of clasts [rock fragments]” within rocks. Clasts represented “crustal material hauled in from somewhere and that’s a tremendous plus beyond what we had originally conceived of as getting. ... So whether it’s volcanic in origin and therefore . . . this is crust from straight under somewhere or whether it’s impact origin and therefore crustal material thrown in from some distance doesn’t matter.” By selecting Descartes as landing site, NASA*had obtained extra sampling, “maybe even a better sampling,” than in other highlands missions. “And we may even have sampled another quadrant of the Moon that we wouldn’t have gotten in any other way. ... we may have a good deal more than the 15 percent or so of the highlands represented in these rocks and we may have a much older segment of the time scale represented.” (Transcript)
One consequence of President Nixon’s Feb. 17-28 state visit to People’s Republic of China could be indefinite ban on overflights of mainland China by reconnaissance drones and high-altitude U-2 aircraft engaged in intelligence-collecting missions, Aviation Week & Space Technology article said. “If the anticipated decision is made, it presumably would end any consideration of flying Boeing’s upcoming long-endurance Compass Cope drone on proposed 24-hr missions over Communist China.” (Av Wk, 2/28/72, 11) February 28-March 24: City of Memphis and Shelby County, Tenn., conducted “Space and Science Awareness Month” to inform citizens about national space program. Project—sponsored by greater Memphis area school systems and supported by NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center—was opened £y Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart and NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. Program exhibited space-related displays—including moon rock, lunar roving vehicle mockup, and models and displays on several NASA programs—at Pink Palace Museum. Also included were displays of educational literature on space technology in 250 school libraries; lectures at 65 schools and at various club meetings by NASA officials; 14 seminars and workshops for teachers; showing of 25 films at elementary schools, on Memphis educational TV station, and to adult groups; and presentation of series of programs on etv station. Memphis awareness month was largest space information program ever held by U.S. city, (msfc Release 72-16)
NASA released photos of Apollo 16 astronauts on lunar surface during
Geraldine Cobb, former NASA employee, had piloted twin engine Islander aircraft for average six hours daily during 15-day search for survivors of Lockheed Electra airliner that crashed in Peruvian jungle Dec. 24, 1971, with 92 aboard, Reuters reported. Miss Cobb, who had picked up only survivor of crash and had flown her to missionary settlement, had passed all NASA tests to become astronaut, Reuters said. She had been “No. 1 choice to be the first woman to fly an Apollo mission until the space program was cut back and it became clear that no woman would be selected by nasa.” (B Sun, 1/12/72, A2)
Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt retired from Air Force and received Air Force Distinguished Service Medal with Oak Leaf Cluster during ceremony at Bolling Air Force Base, D.C. McDivitt, who held rank of brigadier general, had announced retirement from NASA effective Sept. 1 [see June 7]. (Boldt, W Post, 9/1/72, Cl)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 16 astronauts presented 50 awards at Marshall Space Flight Center to Government and industry personnel who assisted successful Apollo 16 mission (April 16-27). (msfc Release 72—75)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate John A. Volpe to be U.S. Ambassador to Italy and Claude S. Brinegar to succeed Volpe as Secretary of Transportation. Nominations were sent to Senate Jan. 4. {PD, 12/11/72, 1735; 1/8/72, 12) December 8:	Soviet newspapers Pravda and Komsomolskaya carried detailed reports of Apollo 17 progress and photos of astronauts on second day of moon-landing mission. Pravda story ended: “We wish them success.” Komsomolskaya said mission was “one of the most daring measures ever carried out by mankind, and undoubtedly the most expensive experiment ever in the area of science and technology.” Washington Post Foreign Service said “new tone in newspaper coverage” reflected high-level decision to cover some U.S. news more sympathetically in “period of Soviet-American detente.” (Kaiser, W Post, 12/9/72, A3)
Issuance of requests for proposals for new astronaut space suit was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Companies were asked to develop prototype space suit that would weigh less than 18 kg (40 lbs), be fully mobile with high degree of hand dexterity while pressurized at 55 200 newtons per sq m (8 psi), give trouble-free service in earth orbit for up to one year with 50, six-hour extravehicular activity (eva) periods, and be repairable in space, (msc Release 72-152)
New York Times editorial praised “encouraging response” of public and major corporations that would enable Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library to reopen Jan. 17 after shutdown for lack of operating funds [see Jan. 3]. “But it is evident that the fate of the privately financed research divisions has merely been deferred— unless continuous and long-range efforts are made to put this vital facility on a sound financial footing.” (NYT, 1/10/72, 32) January 10—13:	Third Annual Lunar Science Conference held by NASA and Lunar Science Institute at Manned Spacecraft Center was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 16 foreign countries. Foreign visitors included Soviet scientists Y. I. Belyayev, M. S. Chupakhin, and K. P. Florenskiy, who participated in conference, consulted with U.S. scientists, looked at lunar samples stored at msc, and helped select samples to return to their colleagues in U.S.S.R. NASA provided three grams (one tenth ounce) of lunar material collected on Apollo 14 mission as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for exchange of samples. Samples included chip from widely studied crystalline rock, small piece of 9-kg (20-lb) boulder, and core samples soils, and polished thin sections. Conference papers dealt with scientific results of Apollo lunar landing missions, analysis of Soviet Luna 16 samples, and results of study of lunar surface by U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1. Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden discussed their observations of lunar surface made from lunar orbit during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Dr. N. C. Costes, Marshall Space Flight Center representative of Apollo Soil Mechanics Investigation Science Team, discussed mechanical properties of lunar soil. Washington Post later compared conference with First Lunar Science Conference in 1970, when “there were few facts available and many theories.” At third conference, “situation seemed to have reversed.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said, “You’re not throwing facts out into a vacuum any more.” Among facts stated at conference were: moon once had strong magnetic field, of which remnants remained to suggest moon once had metallic core up to 280 km (175 mi) thick; lunar crust was 65 km (40 mi) deep and layered; existence of extinct plutonium 244 in Apollo 14 samples indicated plutonium had been trapped when lunar crust solidified shortly after origin of solar system; and Copernicus Crater had been gouged 850 to 950 million yrs ago, making process one of more recent major lunar events. Dr. James R. Arnold of Univ. of California at San Diego reported that moon’s radioactive elements were concentrated in two broad plains, Ocean of Storms and Sea of Rains. “As we go away from this region ... we drop to quite low levels of radioactivity.” Scientists agreed that these radiation emissions should not prove hazardous to astronauts who might visit for short period. Dr. Isidore Adler, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, reported that map of lunar surface chemistry produced from Apollo 15 x-ray data indicated highlands of moon contained more aluminum than did plains. Finding supported hypothesis that moon’s early crust was rich in feldspar. Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ., Apollo Program chief seismic investigator, debated presence of volcanoes on moon with Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Dr. Latham said that while main episode of lunar vulcanism seemed to have ceased 3 billion yrs ago, “it’s by no means certain that we do not have continuing vulcanism on a very minor scale on the moon.” Dr. Gold continued to support theory that moon was dead, rigid body with basins of compacted dust. Dr. Leon T. Silver of California Institute of Technology proposed theory of “parentless lead” on moon to explain presence in some lunar locations of more lead than could have been produced by decay of radioactive uranium. In moon’s extreme vacuum it was possible for vaporized lead to travel great distances from its parent, uranium. Dr. Silver said other materials could be distributed over lunar surface in same way, all of which could confuse analysis of moon’s age. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory discussed tiny piece of green glass among Apollo 14 samples that scientists had nick-named “Genesis bean.” Bean and other glass fragments were almost identical chemically to rare meteorites, Howardites. Evidence suggested green glass had originated on moon and not from meteorite impacts on earth and thus might be some of earliest material of solar system. Consensus of conference on bulk composition of moon was summarized by Dr. Gast: feldspar-rich highland material with anorthosite as one prevalant component, basalts (solidified lava, low in radioactive elements and relatively young) in plains and basins, and KREEP (highly radioactive material rich in potassium, rare earth elements, and phosphorus). Conference closed with discussion of geologic setting of Apollo 16 Descartes landing site and plans for mission’s extravehicular activity. Soviet scientists returned to U.S.S.R. Jan. 23 with lunar samples for Soviet Academy of Sciences, (msc Release 72-06; NASA Release 72—18; Marshall Star, 1/12/72, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/14/72, 22; NASA Trans Sect) January 11:	Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was released from Patrick Air Force Base Hospital where he had been treated for bacterial pneumonia since Jan. 4. (AP, B Sun, 1/11/72)
A five-week Ames Research Center experiment to determine women’s qualifications for space flight had shown women to be as physically fit for travel in weightlessness as men, NASA announced. The experiment— in which 8 of 12 Air Force flight nurses had two weeks of total bed rest in weightlessness simulation, while 4 acted as ambulatory controls—was one of a series to investigate responses to space flight conditions, looking forward to use of the space shuttle by other than pilot-trained astronauts. NASA emphasized that the test was to determine women’s qualifications for space flight and did not represent a commitment to add women to the astronaut corps. Dr. Harold Sandler, head of the experiment team, said the bedridden nurses were weaker after the experiment and showed a 50% reduction in their tolerance to various stresses. “But the same is true of men astronauts.” (nasa Release 73-218; AP, P Inq, 10/25/73)
President Nixon entertained Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt at the White House. Members of Congress and the Secretaries of Labor, Transportation, and Commerce also were among the guests at an entertainment starring singer Sammy Davis, Jr. {PD, 3/5/73, 223; W Post, 3/5/73,
In its program of international cooperation, NASA launched Anik 2 domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada and Intelsat-IV F—7 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. A significant milestone was the Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation on Spacelab, signed by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. To be funded and developed by nine members of the European Space Research Organization, the Spacelab would be carried into orbit by NASA’s space shuttle orbiter and would accommodate experiments and personnel on missions of 7 to 30 days. Notable progress was made in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, with the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission on schedule for July 1975 launch. Working groups met in both countries and a November Moscow meeting familiarized eight U.S. astronauts with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. Docking system designs were essentially completed and all hardware construction was on schedule. Joint dynamic testing of test units began at Johnson Space Center. Flight crews were selected in both countries. Eighty-three nations entered into Definitive Agreements for intelsat, permanently establishing the global communications satellite system envisioned in the U.S. Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Scientists from other nations cooperated in nasa studies ranging from investigations of the solar system to practical applications of space technology. Erts 1 and Skylab environment and resources data were used throughout the world. Scientists from 37 countries and the United Nations participated in Erts 1 experiments and Brazil and Canada established their own erts data-acquisition facilities. Four foreign experiments were carried on Skylab missions and foreign scientists participated in the Apollo solar telescope program and in correlated astronomy sounding rocket programs. Scientists in 19 countries and the U.N. participated in 40 Skylab data-analysis investigations. German and Australian scientists were coinvestigators for Pioneer 11 experiments and French and U.K. scientists for Mariner 10. Investigators from 40 nations and esro were selected to participate in the Apollo 17 lunar sample program. A joint working group of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and nasa held the third and fourth meetings on space biology and medicine, exchanging information on manned space flight. Parallel communications channels using Intelsat and Molniya comsat systems were planned for 1974 to support the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Direct Communications Link, with construction of earth stations in both countries for access to each other’s satellites. Work went forward for future cooperative satellite projects. Agreement was reached with Italy to fly San Marco C-2 in 1974. Negotiations were underway with West Germany for 1974 launch of the aeros-b aeronomy satellite and work continued on the experimental cts comsat to be launched with Canada, the helios solar probe with Germany, the intasat ionospheric beacon with Spain, the UK—5 stellar x-ray satellite, Canada’s Anik C, and U.K.’s X4 technology spacecraft. Negotiations were also underway on nasa launch services for the French-German Symphonic comsat in 1974 and two ESRO test comsats in 1976 and 1977. The U.S. and esro were about to enter agreement for an air traffic control and navigation satellite system. During the year nasa launched 30 sounding rockets from ranges in other countries, including rockets carrying foreign payloads or cooperative experiments. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, Brazil, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. (Pres Rpt 1974; nasa Release 73-281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74, 2-3) • A burgeoning worldwide energy shortage led President Nixon to propose in June the establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept, of Natural Resources, an Energy Research and Development Administration, and a Nuclear Energy Commission. The shortage reached crisis proportion with the embargo by Arab nations on oil shipments to the U.S. in retaliation for U.S. support to Israel during the October Arab-Israeli war. In a November speech President Nixon noted the U.S. was on the verge of “the most acute shortage of energy since World War II.” He called for reduced use of heat, electricity, and gasoline; announced Federal Government steps to lower energy consumption; asked the Atomic Energy Commission to accelerate licensing and constructing nuclear power plants; and asked for an emergency energy act. Nine energy bills, passed in rapid succession by the first session of the 93rd Congress, included authorizations for mandatory fuel allocation programs, construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, a return to year-round daylight saving time, a speed limit on interstate highways, and the National Emergency Act. Soaring prices of all kinds of fuel, long lines of cars and banned Sunday sales at gas stations, and airline fare increases and schedule cutbacks marked closing months of the year. Economists forecast a possible depression as energy shortages aggravated an already recessed economy. Scientists sought additional sources of fossil fuels and, for the future, new sources of energy to make the U.S. energy-autonomous. The focus turned to NASA and its pioneering expertise in the technologies of solar energy and development of hydrogen as a substitute for gasoline in automobiles and aircraft. At the year’s end pending legislation endorsed NASA cooperation with other appropriate agencies in solving the worldwide energy shortage and in providing the U.S. with future sources of non-fossil-fuel energy. (A&A 1973; Library of Congress, Congr Research Service, Major Legislation of the 93rd Congress; Newsweek, 12/3/73)
A Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial commented on the first anniversary of the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite: “For Ohio alone, erts is telling truer tales about strip mining and pollution. For others it is doing such diverse things as charting safe routes for ocean shipping and forecasting water requirements of inland areas. The list of what already has been done and is yet to be done is almost endless.” (Cl PD, 8/14/73)	_ August 15:	NASA held an earth resources experiment package briefing at Johnson Space Center. Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, erep project scientist at jsc, said that Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma, launched July 28 to crew the Orbital Workshop, had completed 10 erep passes and had exceeded four hours of data collection. They had photographed 125 test sites over the U.S., South America, Thailand, East Malaysia, and Australia under the conditions required by the individual primary investigators. Wilmarth said the equipment was “working great” with “essentially no problem at all with any of the camera systems.” (Transcript)
Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield presented honorary faa Airframe and Powerplant Mechanic’s Certificates with an especially established “spacecraft rating” to Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Butterfield said: “The in-flight repair job you performed on the Skylab orbital workshop was one of the most spectacular achievements of the entire space program. It transformed a potentially disastrous mission into an outstanding success and demonstrated once again man’s ingenuity in the face of adversity. I’m sure every aviation mechanic in the country is proud to have you as honorary members of their select and highly skilled fraternity.” The awards were sponsored by the Aviation Maintenance Foundation in cooperation with faa and the aviation industry, (faa Release 73-173)
Life in weightlessness in the Skylab Workshop, orbited May 14, was described by a Wall Street Journal article as the Skylab 2 crew began its 15th day on board the space station. Commander Charles Conrad, Jr., had reported, after attempting to eat canned tomatoes, that he was “flinging tomatoes all over the place.” He had warned, “You’ve got to eat the whole tomato.” Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had told Mission Control: “I don’t use the salt much. It tends to bounce off the food a lot.” Later he had reported a minor kitchen disaster with a bag of dehydrated corn. “The bag failed at its seam. . . . We’ve got corn powder all over everything.” Kerwin said taking a shower was pleasant, but the water didn’t “fly through the air, it sticks to whatever is there, mostly you and partly the walls. It takes forever to dry both one’s self and the walls . . . even using that inadequate little vacuum cleaner that we’ve got.” The crew recommended allotting an hour for taking a shower on future missions. The astronauts were being awakened by the noise of the suction fan when the toilet was used at night. They found themselves growing hoarse from shouting at each other across the roomy Workshop during the day. Kerwin had found himself unable to whistle in zero g, but Astronaut Paul J. Weitz had assured him he could learn after a few days’ practice. “You’ve got to hold your lips a little farther apart.” (Bishop, WSJ, 6/8/73, 1)
The American Museum-Hay den Planetarium in New York commemorated the fourth anniversary of the July 20, 1969, first manned lunar landing, by Apollo 11 (launched July 16, 1969). The Planetarium exhibited the Goddard Memorial Collection of autographed pencil portraits of outstanding contributors to the U.S. space effort by artist William J. Numeroff and showed “The Salvage of Skylab I,” films and narration of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ repair in space of Skylab 1 spacecraft anomalies [see May 14-June 23]. Participants in the program included Skylab 2 backup commander Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart; Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of the U.S. rocket pioneer; and author Arthur C. Clarke. (American Museum Release; pio)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt arrived in Pakistan to discuss the U.S. space program with Pakistani President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and present a Pakistani flag they had taken to the moon during their Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. (upi, W Post, 6/20/73, A18)
The Nippon Electric Co. of Tokyo had won a contract to design and install the antenna and communications equipment for the first Swiss communications satellite station, the New York Times reported. The station was being built above the Rhone Valley in the Valais canton. (Lusinchi, NYT, 10/6/73) October 7—13:	The International Astronautical Federation (iaf) held its 24th Congress in Baku, U.S.S.R. In a message of greeting, the Soviet Council of Ministers said: “Nowadays, when important positive changes take place in international situations, ever more favourable opportunities for development of scientific communication, exchange of experience and uses of scientific achievements for practical needs of mankind open to scientists.” Academician Sergey Vernov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences said Soviet artificial satellites, placed simultaneously in different orbits, had facilitated studies of many regions of earth’s radiation belts, including those where no space station had been before. He hypothesized the existence of an “unstable radiation zone” beyond the outer radiation belt where Soviet Electron satellites had recorded a flux of electrons with energies over 150 000 ev. He believed the zone to be a necessary link in the formation of the earth’s radiation belts. Honorary guests Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander, and Soviet Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy, Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, and Vladimir A. Shatalov participated in an open discussion. Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. could be good and equal partners in conquering space. Stafford said cooperation in astp had already solved colossal technical problems. “And if we can solve problems in space we can, consequently, solve considerable problems on earth.” Soviet scientists reported on a man-plant interaction experiment in which four researchers spent six months in a closed biological environment simulating the earth’s biosphere. The Siberian test project, sponsored by the Krasnoyarsk Institute of Physics, had demonstrated that man could live in an artificial atmosphere created by green algae, fastgrowing wheat, and a variety of vegetables. The plants had been irrigated with sewage waste and with condensed moisture from the atmosphere. The researchers had breathed oxygen released by the plants, eaten the vegetables, and baked bread from the wheat during a simulated space trip in an underground chamber. A paper by Soviet specialists reported that an electric field might divert a flux of charged particles from a spacecraft. The spacecraft’s exterior surface might act as one of the field’s electrodes while the vacuum of outer space acted as an insulating medium, providing an effective radiation shield. Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Marshall Space Flight Center Associate Director for Science, cochaired two sessions on scientific spacecraft systems. The 7th International History of Astronautics Symposium included the papers “From Back Fire to Explorer I” by Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, Kennedy Space Center; “R. H. Goddard: Accomplishments of the Roswell Years (1930-1941)” by Frederick C. Durant III, Assistant Director for Astronautics, National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution; “High Energy Propulsion at naca Lewis Engine Research Laboratory” by John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; and “Early Photography from Rockets” by Frank H. Winter of the Air and Space Museum. Dr. Maxime A. Faget, Johnson Space Center Director of Engineering and Development, received the 1973 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for “playing a major role in developing the basic ideas and original design concepts that have been incorporated into all the manned spacecraft flown by the United States. . . . An expert on vehicles suitable for reentering the Earth’s atmosphere, he is particularly noted for his contributions to the basic configuration of the command module and to the development of the pressure-fed hypergolic engines used on the Apollo modules.” The meeting, attended by 1500 scientists from 29 countries, elected Dr. Charles Stark Draper, Director of the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, iaf President. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/8/73; msfc Release 73-137; nasa Release 73-200; nasa Hist Off; Agence France-Presse, W Post, 10/12/73, A30) October 8:	Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists began to measure stratospheric constituents up to 24 km (80 000 ft) using a Fourier interferometer aboard the British prototype of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft. Eight scheduled flights from Fairford, England, sponsored by the U.S. Dept, of Transportation, were to obtain information on the potential pollution effect of supersonic transports on the atmosphere. In earlier flights the interferometer had detected nitric oxide between 12 and 24 km (39 000 and 80 000 ft) at less than one part per billion. Nitric oxide was believed to be vital in maintaining ozone balance in the stratosphere, (jpl Release 670; JPL pio)
Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was critically burned when a BT— 13 aircraft he was landing incurred engine failure near Galveston, Tex. Doctors reported later that Haise, who had walked away from the accident, had suffered second degree burns over 50% of his body and his condition was “critical but stable.” (W Star-News, 8/23/73, A3)
Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Jack R. Lousma, and Dr. Owen K. Garriott arrived in San Diego, Calif., aboard the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans and were flown to Houston, Tex., on an Air Force C-141 troop carrier aircraft. Blood samples from all three astronauts were flown to Johnson Space Center for analysis. The astronauts were under limited quarantine for one week to protect them from infection. (W Post, 9/28/73; AP, B Sun, 9/28/73)
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Natal, Brazil, carrying a Univ. of California barium cloud experiment. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 18-Dec. 1: U.S. flight crews for the July 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission visited the U.S.S.k. for familiarization with the Soyuz spacecraft and discussions with Soviet counterparts on the flight plan. The discussions, held mostly at the Yuri A. Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training near Moscow, included joint crew activities and onboard documentation. Astronauts participating were Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. astp commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; and Donald K. Slayton, docking module pilot; backup crew Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma; support crew Robert F. Overmyer and Karol J. Bobko; and Eugene A. Cernan, Special Assistant to the U.S. astp Technical Director. At a press conference following the Nov. 29 concluding meeting, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said the U.S.S.R. planned further manned space flights—individual Soyuz missions and linkups of Soyuz with .the Salyut orbital platform—before the joint U.S — U.S.S.R. mission. Stafford told newsmen he was completely satisfied that the Soyuz would be “a great ship to fly.” He said there would be two joint training sessions in 1974, in Moscow in July and at Johnson Space Center in September, (nasa Release 73-250; Smith, NYT, 11/30/73, 9)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, compared the nasa FY 1974 budget program with FY 1973 plans in testimony before the opening session of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization: “Last year Congress approved $3.4 billion, the full amount of the President’s recommendations. In presenting the budget last year, I was able to state to the Congress that the planning associated with the $3.4 billion budget request was configured so as not to require an increase in future NASA budgets above the $3.4 billion level, . . . except as necessary to meet the effects of inflation, or unless new decisions were made to expand the program.” NASA then had had “a balanced and productive program which did not include any ‘built-in’ commitments that would require a higher total level of NASA funding in future years.” nasa’s FY 1974 budget represented a change in this plan. “To meet the necessary constraints on total Government spending in FY 1973 and FY 1974 we have had to reduce our budget plans below the $3.4 billion level by a total of almost $400 million for the 2-year period.” But program objectives were generally the same, “even though some of them will necessarily be achieved at later dates. For this reason, NASA budgets in future years will have to increase. . . . This need is recognized in the preliminary projections for FY 1975.” NASA was “handling the reductions in our FY 1973 and FY 1974 budget plans in a way that will not increase the levels of future funding required above those projected last year.” Dr. Fletcher believed this to be minimum level for space and aeronautics program U.S. should support. The program’s major elements—space shuttle, unmanned planetary and scientific missions, space applications and aeronautics program components, and others—“are ones that have been presented and approved in previous years.” nasa had “squeezed and stretched the program about as far as we can. In some of the reductions we have made in FY 1973 and FY 1974 we may have gone too far. Any further significant reductions would mean a real loss in a key element of the program.” NASA was requesting FY 1974 funds for an advanced supersonic technology program to provide technology for future military supersonic aircraft, data to assess environmental and economic impacts on the U.S. of present and future foreign supersonic aircraft, and a “sound technical basis for any future consideration that may be given by the United States to the development of an environmentally acceptable and economically viable commercial supersonic transport.” The request did not include funds for initiating SST development and did not commit the U.S. to development. Dr. Fletcher was accompanied by Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Charles Conrad, Jr., as well as other NASA officials. (Transcript)
President Nixon issued Executive Order 11726 from San Clemente, Calif., establishing a Federal Office of Energy Policy. He announced the appointment of Colorado Gov. John A. Love as its Director and released a statement outlining a $ 10-billion, five-year program for energy research and development. The President established a goal for the next 12 mos for energy consumption reduction of 5% nationwide, and 7% within the Federal Government. {PD, 6/7/73, 867—75) June 30:	A seven-minute, four-second, total solar eclipse, one of three seven-minute-plus total solar eclipses in the 20th century, began at sunrise in Brazil and crossed Guyana, Surinam, the Atlantic Ocean, the Cape Verde Islands, Mauretania, Mali, Algeria, Niger, Chad, the Central African Republic, Sudan, Uganda, Kenya, and the Somali Republic. It ended at sunset in the Indian Ocean between India and Madagascar. A partial eclipse was visible for 3200 km (2000 mi) on both sides of the totality track. Previous total solar eclipses had been June 8, 1937, for seven minutes four seconds, and June 20, 1955, for seven minutes eight seconds. The next solar eclipse in the current “saros,” or 18-yr period, would be July 11, 1991, for 6 minutes 54 seconds, but the June 30 eclipse’s duration would not be exceeded for 177 years, British astronomer Peter MacDonald said later in a New Scientist article. The African eclipse was witnessed by an estimated 5000 amateur astronomers and tourists and by 2500 international scientists on land, on sea, and aboard research aircraft. Concorde 001, the specially instrumented Anglo-French supersonic transport aircraft, carried seven U.S., U.K., and French scientists across North Africa in lunar shadow at altitudes to 17 000 m (56 000 ft) during a two-hour six-minute flight. They observed total eclipse conditions for 74 min. The Skylab 1 Workshop, unmanned since Skylab 2’s June 22 splashdown, saw only about 10% of the eclipse because its orbital position and telescope mechanisms were not suited for maximum effectiveness. Its cameras operated from 7 am edt until midnight, and eclipse films taken would be retrieved by Skylab 3 astronauts scheduled for July 27 launch. Other scientific observations of the eclipse by at least 28 nations included an instrumented U.S. Air Force aircraft and rockets fired from the Soviet research ship Professor Vize near the Cape Verde Islands [see May 29]. Univ. of Texas observations by telescopes in the Sahara desert tested Einstein’s theory of relativity by measuring the bend of the sun’s gravity. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/73, 6; 6/30/73, 32; 7/1/73, 1; New Scientist, IJYl/ll, 90-91; SF, 8/15/73, 321)
After a 35-yr local dispute, the “Great White Sands Missile Range Lost Gold Treasure Affair” had “blossomed into a national mystery,” the New York Times reported. Attorney F. Lee Bailey recently had been engaged by 50 unidentified claimants who sought prospecting rights to gold bars and treasure said to be buried on the missile range and to be worth up to $1.5 billion. In 1963 the Army, insisting there was no treasure, had banned prospectors from the range because of danger from exploding target-practice shells. Rep. Harold L. Runnels (D-N. Mex.) had proposed a joint Federal-state search for the treasure, said to have originated in various ways. (Sterba, NYT, 10/13/73, 37) October 14:	Doctors in Galveston, Tex., had pronounced the condition of Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., “good and stable” following skin grafts for bums he received in an Aug. 22 aircraft accident, United Press International reported. Haise had been burned over 55% of his body and had suffered a lung ailment following the crash of a World War II training aircraft he had been piloting for an air show group, (upi, M Her, 10/14/73)
Capt. John T. Geary (usn) became Director of the Naval Research Laboratory, succeeding Capt. Earle W.„Sapp who was reassigned. Capt. Geary had been Deputy Commander for Planning, Programming and Resources with the Naval Electronics System Command. (Naval Research Reviews, 8/73, 27; nrl pio) July 17:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz testified on the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1-2 mission in a joint hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Conrad said the mission had proved the feasibility of maintaining a large space station for manufacturing in space. “I think the data will show that you can do all the things up there that you can do down here and many of them perhaps better.” Skylab 1-2 earth resources and solar telescope data would show “that eventually space has a very definite role in helping mankind and in solving some of these problems that are in front of us. After all, the Sun is probably the most single efficient nuclear device that we know about. We do have an energy crisis. We need to better understand that. We just scratched the surface with our 30,000 photographs we brought back. I think you will find that the Earth resources data, when coupled with . . . erts [Earth Resources Technology Satellites] and those types of sensors will ... as an overall systems design, tie all of these things we talk about with different satellites into a big picture.” At the mission’s completion the Skylab 1—2 crew could hand over to the Skylab 3 crew a Workshop that could harbor “a 100-percent successful 56-day mission.” Dr. Kerwin said Skylab 1—2 medical experience enabled him to extrapolate a 56-day mission “without difficulty.” He felt the inflight portion would be “a piece of cake.” Postflight, the Skylab 3 astronauts might “feel a bit loggier than we did.” But Skylab 1—2 had demonstrated that this was a “minor illness . . . that you get from being 28 days in space and that you can return very rapidly to normal.” Weitz said Skylab’s earth resources survey equipment permitted a more selective data acquisition than that of unmanned erts. “I think we have shown in the past with unmanned satellites that part of the problem is that you have a continuous data flow, not all of which is usable, but all of which must be processed and reduced and analyzed in some form.” With Skylab equipment “we can track point sites” and “be selective . . . pick out specific sites, fields, or a bend in the river, if you want to study silting.” (Transcript)
Unusual pulsed-noise signals detected by Soviet scientists at Gorky Univ. [see Oct. 16] might be from experimental U.S. Air Force communications satellites in highly elliptical Molniya-like orbits, Aviation Week & Space Technology said. Possible sources were satellites orbited March 21, 1971, and Aug. 21, 1973—thought to be test vehicles for the Air Force’s planned Satellite Data System. (Av Wk, 11/5/73, 47) The primary objectives were to place the spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with a local equator crossing time of 8:30 am to permit the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, make an in-orbit evaluation, and check out the spacecraft before turning operational control over to noaa’s National Environmental Satellite Service (ness) . Operational responsibility for the spacecraft was transferred to noaa Nov. 29. Excellent data were being returned. The orbit would permit regular, dependable daytime and nighttime meteorological observations in both direct-readout and stored modes of operation in support of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). Noaa 3 was the second operational spacecraft to provide temperature soundings of the earth’s atmosphere as well as direct-readout and globally recorded cloud-cover data. The three-axis-stabilized satellite carried redundant very-high-resolution radiometers, vertical-temperature-profile radiometers, and scanning radiometers. Noaa 3 was the fourth in the Improved tiros Operational Satellite series of second-generation meteorological satellites. The prototype had been Itos 1 (launched Jan. 23, 1970), and the first NOAA-funded spacecraft, Noaa 1, had been launched Dec. 11, 1970. Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) continued to provide meteorological data. The first series of spacecraft had included nine satellites—Essa 1 through Essa 9 (launched 1966-1969). The tos program was a joint NASA and Dept, of Commerce effort under a Jan. 30, 1964, agreement. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for the design and development of the spacecraft and ground systems, launch checkout and evaluation, tracking and data acquisition, and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle, ness was responsible for operating the spacecraft and processing the data, (nasa prog off; GSFC proj off) November 6:	Fourteen hairline cracks were found in the eight stabilizing fins of Skylab 4’s Saturn IB launch vehicle during a routine inspection at Kennedy Space Center. The cracks were discovered just after the Saturn rocket had been loaded with 157 cu m (41 500 gal) of fuel. Six of the fins had two cracks each, the two others one crack each, all at the juncture of the 5-m (16-ft) aluminum fins and the body of the launch vehicle. During rocket inspection, Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue practiced launch abort procedures in a simulator at Johnson Space Center. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/8/73, A3; AP, W Star-News, 11/7/73, B8)
Demonstration electromechanical devices developed for emergency aid to astronauts in space had been adapted, tested, and installed in a Huntsville (Ala.) Hospital room by Marshall Space Flight Center, nasa announced. The devices permitted remote control by severely handicapped or paralyzed patients of communications systems and appliances for comfort and recreation, (nasa Release 73-169) August 25:	A New York Times editorial praised Skylab 3 (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14) as the mission passed the 28-day mark set by Skylab 1—2 (May 14-June 22), to become the longest manned space mission to date: The Skylab 3 astronauts “already have much more than mere longevity in space to their credit. Their two long walks in space have permitted them to do more useful work in orbit outside their vehicle than human beings ever have done before. Their scientific observations and experiments—particularly the study of the sun—have added much to human knowledge.” With its midpoint near, Skylab 3 had already “proved itself one of the most productive manned space missions since the first sputnik went into orbit almost a generation ago.” (NYT, 8/25/73, 22) August 26:	Albion, Mich., police had reported the recovery of a spacesuit worn by Astronaut Alan L. Bean during the Apollo 12 mission (Nov. 14-24, 1969), the Associated Press reported. The suit, valued at $6000, had been on loan from the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum when it was taken from the Kingman Museum in Battle Creek, Mich., a week earlier. (W Post, 8/27/73, A22) August 27:	nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center was officially rededicated as Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in ceremonies at jsc, attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator; Texas Gov. Dolph Briscoe; and Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson. A bust of the late President Johnson by sculptress Jimilu Mason, donated by the Houston Chamber of Commerce and the Albert Thomas Space Hall of Fame, was unveiled. A Johnson Room opened in the jsc Visitor Center displayed the original U.S. copy of the Treaty for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, signed in 1967 during President Johnson’s Administration. At the dedication Dr. Fletcher said that President Johnson had needed “great political courage” 1965-1967 to fight for funds for NASA programs of the 1970s such as Skylab and Viking. “The decision to continue with a strong space program after Apollo may . . . prove to be the most important of all the decisive actions Lyndon Johnson undertook on behalf of space progress.” Earlier in the day Astronaut Alan L. Bean, commander of the Skylab 3 crew orbiting the earth after July 28 launch to join the Orbital Workshop for 59 days, had radioed: “We think the work in which we are engaged right now would not have been possible except for [Johnson’s] strong support and leadership in the Senate and the Presidency.” President Johnson himself had said—on a March 1, 1968, visit to msc—referring to the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958: “The one legislative enactment that I suppose I am proudest of is the bill that I wrote and introduced that made possible NASA, that brought into existence this great facility and others in the program throughout the nation.” President Nixon had signed the law making the name change Feb. 17. Mr. Johnson had died Jan. 22. (Transcript; jsc Roundup, 8/17/73; 8/31/73; McElheny, NYT, 8/28/73, 24)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Assistant Secretary of Labor for Labor-Management Willie J. Usery, Jr., to be Federal Mediation and Conciliation Director. Before joining the Dept, of Labor, Usery had been special representative of the International Assn, of Machinists at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Test Facility, iam representative on the President’s Missile Sites Labor Committee at Kennedy Space Center and at Marshall Space Flight Center, and coordinator for union activities at Manned Spacecraft Center. He had helped to form the Cape Kennedy Labor-Management Relations Council in 1967 and had become its first Chairman in 1968. The nomination was confirmed March 29. (PD, 2/19/73, 154, 156; Usery Off) February 16:	Scientists at the State Univ. of New York had concluded the orange soil found on moon by Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Harrison H. Schmitt was billions of years older than first thought, the New York Times reported. The discovery had originally led the scientific community to believe the moon might have been volcanically active into geologically recent times, but Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer, Professor of Earth and Space Sciences at State Univ., had said, “It can now be reasonably stated that volcanism . . . ended about three billion years ago.” The team had tested the orange soil sample by potassium-argon dating. By measuring atomic properties, the soil had been found to be 3.71 billion yrs old. It was not known whether soil was of volcanic origin. (Rensberger, NYT, 2/16/73, 46)
Twelfth anniversary of the May 5, 1961, launch of Freedom 7 by the Mercury-Redstone 3 launch vehicle, on the suborbital mission which carried Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as the first U.S. man in space. {Marshall Star, 5/2/73, 1) May 6:	Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright received the degree of Doctor of Science honoris causa at the 152nd Annual Commencement of George Washington Univ. in Washington, D.C., and gave the commencement address to the University’s School of Engineering and Applied Science. He said it was perhaps “a blessing in disguise” that the U.S. was running out of fossil fuels. In seeking new energy sources, “you will develop clean energy. And you will develop it within our own resources, thus alleviating the balance of trade problem.” Three sources appeared particularly promising: nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, and solar energy. “In addition, you may even tap the heat of the Earth’s core.” (Newport News, Va., Daily Press, 5/10/73; Langley Researcher, 5/11/73, 1) _
A Chicago Tribune editorial hailed the Skylab 2 astronauts (launched May 25 to man the crippled Workshop orbited May 14) as “tinkerers.” The men who overcame the senseless stubbornness of inanimate objects had been “superlatively trained and admirably persistent and are the products of a highly scientific preparation. But the achievement also reflects the fine American heritage of tinkering. This was the quality that enabled the Pilgrim fathers to make do with strange, native materials when they landed on our alien shores.” It was also “the practical genius that has enabled four generations of young Americans to compel model Ts to live and snort again when it was obvious that they were clinically dead. Its magic has guided these astronauts and their ground advisers to a thrilling kind of space achievement that is typically American.” (C Trib, 6/1/73)
The Skylab 3 astronauts rested aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans following their splashdown [see July 28—Sept. 25], Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, told the press at Johnson Space Center that their 59-day mission had proved man’s usefulness in earth orbit as the Apollo missions had proved his use of the moon. “In the 15 years since its founding, nasa has successfully placed more than 250 payloads in earth orbit. Of all these, the mission that we completed today will perhaps prove to be the most fruitful of all.” Skylab 3 had proved “how great an advantage it is to have the human mind on the scene to make judgments, to observe, to respond to unexpected developments, and to effect corrective measures. All these were demonstrated on Skylab.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said the Skylab 3 astronauts had surpassed their scientific objectives by 150%. “The mission can only be described in superlatives.” (O’Toole, W Post, 9/26/73, 1A; AP, B Sun, 9/26/75)
An Atlanta Constitution editorial commented on Skylab as the Sky lab 2 astronauts planned a spacewalk to repair the power unit on Skylab 1 (launched May 14) : “The Skylab is a significant step in the developing technology of space exploration. Three men are there now, brave men. Their sheer competence makes it all seem routine, but they are risking their lives daily in doing things that literally no men have ever done before.” (Atlanta JC, 6/5/73)
A series of calibration rocket (calroc) launches at White Sands Missile Range during the manned Skylab 2 mission scheduled for May would provide a reference for the calibration of equipment used in two experiments on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), Marshall Space Flight Center announced, calroc launches were also scheduled during the Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 missions. The rockets would acquire solar flux data on specific regions of the sun in conjunction with. Skylab astronaut observations of the same regions with ATM experiments. Instrumentation on calroc would be similar to but smaller than that aboard the atm. Black Brant VCs would be used for all the launches. Taking part in the program, managed by MSFC, were Goddard Space Flight Center, Ames Research Center, the Naval Research Laboratory, Harvard College Observatory, and White Sands Naval Ordnance Missile Test Facility, (msfc Release 73-42)
A NASA investigation board had found an electrical malfunction to be the major factor in the May 10, 1972, accident over Bergstrom Air Force Base, Tex., in which Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., had ejected safely from a T—38 jet trainer aircraft, Johnson Space Center announced. The malfunction had caused loss of instruments in severe weather and the aircraft had been destroyed, (jsc Release 73-91)
NASA launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment to a 197.8-km (122.9-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) April 10:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz completed training at Marshall Space Flight Center for a three-hour extravehicular activity scheduled for the Skylab 1—2 mission, set for May 14 and 15 launches. Although Conrad and Kerwin were to perform the EVA, all three crew members trained so that any combination of two could accomplish the activity. The training—begun in February 1972—took place in msfc’s Neutral Buoyancy Simulator, which held a full-scale mockup of a major portion of the Skylab cluster in a simulated weightless environment, (msfc Release 73-55)
Exclusive astronaut writing contracts with Life magazine and other media had harmed the press, the public interest, the space program, and the astronauts themselves, Robert Sherrod said in a Columbia Journalism Review article released in advance of its May/June publication date. The contracts had brought relatively little money to all but a few astronauts and had distorted their individuality and diversity into a “deodorized, plasticized, and homogenized” image. Under the contract system, NASA could censor whatever the astronauts signed. “Even though this censorship was rarely invoked, it was inhibiting; so was the necessity of Life's making the astronauts look good, and vice versa." President Kennedy had originally opposed the contracts, but had been persuaded in their favor by Project Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. Former President Johnson had supported the contracts in a letter Sherrod received a few months before Johnson’s Jan. 22 death. Sherrod said the contract system had had no adverse affects on the flow of space news. “Due in large part to the exclusion policy, many members of the working press deeply resented NASA.” (Text)
Skylab 2 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was retiring from nasa and the Navy effective Feb. 1, Johnson Space Center announced. He would become Vice President, Operations, and Chief Operating Officer, of the American Television and Communications Corp., a Denver-based cable TV firm, (jsc Release 73-158)
The Skylab Saturn IB/Apollo rescue vehicle, readied for rescue of Skylab 4 astronauts (launched Nov. 16), was rolled out from Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B. By Dec. 19 the vehicle would complete flight readiness tests, the two-day final overall test of spacecraft systems and ground support equipment, and a simulated launch. On Dec. 21 the rescue vehicle would he within nine days of launch readiness and would hold at that point Until needed in an emergency or returned to the vab at the end of the mission. The rescue command module was equipped with two additional crew couches and additional life support and communications connections to permit it to return the three Skylab 4 crewmen and the two rescue crew members, Vance D. Brand and Dr. Don L. Lind, (ksc Release 283—73)
Several U.S. correspondents had been permitted by the U.S.S.R. to visit the Soviet cosmonaut training center at Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City) near Moscow, Time magazine reported. Time reporters included in the tour had quoted Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, as saying that similarities rather than differences predominated in the U.S. and U.S.S.R. approach to manned space flight. The similarities included a preference for jet pilots as spacecraft commanders; “training is shaped by requirements, just as the shape of the aircraft is decided by its speed.” Shatalov had recalled Watching Skylab astronauts practicing in a simulator. “It was the same as we simulate here, not more, not less. We are treading the same paths.” [Time, 7/9/73)
l/c Eduard Burchard, West German Air Force medical officer, had begun two-year tour of duty with the Flight Medicine Section of Johnson Space Center, jsc announced. Burchard would work with U.S. scientists on Skylab. (jsc Release 73-26) March 14:	Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, cited examples of space technology spinoff in testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1974 authorization hearings: A heat recovery system developed from an improved means for eliminating thermal gradients in spacecraft would soon be available for use as a home unit that would provide adequate warm air and hot water from a single flame source. A fast-scan infrared camera adapted from Marshall Space Flight Center research would project 60 frames per second, giving “the same flicker-free image you receive on your TV set.” An irreversible warm-up indicator adapted from NASA-sponsored low-temperature balloon battery research could warn when frozen food had been exposed to too high a temperature. A low-cost portable drug detector developed under Ames Research Center auspices would detect drugs in urine in microscopic amounts. ARC had cooperated with the NASA-sponsored Biochemical Application Team at Stanford Univ. to develop a consumable pill to telemeter body temperature to a remote display unit. The pill could determine the location of ulcers or tumors within the intestines. The need to monitor astronauts’ sleep had led to the development of a sleep analyzer—a soft electrode cap—that required no scalp preparation for good electrode contact. The NASA-sponsored Biomedical Team at Southwest Research Institute had helped make Temper Foam available for prevention of bedsores and as an impact-absorbing material for artificial limbs. The foam had been developed under arc contract. (Transcript)
France had begun work to hold future nuclear tests underground at two uninhabited atolls in the Pacific, French Adm. Christian Claverie said in Papeete, Tahiti. French nuclear tests previously had been conducted above the French-governed Tahitian atoll Mururoa, against international protests, (upi, NYT, 11/4/73, 77) November 5:	Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed ground practice of docking maneuvers at Johnson Space Center. The astronauts were scheduled for Nov. 10 launch on the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14). (upi, NYT, 11/6/73, 25)
The Senate confirmed Skylab 2 astronaut Cdr. Paul J. Weitz, Jr. (usn), for permanent promotion to the grade of captain. (CR, 7/20/73, S14273)
Man’s ability to survive in space was discussed in New York Times and Washington Post articles. Of 33 astronauts who had made Apollo flights, 11 had suffered from motion sickness for the first few days in space. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), the aborted moon landing mission, had indicated that men in danger would have a tough time surviving in space. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had lost 6 kg (14 lbs) during the six-day mission. John L. Swigert, Jr., had been so overcome by fatigue near the end of the flight that he made several errors in checking reentry procedures. Fatigue might also have contributed to the deaths of the Soviet Soyuz 11 (June 6-30, 1971) cosmonauts. Calcium loss in weightlessness, the most serious of potential medical problems, could lead to thinning of the bones and subsequent bone breaks after long periods in space. Other health problems included increased heart rates, weight loss, decreased oxygen consumption, reduced blood pressure, and the reduced flow of blood to the brain and kidneys. Psychological effects, as well as these problems, would be studied on Skylab missions. Were windows necessary? Should doors be doorshaped or would circular holes be sufficient? Would the crew tolerate sleeping upright in sleeping bags attached to the walls? (Schmeck, NYT, 5/14/73, 24; O’Toole, W Post, 5/14/73, A12)
U.S.S.R. scientists had named a newly discovered mineral “armstrongite” after the U.S. astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to set foot on the moon, the Associated Press reported. The mineral, belonging to the zirconium-silicate compounds, had been found by a joint SovietMongolian expedition in the Gobi Desert. A sample of the mineral had been sent to Armstrong. (AP, NYT, 4/29/73, 53) April 29:	Los Angeles International Airport banned all landings and takeoffs over populated areas between 11 pm and 6 am and became the first U.S. airport with regular two-way traffic in the same airspace. The measures had been taken in response to community protests over aircraft noise. Federal Aviation Administration air controllers would regulate the two-way traffic, called nose-to-nose operations, and had said there would be no safety problem. (Lindsey, NYT, 4/29/73, 58) April 29-May 2:	The First International Conference on Offshore Airport Technology was sponsored by the New York Section of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Federal Aviation Administration in Bethesda, Md. Director W. D. Brinckloe of the Univ. of Pittsburgh’s Graduate Center for Public Works spoke on the multipurpose use potential of offshore airports: “Experience suggests that what should be planned is a terminal, mating all possible transportation modes, and complete with all the facilities and services needed to make the Terminal City thrive.” Multiple use of the island airport “should be given equal attention with more conventional aspects of airport design and ocean construction. In the end, it may be the element that makes the project economically feasible.” (aiaa Release, 3/1/73; Text)
Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), former Commander of the Air Force Strategic Air Command, joined nasa as a consultant to the Administrator. (nasa Ann, 9/10/73) August 14:	An Apollo command module atop its Saturn IB launch vehicle was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center. Vehicle readiness had been ordered by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider for a possible rescue mission of Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28) when two of the four quadrants of the service module’s reaction control system, used for maneuvering the command and service module, failed and raised doubts about the ability of the CM to return safely to earth. If a rescue system were not ordered, the vehicle would carry Skylab 4 astronauts—Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—to a Nov. 9 rendezvous with the Skylab Orbital Workshop. (Marshall Star, 8/15/73, 1; Thomas, Today, 8/14/73)
Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr.—Apollo 13 lunar module pilot, Apollo 8 and 11 backup pilot, and Apollo 16 backup commander—had been named Technical Assistant to the Manager, Orbiter Projects Office, at Johnson Space Center, jsc announced. Haise, who had logged 142 hrs 54 min in space, would be responsible for assisting Manager Aaron Cohen in the overall management of the space shuttle orbiter development, (jsc Release 73-41)
Dr. Carl E. Sagan, Cornell Univ. astronomer and NASA consultant, arrived in Paris to receive an International Galabert Prize for space research. Other recipients would be Soviet Academician M. Y. Marov and French astronomer Adouin Dollfus. (fbis-Sov, 6/21/73, G15) June 19:	Soviet cosmonauts had telegraphed congratulations for new achievements in the conquest of space to the Skylab 2 crew orbiting the earth in the Skylab 1 Workshop, the Moscow Domestic Service reported. The astronauts, launched May 25, had surpassed the world mannedspace-flight endurance record June 18 after repairing the Workshop. Maj. Gen. Vladimir N. Shatalov, director of cosmonaut training, wired on the cosmonauts’ behalf, wishing the astronauts a successful conclusion to their program and a safe return to the earth. (fbis-Sov, 6/20/73, G4)
The 16th Annual Goddard Memorial Dinner was held in Washington, D.C., with Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt among the honored guests. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. The citation read: “To the Honorable George M. Low who has held key positions in the space program since its beginning, and has played a vital role in putting men into space and later, on the moon. Among Dr. Low’s outstanding contributions was, as acting NASA Administrator in 1971, the negotiation of the space agreement with the Soviet Union which provided the foundation for the Apollo/Soyuz flight in 1975 and other joint space endeavors.” The National Space Club Press Award was presented to Ralph Morse of Life magazine for “his ingenuity in photographically interpreting the dynamics of the United States Space Program and for his resourcefulness in portraying the human experience in its larger dimension.” The Astronautics Engineer Award went to Wilfred E. Scull of Goddard Space Flight Center for “outstanding leadership—from decision to fruition—of the Earth Resources Technology Satellite Project.” The Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to The General Electric Co. for “outstanding accomplishment” as prime contractor to nasa for the Earth Resources Technology Satellite and ground data handling system. (Program)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released a statement on private communications of crews of the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), after meeting with the Deputy Administrator, Dr. George M. Low; Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers; and Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. A May 3 memorandum had authorized private communications for morale purposes (weekly calls from Skylab astronauts to their families), for “extreme” operational emergencies, and for medical reasons (to permit private doctor-patient relations). Following objections from some newsmen to the May 29 Charles Conrad, Jr., private conversation on operational matters, Dr. Fletcher had decided to instruct Mission Control’s Capsule Communicator to query the seriousness of a situation before permitting a private conversation from Skylab. Dr. Fletcher said in his new statement that he would rescind this instruction because “we believe it would be imprudent to discourage requests by the crew for private operational communications.” Paraphrases of the communications would he released to the press. “We will continue to leave it entirely up to the flight crew as to when to call for such a conversation, and will send no new instructions or clarification of instructions. This decision was reached so that we would in no conceivable way inhibit them from calling for a private conversation when they believe a need exists, and so that we will not jeopardize the safety of the mission.” (NASA Release 73—110)
NASA announced it had granted a five-year exclusive patent license for the automated visual sensitivity tester (avst), a device to detect eye abnormalities, to Consultants Unlimited. The device—an 8-mm motion picture projector with an electronic control unit and an automatic response plotter—had been developed by Ames Research Center scientists for astronaut eye examinations during long-duration space missions. (nasa Release 73-226)
Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz completed their last medical checkups at Johnson Space Center and were declared ready for the Skylab launch, as countdown proceeded for May 15. Data were also gathered for inflight comparison of the astronauts’ physical conditions. (Wilford, NYT, 5/12/73, 58)
Soviet journalist Victor Louis discussed U.S.S.R. plans for the Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft in a New York Times article. The aircraft was scheduled to go into regular passenger service in 1975, when it was expected to begin carrying 120 million passengers annually. Soviet territory was so sparsely populated that “fewer people will be troubled by noise than in Europe or the United States.” Soviet statistics showed 3500 internal airfields in the U.S.S.R. Soviet aircraft flew to 63 major cities throughout the world—operating between Moscow and Santiago, Chile, and eastward between Moscow and Jakarta. SST watchers had calculated that the U.S.S.R. would not sell more than 20 Tu-144s initially. “Ten are estimated to be sufficient to satisfy [Soviet national airline] Aeroflot’s demands for its internal and international European, African and Asian routes, and perhaps a further ten would be taken up by the Czechs . . . and other countries of Eastern Europe.” Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev—who had taken over Tu-144 planning after the death of his father, Tu-144 designer Andrey N. Tupolev—had predicted 50 times more air passengers by the year 2000 and talked of aircraft that would cruise in the stratosphere and carry 1000 persons at speeds of 10 060 km (6250 mi) per hr. (NYT, 6/2/73, 31) June 3:	The Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft exploded and disintegrated in mid-air over the French village of Goussainville near Le Bourget Airport on the final day of the Paris Air Show, killing 13 persons [see May 24-June 3], (Randal, W Post, 6/4/73, Al) June 4:	NASA was “fighting for its political life,” a Detroit News editorial said as the Skylab 2 astronauts considered ways to release a stuck solar wing on the Skylab 1 Workshop launched May 14: “Its funds have been cut drastically since the moon landings were accomplished. Skylab itself is a vehicle costing $295 million. If it has to be abandoned the people will demand more expenditures be cut. So NASA is trying to prove that man really is boss of the machines he produces, that money is not being thrown away. There is a limit, however, to what NASA can devise and the astronauts accomplish. That limit must not be overstepped.” (D News, 6/4/73)
An era of global scarcity had begun, a Science editorial noted. “The advanced countries are vulnerable in one or more respects.” Japan had been enjoying a boom but needed to import raw materials, fossil fuels, and food. In Mexico people lived under conditions like those of 100 yrs ago, “with a disregard for sanitation,” but with “Coca Cola signs and transistor radios everywhere.” Much of the world was aware of U.S. living standard and gadgets. “They yearn for both, while the population explosion continues. We are soon going to witness dramatic and miserable confrontations of aspirations, expectations, and limitations.” (Abelson, Science, 7/27/73, 303) July 28-September 25:	The Skylab 3 Apollo spacecraft carrying a threeman crew was launched into near-earth orbit, rendezvoused with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), and docked with the space laboratory for the second manned mission in the Skylab program. A series of problems threatened to disrupt the mission, but corrective actions and workarounds permitted it to proceed successfully, setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Sept. 25. The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee at 10 min 2 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the csm separated from the stage as planned. The galactic x-ray mapping experiment mounted in the instrument unit (iu) was deployed. At 5 hrs 19 min 53 sec after launch the S—IVB/iu deorbit maneuver was commanded, and the stage impacted the predicted Pacific Ocean area after planned maneuvers. During CSM maneuvers to rendezvous with the Workshop, a leak was detected in the CSM reaction control system (rcs) quad B thruster, one of four assemblies of rockets used to stabilize the spacecraft or to change its velocity and also used as a backup for bringing the CSM back from orbit. Analysis indicated the oxidizer valve was stuck open or partially open. Quad B was isolated; analysis showed that all deorbit mission rules could be satisfied. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 3:38 pm edt on the fifth orbit. Rendezvous, fly-around, and docking were covered by 23 min of TV. The crew entered the multiple docking adapter (mda) at 4:00 pm edt and began Workshop activation, but activation was curtailed because the crew quickly began to feel motion sickness. Lousma was experiencing nausea and Bean and Garriott were uncomfortable. Bean said he and Garriott tended “to be fairly careful of how we move. And since we are moving rather slowly, then it’s taking a little bit longer than we’d planned.” Motion sickness continued the second day, July 29, and the astronauts were taking scopolamine-dexedrine tablets. Bean communicated, “We feel okay, except in the stomach. . . . And our thinking is that we’re not going to be able to work much faster than we are right now. . . . There’s a desire to maybe take a break for an hour or two and get in the bunk and stay still for a while.” Flight Director Neil B. Hutchinson told the press at JSC that extravehicular activity (eva) to install a new sun shield and retrieve and install Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) film probably would be delayed from July 31 to Aug. 1 at the earliest. Four to five hours of work were carried over from July 28 and 29. Still suffering from motion sickness, the astronauts continued Workshop activation July 30 (Mission Day 3). The first EVA was delayed to Aug. 2 and later rescheduled to Aug. 4 to ensure the astronauts’ complete recovery. Activation was completed July 31 (MD-4) and research began as the crew improved slightly. Bean told ground control: “We’re getting better; it’s just taking a little longer than we thought. . . . Everybody feels pretty good between meals. Then mealtime comes, and we’re caught ... in the squeeze. We’re trying to decide whether we ought to eat all we have to ... to keep our strength up, or eat about what we want to, which isn’t very much.” A TV broadcast from the space station July 31 showed minnows for a biomedical experiment swimming in their plastic aquarium in tight spirals and sometimes apparently trying to swim toward the surface, but with their heads pointed straight down. Garriott said, “Apparently they can’t make up their minds which way is up and down, either.” He also turned a spider named Arabella loose in a plastic cage to observe her web-spinning abilities in zero-g conditions. Later in the mission Garriott reported baby minnows hatched in space performed in water “as if they’d already adapted while they were still in the egg.” They “felt right accustomed to zero-g.” August 1-September 24:	Bean told ground controllers after breakfast Aug. 1 (MD—5) : “This is the first morning we’ve been up here . . . that after a meal everybody felt good. Everybody feels real good right now. Best since we’ve been here.” During live TV the astronauts ate a hearty lunch to music. Bean demonstrated his proficiency in eating while hanging upside down. A medical briefing below at Johnson Space Center suggested that moving quickly from the confined cm to the large Workshop might have contributed to the motion sickness. The milder nausea experienced on the May 25—June 22 Skylab 2 mission could have been caused by a more gradual transition into the Workshop. “I think that it is merely a matter of room in which you can exercise your vestibular mechanisms, and that the workshop simply presents more of that space. . . . perhaps it was too much too soon.” On Aug. 2 a master alarm buzzer awakened the astronauts at 6:45 am EDT. Pressure and temperature were falling rapidly in the CSM reaction control system quad D because of an oxidizer leak. Because of quad B’s July 28 leak, only A and C of the four quads remained fully operational. The quad D leak lasted two hours, losing an estimated 5 kg (12 lbs) of nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer. Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney said at a morning press briefing that the spacecraft was flyable with the loss of the two quads but “it would be flown in a mode which is not entirely standard.” The main concern was “that we have had two problems which are related, at least they seem to be related.” A flaw common to the whole RCS could necessitate the crew’s immediate return to the earth or accelerated preparation of the Skylab 4 spacecraft to make it available as a rescue vehicle should the CSM become unusable. Full activation of Skylab-rescue-vehicle preparation was authorized. Launch and checkout crews began working a 24-hr-day, 7-day-week schedule, preparing two additional couches and other equipment for installation. Earliest possible date for a rescue mission was established as Sept. 5. The EVA rescheduled for Aug. 4 was again postponed, for 24 to 48 hours to free the crew for system checks, to free ground controllers to troubleshoot the problem, and to give time to work out EVA procedures for the new spacecraft configuration. While reentry procedures were being rewritten for the new configuration, the astronauts continued scientific experiments. By the afternoon of Aug. 2 Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, was able to tell the astronauts that troubleshooting the RCS had indicated no apparent generic problem, but two unique quad failures, and there was now confidence that the two remaining quads would ensure attitude control should immediate reentry become necessary. “We’re proceeding ... as if we’re going to have a normal mission.” Astronaut Bean replied: “Fine. You just said the right words. . . . we’re pretty happy with the way things are going, at the moment . . . and we agree 100 percent with what you just announced. . . . everybody’s happy up here.” On Aug. 3 Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said at a JSC press briefing that continuing investigation indicated the two quad failures were unrelated and reexamination of reentry capabilities showed three ways of returning to the earth: using the primary service propulsion system, using the RCS with the two operational quads, and using the hybrid RCS in the cm. “We’re feeling considerably better than . . . yesterday morning.” A slowdown was ordered in the emergency rescue preparations. The Apollo cm would be outfitted in a Skylab 4 configuration, with three astronaut couches rather than the five needed for a rescue mission. The slowdown would delay rescue readiness until Sept. 10. Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma conducted their first full day of experiments and prepared for an earth resources experiment package pass. Garriott held the TV camera at the window to telecast a good view of the U.S. from North Dakota to North Carolina. Later the first of 26 erep passes was made, to gather data for oil exploration, ocean temperatures, mapping, land use surveys, crop inventories, and pollution studies. A master alarm sounded in the CSM Aug. 4, later attributed to a short-circuit in Skylab’s solar telescope system. The short knocked out one of the two TV systems in the atm but did not afFect Skylab’s main power system. Ground crews investigated problems in the primary and secondary coolant systems Aug. 5. One had been slowly leaking since the Skylab 1 launch May 14 and was expected to become inoperative in 16 to 20 days. The secondary loop was thought to have a small leak, begun during the Skylab 2 mission and giving the loop a predicted 60-day lifetime. Possibly additional coolant would have to be carried up by the next manned mission, Skylab 4, but Program Director Schneider said there was “no immediate danger to the crew.” By Aug. 6 evaluations showed that only the primary loop was leaking; the second was sound and could operate for the rest of Skylab 3 as well as for Skylab 4. Flight surgeon Paul Buchanan’s nightly bulletin said Aug. 5 that the crew “continues to report good health and optimistic outlook” and had asked about an increase in their menus “to match their growing appetites.” Fluid intake and output was “optimal.” The first EVA was performed Aug. 6. Garriott and Lousma stepped outside the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm edt to install the 3.6- by 7.3-m (12- by 24-ft), paper-thin, aluminized Mylar awning over the Workshop to reflect the sun’s rays away from the spacecraft skin, damaged when the meteoroid shield was torn ofF during the May launch. Garriott, standing in the Skylab’s open hatch, pieced together the two 16.8-m (55-ft) poles from metal sections and handed them to Lousma. Lousma attached them to a bracket to form a “V” over the Workshop. The sunshade was slowly pulled up by a system of pulleys. One rope kept twisting around the poles and the sunshade folds did not straighten immediately, but after four hours—twice the time expected—the sunshade was successfully deployed. Workshop temperatures were lowered before the EVA ended. Astronaut Bean said Garriott and Lousma worked “at a slow and steady pace” and were not tired. Lousma retrieved and replaced film in four ATM experiments, installed two new cameras, removed a door latch from an atm experiment, and fixed the particle-collection experiment to the rim of the atm. Lousma also inspected the two leaking quads in the CSM RCS and looked for coolant leaks. He noted some evidence of micrometeorite pitting but no clues to causes of the malfunctions. The astronauts completed the eva at 8:01 pm edt, after 6 hrs 31 min, surpassing the 3-hr 30-min record set June 7 by Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin. Garriott, first solar physicist in space, focused the atm cameras on the sun Aug. 7 for the first time during the mission. TV audiences watched him work at the ATM panel. By Aug. 8 Dr. Lawrence F. Dietlein, jsc Deputy Director for Life Sciences, reported the astronauts were “in excellent spirits and have no health problems.” They had completely recovered from motion sickness. Their weights had stabilized after a loss of 1.8 to 2.3 kg (4 to 5 lbs) each. Data obtained on the rotating chair indicated their sensitivity to motion had lifted. Since deployment of the sunshade, temperatures in the Workshop had dropped to 296 K (74°F). The crew photographed a coronal transient with the ATM camera two hours Aug. 10. It was the first time a transient—protons and free electrons expelled violently from the sun’s limb at a speed of about 312 km (194 mi) per sec, a phenomenon that occurred two or three times a year—had been observed at that range and time resolution. Program Director Schneider announced Aug. 14 that Skylab 3 would continue its full 59-day mission. From analyses of the CSM and Workshop, he had “concluded that there is no imminent need for rescue, and ... we have made the decision to proceed with a normal test flow on an accelerated basis at Cape Kennedy.” Skylab 4 was being prepared for a normal mission but would be available for a rescue mission if necessary. The earliest launch date could be Sept. 25. Schneider said, “We’re reasonably confident that [csm] 117 is a good vehicle.” “Looks like they got a renewed burst of confidence down there,” Bean said when told of the decision. “We feel that way up here.” JSC announced Aug. 21 that the astronauts would install a new “six-pack” of gyroscopes during an Aug. 24 EVA, to replace faulty ones. The six-pack had been carried up on the Skylab 3 cm. Meanwhile the crew continued with experiments, requesting more work Aug. 14 because all had spare time and “you just can’t sleep 8 hours up here.” They photographed tropical storm Brenda Aug. 19 as it moved across theYucatan Peninsula toward the Gulf of Mexico. On Aug. 21 Astronaut Bean discovered and photographed through ATM telescopes what Skylab principal investigator Dr. Robert MacQueen called “certainly one of the biggest solar events” seen on the Skylab missions. Bean said the complex series of events on the solar limb looked “like a big bubble” sitting on the edge of the disc. He observed it with the white light coronagraph and x-ray instruments and reported it to be three fourths the size of the sun. NASA scientists alerted other facilities to make observations from ground instruments and other satellites. Dr. MacQueen said the event might have been caused by an explosion on the back side of the sun. “It was a beautiful event.” The crew “did a fine job.” Schneider announced Aug. 23 (MD—27) that the Skylab 3 crew had been given permission to continue the mission for another seven days. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, told the press that he saw nothing in the medical data thus far “that would indicate that we could not press on with the mission, and ... we feel we can go the full 59 days as planned.” EVA—2 began at 12:24 pm edt Aug. 24 with am depressurization by Lousma and Garriott. Lousma completed installation of the six redesigned gyros mounted inside the spacecraft by connecting cables to a computer system outside, and the new gyro system was put into operation. The astronauts installed a sail sample on a hand rail to test durability, replaced ATM film, retrieved and stored cassettes from one experiment, and removed the aperture door ramp latch from two ATM experiments, concluding EVA-2 at 4:31 pm EDT, after 4 hrs 30 min. At 8:01 am edt Aug. 25 (MD—29) the Skylab 3 astronauts surpassed the single-mission endurance mark of 28 days 50 min set in June by Skylab 2. They had completed 404 earth orbits and had traveled 18.5 million km (11.5 million mi). And at 6:11 am edt Sept. 5 (MD-40) Astronaut Bean surpassed the space flight record for one man of 49 days 3 hrs 38 min 36 sec, set in June by Charles Conrad, Jr., on Skylab 2. EVA-3 began at 7:18 am edt Sept. 22. Bean and Garriott moved through space to retrieve and replace atm film and retrieve experiments and parasol samples. EVA operations ended at 9:59 am edt, after 2 hrs 41 min. During the mission, spiders Arabella and Anita first spun webs in corners of their cage, without the normal circular pattern. Each day, however, each improved web formation, adding more radials, adjusting to weightlessness. Garriott said of Arabella Aug. 9 that “she learned very rapidly in zero-g without the benefit of any previous experience.” She “figured out a very nice solution to the problems of zero gravity.” Later ground controllers told Garriott to share his filet mignon with the spiders to keep them alive for the entire mission. Anita, however, was found dead Sept. 16, possibly from inadequate diet. The astronauts righted the cm and remained inside until the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans maneuvered alongside and a crane lifted the cm aboard. Immediate medical examinations found the crew in excellent spirits and surprisingly good condition. Blood pressures and heart rates were within normal range. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for physical checks and would fly to Houston Sept. 26. They would be quarantined for one week. The Skylab 3 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing unmanned Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. Despite mission problems, 150% of scheduled atm observing time was accomplished and erep sensors were operated on 39 Z-axis local vertical data runs and 5 solar inertial data runs, completing 218 of the 386 earth resources task sites. All medical experiments were successfully carried out. All but one of the corollary experiments achieved or exceeded objectives. Of 13 student experiments, 9 were completed. Added unscheduled tests and experiments had significantly increased the data yield above premission planning and Skylab was left in an excellent position to complete the final SL-4 mission. Skylab 3 was officially adjudged a success Oct. 11. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 59 days 11 hrs 9 min; the longest cumulative time in space for one man, 69 days for Bean (who had spent 10 days on the Nov. 14-24, 1969, Apollo 12 mission) ; the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 41 000 000 km (25 500 000 mi) ; the longest EVA, 6 hrs 31 min on Aug. 6; and the longest cumulative orbital EVA time, for one astronaut, 13 hrs 40 min for Garriott. In the first mission to man the Orbital Workshop May 15-June 22, Skylab 2 astronauts had conducted medical, solar, and earth resources experiments for 28 days, as well as repairing the Workshop to salvage the mission. The Workshop would be operated unmanned until the November Skylab 4 launch for a third and final mission. (NASA prog off; jsc pao press briefing transcripts, 7/28/73-9/25/73; NYT, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Post, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Star-News, 7/28/73-9/27/73; B Sun, 8/16/73, A5; 8/20/73, A3) July 28:	NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment to a 120.2-km (74.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed successfully but the experiment data were saturated and not useful, (gsfc proj off) July 29:	Fifteenth anniversary of the signing of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The act provided for the establishment of NASA, which officially came into being Oct. 1, 1958. (nasa Release 73-134) July 30:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, praised NASA’s successful efforts to save the Skylab 1—2 mission during testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Science hearing to review the Skylab Investigation Report [see July 13]: “We were able to save Skylab because of the tremendous depth and breadth of the NASA team and the dedication and skills of thousands of people on that team. There certainly isn’t another country that could have reacted as we did. I doubt whether there is another team within this country that could have reacted in this manner. Our team could do it because of years of training, working hard on highly exacting projects, and working as a team to drive toward a technical objective. The performance of the team on the ground, and of course the magnificent performance, skill and courage of the astronauts, saved Skylab. I would hope that this is remembered as the real story of Skylab, not the failure which caused it to happen.” NASA was “taking all the steps we know how to prevent a future failure due to similar causes in other programs.” Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center testified that, throughout six years of reviews and certifications, “the principal attention devoted to the meteoroid shield was that of achieving a satisfactory deployment. Never did the matter of aerodynamic loads on the shield or aeroelastic interactions between the shield and its external pressure environment during launch receive the attention and understanding during the design and review process which in retrospect it deserved.” The omission had not been surprising. “From the beginning, a basic design concept and requirement was that the shield be tight to the tank.” The question of whether the shield would remain tight against the tank under the dynamics of flight through the atmosphere “was simply not considered in any coordinated manner.” Possibly contributing to the oversight “was the basic view of the meteoroid shield as a piece of structure.” No full-time subsystem engineer had been assigned to the shield. “While it is recognized that one cannot have a full-time engineer on every piece of equipment, it is . . . possible that the complex interactions and integration of aerodynamics, structure, rigging procedures, ordnance, deployment mechanisms, and thermal requirements of the meteoroid shield would have been enhanced by such an arrangement,” (Testimony)
The countdown for the twice-delayed launch of the Skylab 4 mission [see Nov. 6, 12, and 13] proceeded smoothly toward Nov. 16 launch. The Apollo spacecraft’s electrical system was activated and the 1st stage of the Saturn IB launch vehicle was loaded with 157 cu m (41 500 gal) of fuel. Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue inspected the spacecraft and received final briefings on the Apollo systems and the solar telescopes in the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14). (icsc press briefing transcript, 11/14/73; Wilford, NYT, 11/15/73, 6)
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., announced in Cleveland he would make a third bid for the Democratic nomination to the Senate from Ohio. He had lost the 1970 Democratic senatorial primary; a head injury had forced him to end his 1964 Senate campaign. Glenn, as pilot of Friendship 7 (launched Feb. 20, 1962), was the first American to make an orbital space flight. (CSM, 12/11/73; A&A 1962)
Appointment of David R. Scott, former astronaut, as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center was announced by frc. Scott had flown on Gemini 8 (March 16—17, 1966) and Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) missions and was commander of Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, he had served as Technical Assistant to the Apollo Program Manager and as Special Assistant for Mission Operations and Government Furnished Equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Office at Manned Spacecraft Center (which became Johnson Space Center Feb. 17). He held two nasa Distinguished Service Medals, the nasa Exceptional Service Medal, two Air Force Distinguished Service Medals, the Air Force Distinguished Flying Cross, the David C. Schilling Trophy of the Air Force, and the Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1971. (frc Release 21—73)
A New York Times editorial commented on the research recession caused by changing priorities of the Federal Government and insufficient budget appropriations in Federal research programs: “The brilliant record of American scientists . . . testifies to the quality of the national research enterprise. But how long can such top quality survive in the face of the present economic stringency and the threat of even worse times ahead?” (NYT, 1/5/73, 28) January 7:	Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had announced his decision to leave NASA and retire from the Navy effective March 1 to accept a position with private industry, Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Lovell, who had been Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC since May 1971, would become Senior Executive Vice President of Bay Houston Towing Co. Lovell was a veteran of four space flights including Gemini 7 (launched Dec. 4, 1965) ; Gemini 12 (launched Nov. 11, 1966) ; Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968), the first mission to circle the moon; and Apollo 13 (launched April 11, 1970), the mission scheduled to make the second lunar landing but aborted after an onboard explosion. He held the record for total time in space— 715 hrs (30 days), (msc Release 73-01)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, Atomic Energy Commission Chairman, to be U.S. Representative to the Sept. 18-24 International Atomic Energy Agency General Conference in Vienna. Among five alternate representatives nominated was Apollo 8 Astronaut and former National Space Council Chairman William A. Anders. {PD, 9/17/73, 1128, 1132)
U.S. Embassy officials in Moscow presented to U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny, on behalf of President Nixon, a lunar sample brought from the moon by the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 7 mission. Podgorny said in accepting the sample that preparations were “successfully continuing” for the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. He wished “all success” to the Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28 to work in the Orbital Workshop launched May 14). (W Star-News, 8/2/73, A2)
Reaction of writers Norman Mailer and Katherine Anne Porter to space flight and to nighttime launch of Apollo 17 were reported in the Christian Science Monitor. Authors had witnessed the Dec. 6, 1972, launch and participated in a space seminar during the “Voyage beyond Apollo” cruise of the S.S. Statendam, which left New York Dec. 4 for Cape Kennedy and the Caribbean. Mailer had said: “Moon colonies offer the possibility that we’ll be able to discover definitively and for the first time what we are doing wrong. Whether we thrive on the moon or fail we’re going to learn something that we’re not going to learn by staying here on earth. . . .” Part of “the fundamental impasse of 20th-century man and woman is that they cannot find communities which express their philosophical ideas, their social ideas, and their private ideas. In other words, the one thing that we can’t do any longer is verify what we think. We can have ideas. But we spend our lives just talking about them. “There are very few people who have a profound sense of commitment. One of the reasons that the astronauts have been so revered . . . is that they have this huge sense of commitment. . . . they are absolutely devoted to a living a life that they believe in utterly and are willing to go through great hardship for it. I think that until our society reaches the point where many more people live lives of such commitment it’s going to remain essentially unhealthy. . . . “The decision to go to the moon is such a declaration of intent. If nothing else, one has to risk dying on it. One has to recognize that one is taking a major step, and the idea of taking a major step brings out in, people at least for a short period . . . the best in them. Then, if there’s something really alive in the venture, they’re likely to keep changing their habits and go on to make more of themselves.” Miss Porter had said that, in almost anything men undertook together here on the earth, “in no time at all there’s a pull and haul for power. They’re betraying and tricking each other, getting in one another’s way. And yet when it comes to something they consider big enough and grand enough they do it in a grand way and they do it well, like the astronauts. . . . We’ve always built and saved a little more than we’ve been able to destroy, don’t you think?” (CSM, 1/3/73)
Newspaper editorials commented on the Sept. 25 successful splashdown of Skylab 3 [see July 28—Sept. 25]. The Washington Star-News: The astronauts couldn’t have selected a worse evening to return to the earth “in the whole 20th Century.” Their reentry had been “upstaged, unfortunately,” by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s vain attempts to clear himself of allegations of bribery and income tax evasion, “and, of course, the Watergate hearings persisted as a distraction. But these latest Skylab voyagers still must receive the recognition they deserve for the longest and most voluminously rewarding space flight in history.” Skylab was “the proper program in space for the years just ahead, because it promises many more revelations about the earth and seas—the condition and potentials of our planet.” (W Star-News, 9/28/73, A18) The Wall Street Journal noted that the Skylab 3 crew could anticipate a small pleasure that eluded most returning travelers. “Unlike the rest of us, they have numbers of people who are absolutely hungering to see the photographs they brought back, despite the fact that they’ve returned with no fewer than 77,600 shots of the sun and 16,800 of the earth.” (WSJ, 9/28/73)
Newspaper editorials commented on the success of the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission. New York Times: “This first group of astronauts did much more . . . than demonstrate man’s biological capability to live and work in space for four weeks. They proved that men in space can do what machines cannot do, they can repair their vehicle.” It was conceivable that “when all the Skylab data are available, the field of solar astronomy may be advanced as radically as lunar astronomy has been in recent years.” At Skylab’s completion “a strong economic and scientific case will doubtless have been made for creating one or more permanent manned stations in space. Any such orbiting laboratories should surely be United Nations ventures in international cooperation, not new instruments for senseless and expensive national rivalries.” (NYT, 6/24/73) The Philadelphia Inquirer: It had been shown that “enterprising spacemen can do more than routine work for long periods of time. They can deal with the unexpected, correct serious malfunctions and adjust routine to changed circumstances. In space, as on earth, things do not always go well. There, as here, adversity is the true test of men. The Skylab pioneers have met that test with distinction.” (P Inq, 6/24/73)
The Apollo Honor Awards Ceremony at NASA Hq. celebrated the success of the Dec. 7—19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission and honored 47 persons for contributions to the success of the entire program. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a foreword to the ceremony that Apollo’s richest achievement might be the spiritual unity it provided “by enabling all Americans, and all the world watching our astronauts’ progress moonward, to discover the uniqueness of our beautiful yet fragile Earth as viewed from the perspective of the Moon. Unique in the solar system, it is the only home of the Family of Man; and seen from the perspective of the Moon, the common humanity that we all share becomes more evident than the temporal differences that keep us apart.” Dr. Fletcher and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Associate Administrator, presented awards, while Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt congratulated recipients. The NASA Distinguished Service Award was presented to Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences, and Director Chester M. Lee of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Program, who had been Mission Director for Apollo 12 through 17. Exceptional Service Medals were presented to 21 employees; the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 14 scientists from Government, industry, and universities; and the Group Achievement Awards to 10 teams from industry and Government. The Distinguished Public Service Medal, NASA’s highest award to nonGovernment personnel, went to: Dr. B. Paul Blasingame, Delco Electronics Div., General Motors Corp.; Joseph F. Clayton, Aerospace Systems Div., Bendix Corp.; Clinton H. Grace, International Business Machines Corp.; Robert E. Greer, George W. Jeffs, and Joseph P. McNamara, Rockwell International Corp.; Thomas J. Kelly, Grumman Aerospace Corp.; H. Douglas Lowrey, Chrysler Corp. Space Div.; Richard H. Nelson, Boeing Co. Space Div. Aerospace Group; and Theodore D. Smith, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. (Program; nasa Release 73-60; RI pro)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt attended an awards ceremony at Kennedy Space Center honoring icsc personnel and contractor employees for their contributions to the Apollo 17 mission (launched Dec. 7, 1972). (icsc Release 54-73)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt had arrived in Indonesia to present a moon rock to Indonesian President T. N. J. Suharto and lecture at the Indonesian Institute for Outer Space, the Associated Press reported. They were on an 11-country tour of Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and the Pacific. {Birmingham News, 6/25/73)
The People’s Republic of China was preparing to deploy the first group of 10 nuclear missiles capable of reaching U.S.S.R. targets, Joseph Alsop reported in Washington Post. U.S. intelligence agencies had observed missile sites carved into mountain sides and believed the new intermediate range missile had already been successfully tested. (W Post, 1/17/73, January 17—19:	A Skylab simulation at Manned Spacecraft Center picked up the Skylab flight plan in the 10th day of the mission scheduled for April 30 launch. Flight controllers worked in shifts to tally the day’s activities, prepare a summary flight plan for the day following, and complete a detailed flight plan for use the next day. Activities included all elements of flight between 8 am and 5 pm each day but were oriented toward experiments rather than flight operations. Skylab astronauts manned crew simulators, principal investigators manned support stations, and the Marshall Space Flight Center Operations Support Center for Skylab provided support for the Orbital Workshop. Prime contractors North American Rockwell Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. supported the simulation, msc controllers inserted simulated malfunctions to exercise procedures and mission rules for the flight and to observe the reaction of control teams, (msc Roundup, 1/19/73, 2) January 18:	The European Space Research Organization Council met in Paris and unanimously authorized establishment of a project to develop the sortie laboratory to fly with nasa’s space shuttle in the 1980s. Participating states would provide funding and would use esro facilities and assistance. The Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Belgium, and Spain would participate initially, with other esro member countries expected to join later. After definition studies of the research and applications module (ram), the sortie lab final design would be agreed on by NASA and ESRO. esro would proceed to development phase, with delivery of the sortie lab to NASA scheduled for 1979. The laboratory would consist of a pressurized manned module to house equipment, experiments, data-processing equipment, electrical power and environmental control systems, and a six-scientist crew. An external, unpressurized instrument platform would house experiments and large instruments controlled remotely from the laboratory. Project cost was estimated at $250 million to $300 million. Negotiations at agency and governmental levels would begin shortly, (esro Release, 1/19/73; NASA Release 73-12)
Mikhail D. Millionshchikov, Vice President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and a principal spokesman in Soviet scientific contacts with the West, died in Moscow at age 60. He had contributed significantly to the studies of the turbulent flow of liquids and gases, nuclear energy, and new techniques for direct energy conversion. On April 28, 1970, Academician Millionshchikov—as head of a 10-man Soviet delegation to a conference sponsored in Washington, D.C., by the Fund for Peace— had suggested U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space exploration. This proposal had been “the first public suggestion by a Soviet spokesman of this hope,” the New York Times reported later. Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, also a conference participant, had proposed the next day that the two countries agree to exchange space engineers as a first step toward joint space cooperation. {NYT, 5/29/73, 32) May 28:	A New York Times editorial commented on the repair of Skylab 1, damaged on launch May 14: “Many people deserve credit for this remarkable turn of events. First there were the Houston ground controllers who maneuvered the crippled Skylab into an optimal position. ... A small but varied army of technicians hurriedly contrived not one but three possible ways of creating a parasol in space so as to replace the missing heat shield that had created the most trouble. Finally, the Sky-lab astronauts mastered their new tasks in an incredibily short time, reached orbit in the neighborhood of Skylab, surveyed the damage, and made the most essential ‘fix,’ the sunshade, which yesterday brought the station’s temperature down to tolerable levels.” It had been a grueling test for all concerned. “But for the moment, at least, the Skylab project has been truly resurrected from near-death.” (NYT, 5/28/73, 14)
The skeleton crew at aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office at Jackass Flats, Nev., would be disbanded by late June, snso Nevada Operations Chief John P. Jewett was quoted as saying. The facility would be shut down June 30 following termination of the nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program [see Jan. 5]. More than $1.2 billion had been spent on program since its inception in 1959. (upi, Orlando Sentinel, 1/7/73)	! January 8-23:	The U.S.S.R. launched its Luna 21 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 11:55 am local time (1:55 am est). The “automatic station” was separated from the “satellite” in earth orbit and placed on a close to the planned trajectory for the moon. Tass said the purpose of the mission was to “further scientific studies of the moon and near-lunar space.” During the flight to the moon all systems were reported functioning normally. On Jan. 12 Luna 21 entered lunar orbit with 110-km (68.4-mi) apolune, 90-km (55.9-mi) perilune, 1-hr 58-min period, and 60° inclination. Orbital corrections were made Jan. 13 and 14 and on Jan. 14 the spacecraft was placed in an elliptical orbit with a low point of 16 km (10 mi) from the moon’s surface. Luna 21 softlanded on the eastern fringe of the Sea of Serenity Jan. 16 (Jan. 15 est) and released the 840-kg (1850-lb) self-propelled Lunokhod 2 vehicle to make scientific investigations of the moon’s surface. Lunokhod 2 resembled its predecessor, Lunokhod 1 (placed on the moon Nov. 17, 1970, by Luna 17). It carried flags, pennants with Lenin’s has relief, state coat of arms, and the inscription “50th Anniversary of the U.S.S.R.” and was equipped with a control system, radio and TV devices, and scientific instruments including a French-made laser reflector. The reflector was designed to measure the distance between the earth and the moon to within 20-30 cm (10-12 in). Between Jan. 16 and Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2, powered by solar batteries and controlled from the ground by a special crew, photographed the lunar soil, rocks, and panoramic moonscape; determined chemical composition of the surface layer; measured the glow of zodiacal light near sun; and looked for cosmic dust. A highly skilled ground crew maneuvered vehicle over the shortest and safest routes, orienting it to a complex relief map of route. Lunokhod 2 was turned to bypass obstacles without decreasing speed. On Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2 was commanded to terminate operations in preparation for lunar night. Luna 17 was the first unmanned spacecraft to land on the moon and deploy an automatic lunar explorer. The last mission in the series, the unmanned Luna 20 (launched Feb. 14, 1972), had landed on the moon and returned to earth with lunar samples, (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; Tass fbis-Sov, 1/8/73, LI; 1/15-19/73, LI; 1/22-23/73, LI; 1/26/73, 4; SBD, 1/9/73, 38; Shabad, NYT, 1/17/73, C14) January 8:	Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, nasa Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) Program Director, was quoted by Aviation Week & Space Technology as saying U.S.S.R. would use a U.S.-supplied very-high-frequency (vhf) transceiver on Soyuz spacecraft during rendezvous and docking maneuvers with Apollo spacecraft in July 1975 mission. Transceivers had been used in lunar modules for Apollo rendezvous and docking in lunar orbit. The U.S. also would build a receiver for Apollo spacecraft that could operate on Soviet communication frequencies and might lend to the U.S.S.R. equipment for use by cosmonauts and astronauts during joint portions of mission. Dr. Petrone had said NASA engineers, in discussions with Soviet engineers, had noted that necessity of concentrating on interpreter for exchange of technical information had made them more aware of technical problems than they would have been in direct English conversation. March meeting of U.S. and Soviet ASTP planners would consider flammability problems. (Av Wk, 1/8/73,
A New York Times editorial commented on the cost-benefit ratio of the U.S. Skylab missions. “Is the advantage gained by putting men into space worth the high price that must be paid?” Although bold, imaginative, and potentially useful, Skylab came at a time when Americans were “oppressively aware of the limits of the nation’s resources and of the consequent restraints and constraints on national policy.” Skylab would be most important “in providing practical evidence in determining the relative value of manned activity in utilizing earth’s immediate neighborhood to meet man’s needs on this planet.” (NYT, 5/13/73, 4:14) May 14-Ju.ne 22: The Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and—11 days later— the Skylab 2 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew were launched into near-earth orbit to establish the first U.S. manned orbital laboratory, in the four-mission Skylab program. Skylab i’s meteoroid shield was torn off and the solar array system damaged during launch, cutting power and raising temperature to threaten the mission, although the spacecraft achieved satisfactory orbit. Skylab 2, scheduled for May 15 launch, was delayed while damage was assessed and the flight plan modified. On May 25, Skylab 2 carried three astronauts to rendezvous and dock with the earth-orbiting Workshop. The crew boarded the Workshop, repaired spacecraft damage, and conducted medical experiments and studies in solar astronomy and earth resources for a record 28 days before undocking for a safe return to earth June 22. May 14-24:	Skylab 1 (SL-1) was launched on time at 1:30 pm edt from Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39, Pad A, by a two-stage Saturn V launch vehicle after a nominal countdown. Liftoff was witnessed by U.S. and foreign TV viewers and by an estimated 500 000 persons at ICSC, including U.S. and foreign dignitaries and 26 former prisoners of war invited by NASA. The Skylab 2 crew—Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Paul J. Weitz (pilot), and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot)—watched the launch from quarantine. Skylab’s Saturn Workshop (sws) cluster launched toward earth orbit included the Orbital Workshop (ows) with its Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), multiple docking adapter (mda), and instrument unit (iu). At 63 sec into the mission, indication was received that the meteoroid shield had deployed prematurely. The Workshop was placed in nominal, circular orbit with 438.2-km (272.2-mi) altitude, 93-min period, 50° inclination, and 7649.4-m-per-sec (25 096.6-fps) orbital velocity. The payload shroud was j ettisoned on time at 15 min and 25 sec after launch and the atm deployed at 21 min 34 sec with normal deployment of the ATM solar arrays at 26 min 38 sec, but ground controllers received no indication that the Workshop solar array system (sas), which was to have been released by an onboard computer, had been deployed. At 41 min, a ground command was sent to deploy the two SAS wings. They did not respond. The command was sent again 30 min later and a third time near the end of the first orbit, without result. During the first postlaunch press briefing, Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that if the arrays did not deploy “the mission will be seriously degraded.” The crew was not set up to perform a fix-it-yourself extravehicular activity (eva) and there were no controls for deployment inside the Workshop. Anxious officials and flight controllers began analyzing radioed launch data. Analysis and later inspection revealed that the meteoroid shield had been torn off by vibration of the vehicle just after passing through mach 1 speed, near the time of highest dynamic pressure. Some early measurements indicated that the shield separation straps were still satisfactory, but later measurements indicated failure. The failure had released the securing mechanism on SAS Wing 2 and the wing ripped off. A piece of shield had wrapped around SAS Wing 1 and kept it from deploying. Loss of the wings, which were to provide power to the Workshop, reduced power to 50% of its average 8000-w output; the remaining 50% would he supplied by the four atm solar panels. At 11:00 pm edt Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced the Skylab 2 launch had been rescheduled to May 20 to allow assessment of damage and development of a new flight plan to maximize scientific return from Skylab’s experiments with limited power. Fuel cells of the Skylab 2 command and service module (csm) would be used to produce electricity, after joining the Workshop, but the CSM oxygen and hydrogen for the cells would last only 16 to 21 days. It was too early to assess the effect on Skylab 3 and 4 missions, planned for 56 days each. On May 15 Skylab faced a new threat as temperatures inside the Workshop reached above 311 K (100°F). The lost meteoroid shield had also been designed to reflect sunlight and help cool the Workshop. “We think we can live with the electrical power shortage,” Schneider said, “but if we can’t solve this thermal problem we have a serious situation,” Schneider feared foods and film might be spoiled, plastic parts might begin to leak poisonous gases, and the laboratory might become uninhabitable. The entire Skylab team was mobilized—at Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Martin Marietta Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., trw Inc., and Garrett AiResearch Co.—in an all-out attempt to overcome the loss of the shield and solar arrays. Schneider said NASA was studying the possibility of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ putting “some kind of a thermal blanket around the spacecraft,” but that would require a delay of the Skylab 2 launch beyond May 20. Astronauts would also inspect the solar wings, but whether they could make repairs was uncertain. The Skylab 2 crew returned to JSC May 15 to help flight planners salvage the mission. Special attitude maneuvers were run to obtain temperature data on the Skylab cluster and to limit Workshop temperatures, as internal temperature soared as high as 325 K (125°F). Temperature was reduced by pitching the Workshop with the longitudinal axis pointed at the sun for one orbit and, on May 16, the Workshop was tilted 55° away from the sun, with sufficient sunlight on the working solar panels to charge the batteries but moving the space station out of the sun’s full glare. Teams continued to compute options to overcome the loss of the shield: astronauts could spray-paint Skylab Vs side to alter radiation properties of the gold foil coating the Workshop shell, could wallpaper the critical area, or could deploy a solar sunshade. Choice of the third option was announced May 16. The astronauts were trained in three possible methods of deploying the sunshade and in procedures to deploy the jammed solar panel. If they failed with the panel, a near-normal 16- to 21-day mission could still be realized by using the CSM power and curtailing some experiments. After that experiments would have to be severely cut back to reserve power for the CSm’s trip home. On May 17 NASA announced postponement of the Skylab 2 launch until May 25 to allow the astronauts to practice techniques for deploying the sunshade and mission engineers to design, fabricate, and test hardware. Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz flew to msfc to practice installing the sun shield in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator. On May 20 the Workshop was purged of any gases from the overheated insulation material and turned slightly to allow the sun to warm the airlock module and prevent water stored there from freezing and causing breakage. Components of the astronauts’ repair kit were shipped to MSFC for final testing before being installed in Skylab 2’s Apollo csm. On May 22 the Skylab 2 astronaut crew flew to KSC to prepare for the May 25 launch. Three thermal shields were decided on at a May 23 review: a parasol deployable from the Workshop through the solar scientific airlock, a backup twin-pole shield deployable by the crew during EVA, and a standup-EVA (seva) sail deployable by the crew from the CSM if both other methods failed. The Skylab 2 countdown resumed at 5:30 am edt May 23 at ksc. It had been halted eight hours after Skylab 1 liftoff May 14. On May 24 the three emergency sunshades and necessary tools were stored in the CM. Significant experiments—S015, effects of zero g on single human cells; S020, x-ray/solar photography; T025, coronagraph contamination measurements; M555, gallium arsenide crystal growth; equipment for S063, ultraviolet (uv) airglow horizon photography; and spare equipment for TV coverage of the ATM EVA—were removed to accommodate the additional 180 kg (400 lbs) of equipment. The crew would also carry an extra medical kit to replace medicines spoiled by high temperatures in Skylab 1. Lightning struck the Skylab 2 mobile service structure at 5:24 pm EDT May 24, but retests of the vehicle indicated no damage. At a May 24 press conference Program Director Schneider said there would be limited activity by the crew to deploy the partially opened solar panel. “We’re not too optimistic that we’ll be able to do too much, although we will give Capt. Conrad the option to try it if it looks like a reasonable job.” NASA was “very confident that ... we will be able to deploy a [thermal] shield, we will get the spacecraft temperatures back under control, and we will have a good 28-day mission.” May 25:	Skylab 2 (SL-2) was launched from ICSC Launch Complex 39, Pad B, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle into heavy dark clouds on time at 9:00 am edt. As Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz headed toward the Skylab 1 Workshop they were to attempt to repair in orbit and man for 28 days, Commander Conrad told Mission Control, “We fix anything.” The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee 9 min 56 sec after launch. Six minutes later the csm separated. The S—IVB stage deorbit maneuver was performed at 2:23 pm edt and the stage splashed into the Pacific Ocean. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 4:30 pm EDT over the Guam tracking station on the fifth orbit. During 15 min of TV coverage the CSM flew around the Workshop, within 1.5 m (5 ft) of it. The astronauts confirmed that the SAS Wing 2 was missing and that the SAS Wing 1, deployed only 15°, was restrained by a piece of the micrometeoroid shield wrapped around the SAS beam fairing. Portions of the gold foil laminated to the Workshop skin for thermal protection had been torn and heat and uv radiation from the sun had scorched the skin. The astronauts soft-docked the CSM with the Workshop, using only three capture latches; ate dinner; and undocked to attempt to deploy the jammed solar panel. Weitz stood in the open hatch of the CSM with Kerwin holding his knees to keep him from drifting into space. He tried to free the solar panel with a shepherd’s crook and a pole with pruning shears attached without success. Conrad told Mission Control that the panel appeared to be “hooked in there like it’s nailed on.” The repair attempt was ended at 8:12 pm edt. The crew made four unsuccessful attempts to redock with the Workshop. Working in bulky spacesuits and gloves, the astronauts evacuated the air from the Apollo cabin and hooked up an electric cable to override a suspected short in the docking probe. “Yea. We got a hard dock out of it [a docking using all 12 sealing latches to seal the two spacecraft together],” Conrad said at 11:50 pm edt. The crew found one of the capture latches had stuck in the retracted position, but troubleshooting procedures recommended by Mission Control restored the latch. May 26-June 21:	The Skylab 2 crew entered the multiple docking adapter on the Skylab Workshop at 12:45 pm edt May 26 and performed activation and Workshop preentry tasks. A chemical detection device inserted into the passage indicated no lethal gas was present. At 2:30 pm edt Astronaut Weitz entered the Workshop wearing a gas mask, gloves, and soft shoes to protect him from the heat. Weitz told ground control, “The ows appears to be in good shape. It feels a little bit warm as you might expect, like 90 to 100 degrees [F; 305 to 310 K] in the desert. I felt heat radiating from everywhere but I never felt uncomfortable. And nothing I touched felt hot to me. It’s a dry heat.” Kerwin and Conrad followed Weitz. After a quick inspection, the crew closed the hatch. At 4:30 pm edt the crew began to deploy the solar parasol—a mylar shade folded against a telescopic pole—through the solar airlock. As they readied the parasol, the astronauts looked out of the windows and identified landmarks across the U.S. Weitz recognized Seattle, Wash., and Conrad spotted both launch pads used for the Skylab launches at Conrad and Weitz popped open the shiny aluminum and orange canopy at 8:30 pm edt May 26 (Mission Day 2) while Kerwin took TV photos from the attached Apollo cm. Significant external temperature decreases were noted almost immediately after deployment. Internal temperatures decreased more slowly. The Workshop was headed back to solar inertial attitude. By May 27 the Workshop temperature had dropped to 309 K (97°F). The crew activated systems and experiments while their back-and-forth excursions through the Workshop were televised to the earth. The Washington Post later said they resembled “skin divers snorkeling through a cave in the Caribbean” or a scene from the film “2001” with astronauts “in orange flight suits and white T-shirts swimming like fish through the big workshop, floating backwards and tumbling like gymnasts.” On May 28 the astronauts began the first medical tests, taking and processing blood samples and checking the conditions of their circulatory and metabolic systems. Checkout and preparation of the (atm) was begun. During a seven-minute televised space-to-ground news conference beginning at 1:09 pm edt, Conrad said the crew had adapted rapidly. “None of us has had any motion sickness. ... It seems to be like the simulator except with the absence of gravity.” Kerwin concluded that the brain and eyes must override the body’s vestibule system in the inner ear. “You say to your brain, ‘Brain, I want that way to be up.’ And your brain says, ‘OK, then that way is up.’ . . . Your brain will follow you.” Conrad agreed, “We’re in good shape for 28 days.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said later in the mission that it was “rather amazing” that the crew had shown no signs of the expected motion sickness. Data received were preliminary, but prelaunch exercises in a whirling chair might have helped avoid nausea. Temperatures continued to drop slowly, reaching 304 K (88°F). At 8:50 pm edt a 69-sec trim burn put the Workshop into a repeating ground track about 96 km (60 mi) west of normal, to acquire earth resources data. On May 29 checkout of the ATM was completed and four passes were made. Kerwin trained an array of telescopes to observe x-ray emissions and examine the structure of the sun’s atmosphere. He photographed three regions of the sun considered active by solar physicists and made detailed observations of the full solar disk and the corona. Conrad and Weitz prepared the earth-oriented cameras for earth resources experiment package (erep) passes. Two biomedical runs were made. During a private conversation with jsc, Conrad reported that the internal temperature had stabilized near 304 K (88°F) and that, while this would be tolerable for the rest of the mission, he did not think the crew could carry out the full protocol on the bicycle ergometer (exercise device). On May 30 the solar telescopes were aimed at the active regions of the sun while scientists on the earth received excellent TV photos of the solar corona and the solar disk in the uv spectrum. The first erep photo pass was made over a 3200-km (2000-mi) strip from Oregon to the Gulf of Mexico. Good pictures were obtained of the Great Salt Lake, gypsum beds in New Mexico, and the soil salinity of the Rio Grande Valley, as well as microwave measurements of the Gulf of Mexico. After the erep pass, the batteries—at a reduced level of 45% to 50% capacity—tripped off line and ceased to produce electricity. They had been designed to trip off at 20% capacity. One battery also lost the regulator that allowed the solar panel to recharge it, decreasing the total Workshop power by 6%, or 250 w, leaving 4200 w. The Workshop required 3600 w for maintenance, leaving only 600 w for experiments. The second erep pass was canceled for a power evaluation. Sixteen batteries were brought back on line but two remained off line and were useless. Heat, fans, and lights were powered down. Workshop power continued reduced May 31 and erep experiments were canceled. The crew continued medical experiments, each taking a turn in a rotating chair to provide data on motion sickness and maintaining balance in zero g. Weitz repaired the mirror system on the uv stellar photography experiment. Temperatures had dropped to 301 K (82°F). The Skylab astronauts took their first day off June 1 (Mission Day 8) and their first shower in space. On a 15-min color telecast they performed housekeeping chores and—to the music from the film “2001”— did handstands, somersaults, and cartwheels in the zero-g atmosphere. Conrad led the crew in a run around the watertanks. Centrifugal force overcame weightlessness, so the men could keep their feet on the track. On the ground Skylab officials announced the decision to make a second attempt to free the jammed solar panel, while engineers and the backup astronauts, led by Russell L. Schweickart, tested EVA procedures. On June 2, Conrad and Weitz made a 10-min erep photo pass from California to Central Mexico to gather data on earthquakes, volcanoes, pollution sources, mineral resources, and land-use patterns. On the ground Schweickart successfully tested three ways of freeing the jammed solar panel using a bolt cutter, a prying rod, and a surgeon’s bone saw. The astronauts completed the third erep pass over North America and the fifth ATM pass on June 3. The nuclear emulsion experiment, the transuranic cosmic ray detector, and the neutron analysis detector were deployed. Astronaut Conrad set a new world record for time in space at 1:17 am EDT, surpassing the 715-hr 5-min mark set by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. The first ball game in space was held in the Workshop. Conrad said a ball thrown in weightlessness “goes straight as an arrow.” The fourth erep pass was made June 4, as well as five hours of atm solar viewing. Dr. John Zeiglschmid, Skylab Flight Surgeon, told a JSC press briefing that the physical condition of the Skylab crew was excellent. They were consuming the proper amount of food and getting adequate rest. Conrad and Kerwin had lost only 0.5 kg (1 lb) ; Weitz had lost 1.8 kg (4 lbs). Top Skylab officials at msfc agreed that solar wing deployment techniques developed by Astronaut Schweickart were feasible, without unusual safety hazards. On June 6 preparations were made for the next day’s EVA. Conrad said, “I guess we have a fifty-fifty chance of pulling it off.” The 16 Workshop batteries were producing 4200 w—only 600 w more than the minimum necessary for the astronauts’ survival. One battery was down to half charge and others were believed to have been damaged by the heat. The astronauts photographed hurricane Ava during an erep pass, made an atm pass, and photographed uv spectra of stars. Conrad and Kerwin opened the am eva hatch at 11:23 am edt June 7 and extended their umbilicals and a rigged-up 7.6-m (25-ft) pole fitted with cutters for releasing the jammed solar wing, as Weitz took TV photos from the Skylab and the csm. Outsid Kerwin had difficulty keeping a firm footing, with only makeshift andholds and foot restraints, as he secured the end of the pole to antenna mount. His heart rate rose to 150 beats per minute and he \s burning energy at 2000 to 2500 BTUs an hour. Finally he extended the pole to the beam holding the wing and—with Conrad repeatedly telling him to “take it easy” and “cool it”—managed after several tries to fit the cutters around the small bolt that restrained the wing. Conrad moved hand over hand along the pole to the wing. Tangling of the 10.6- and 18.3-m (35- and 60-ft) flexible umbilicals linking the astronauts to spacecraft life support systems complicated their movements. Kerwin pulled a lanyard to snap the cutters and sever the bolt and then extended the wing using a rope attached to the upper surface. Conrad pulled a rope to break a frozen actuator. Two of the sections making up the wing were 40% deployed and the other about 30%. The two astronauts also changed a film magazine in a telescope camera and latched open a balky door on an x-ray telescope before reentering the Workshop and closing the am eva hatch at 2:53 pm edt, concluding 3 hrs 30 min successful eva. The Workshop was pitched up to expose the panels to more direct sunlight and unfreeze the hydraulic system that deployed them. After a few hours one section was 90% deployed, another 40%, and the third 29%. By the next day the sections were fully deployed. Additional electric power of 3000 w was obtained and all eight batteries supplied by the solar panels were charged and in good working order—paving the way for a full Skylab mission. From Mission Control Schweickart said, “Everybody’s shaking hands down here and we just wish we could reach up and shake yours.” President Nixon sent a message: “On behalf of the American people I congratulate and commend you and your crew on your successful effort to repair the world’s first true space station. In the two weeks since you left earth, you have more than fulfilled the prophecy of your parting words, ‘We can fix anything.’ All of us now have new courage that man can work in space to control his environment, improve his circumstances and exert his will even as he does on earth.” On June 12 the ninth erep pass was made. Weitz said he could see pollution flowing into Lake Erie and he couldn’t find Washington, D.C., because of haze. Conrad melted an aluminum alloy to study the behavior of molten metal in weightlessness and used an electron beam for welding inside a small vacuum chamber. On June 13 Dr. Hawkins told a JSC medical review that Kerwin and Weitz were no longer able to perform at preflight levels on the bicycle ergometer, indicating their cardiovascular systems had been weakened by weightlessness. The condition was not at dangerous levels and was not interfering with their normal day-to-day performance. Weitz photographed a massive explosion on the sun with the atm solar telescopes June 15. The flare had erupted from the center of the sun’s side facing the earth and covered an area 40 200 km (25 000 mi) wide. Conrad checked out the Apollo CSM for the return trip to earth, while Kerwin initiated the growth of bacteria in a culture medium and photographed its behavior in the space environment. On June 17 a trim burn corrected a cross-track error and positioned the vehicle for the start of the Skylab 3 mission. President Nixon telephoned the astronauts from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “I guess the way I could summarize this project is that it proves that man still matters. With all the technical machines . . . that you had to work with, it proved that when there were difficulties the ingenuity of men in space was what really mattered, and you have made us all very proud with the way you handled some difficult problems in this project.” The President invited the three Skylab astronauts to visit him at San Clemente, Calif., after splashdown. At 3:22 am edt June 18 (MD—25) astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz surpassed the previous space endurance record held by the Soyuz 11 cosmonauts (launched June 6, 1971). Conrad asked that a message be relayed to Soviet cosmonauts giving “our respects at this point in our flight to them and their comrades. Wish them good luck from us in the future.” EVA-2 began at 6:53 am edt June 19. Conrad and Weitz moved through space to retrieve and replace the atm film cassettes while Kerwin photographed the eva for TV from inside the Workshop. Conrad also freed a stuck relay by striking it with a hammer. One of two dead batteries began charging immediately. From the ground Schweickart said, “It worked. Thank you very much, gentlemen. You’ve done it again.” The cameras for the white light coronagraph and x-ray spectroheliographic experiments were replaced by the astronauts to permit photography during the unmanned period between Skylab 2 and 3. eva operations ended at 8:29 am edt, after 1 hr 36 min. During a June 20 press conference from space Kerwin said the astronauts’ physical condition was “a pleasant big surprise. I’m tremendously encouraged about the future of long-duration flight.” June 22:	The astronauts undocked the csm from the Skylab Workshop at 4:55 am edt on Mission Day 29. As the csm pulled away and circled the Workshop, TV and photographic coverage were obtained by the crew, cm separation from the sm at 5:40 am edt was followed by initial service propulsion system firing at 6:05 am edt and a final deorbit maneuver at 9:11 am edt. The cm splashed down at 9:50 am edt 1340 km (830 mi) southwest of San Diego. A recovery helicopter dropped swimmers who installed a flotation collar and a sea anchor. The recovery ship Ticonderoga was maneuvered beside the CM and a crane lifted it aboard with the astronauts inside. Medical examinations on board the recovery ship found some dizziness and ill effects from weightlessness. The crew would travel by ship to San Diego and by air to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., June 24. The Skylab 1-2 mission achieved its primary objectives of establishing the Skylab Orbital Assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data on the crew for use in extending the duration of manned space flight, and performing inflight experiments. It contributed significantly toward program objectives of determining man’s ability to live and work in space for extended periods, extending the science of solar astronomy beyond the limits of earth-based observations, and developing improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space. Despite mission anomalies, 80% of the solar data planned was obtained; 12 of the 15 earth resources data runs were accomplished; all 16 medical experiments were conducted as required and a time history of man’s adaptations to zero-g environment was obtained for the first time; and data were taken on all 43 experiments scheduled for Skylab 2 except those precluded by the use of the solar parasol and weight and power limitations. The performance of the flight crew was good and the mission was judged officially on July 14 to be a success. Major records set to date included the longest-duration manned flight, 28 days 50 min; the longest total time in space for one man, 49 days for Conrad (veteran of Gemini 5 and 11 and Apollo 12 missions) ; the longest inflight EVA, 3 hrs 30 min by Conrad and Kerwin June 7; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned flight, 18 531 559 km (11514 967 mi). Skylab 1-2 was the first U.S. manned orbital workshop. Skylab 3 was scheduled to be launched in August and Skylab 4 in November. The Workshop would be operated unmanned between manned missions. The Skylab program was directed by NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, msfc developed and integrated the major program components including the ows, AM, MDA, atm, payload shroud, and most experiments and was responsible for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. KSc managed launch operations. JSC was responsible for flight operations, recovery, crew selection and training, and development of the modified CSM and the spacecraft launch adapter. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the overall direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA prog off; NASA pao press briefing transcripts, 5/14/73-6/20/73; NASA Mission Rpt MR-3; PD, 6/25/73, 787, 827; NYT, 5/17/73-6/22/73; W Post, 5/16/73-6/22/73; W Star & News, 5/23/73-6/22/73; B Sun, 5/15/73-6/12/73; M Her, 5/14/73, 19A; H Post, 6/7/73) May 14:	Unsolicited cash contributions to NASA from persons in the U.S. and foreign countries since 1959 would be used to finance the 19 student scientific experiments on Skylab [see Jan. 26], NASA announced. The $5548 fund included individual gifts ranging from $1500 to the $0.35 contribution of an eight-year-old boy sent in 1970 because he had heard that NASA “didn’t have enough money.” A retired Navy chief petty officer had sent one day’s pay after each manned flight in memory of his son who had been killed in the Korean war. A naturalized citizen from Eastern Europe had sent $100 in 1964 because he wished to be a part of the space program that would mean the survival of a free U.S. (nasa Release 73—98)
It was “puzzling,” a Washington Star and Daily News editorial said, “that Soviet leaders remain so secretive about their space problems, when the general nature of a mishap cannot be hidden from modem tracking equipment and more openness could lead to a sharing of corrective knowledge. The Russian announcement that the last Salyut had merely completed its mission . . . fooled no one. Greater frankness, certainly, will be needed in the joint mission [U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project] requiring the confidence of each country’s experts in the other’s equipment and ability.” (W Star & News, 5/9/73, A23) May 10:	Skylab 1, scheduled for launch May 14, would carry 950 kg (2100 lbs) of food, including lobster newburg, prime ribs of beef, filet mignon, asparagus, strawberries, and after dinner mints, the Washington Post quoted Dr. Malcolm C. Smith, Chief of Food and Nutrition at Johnson Space Center, as saying. Each Skylab mission would carry more than 70 different foods prepared by an automatic meal-reconstitution module. Semisolid food could be eaten out of the can with a fork and spoon and prevented from flying around in the weightless environment by a polyethylene membrane. Beverages could be consumed one swallow at a time from a multichambered bellowslike canister. Previously, astronauts had to drink the entire beverage at one time once the valve was opened. Fruit juices were fortified with potassium gluconate to replace the potassium lost in weightlessness. The use of alcoholic beverages had been rejected because of medical drawbacks and public opinion. The astronauts arranged their own meals with the correct combinations of nutrients and calories. Frozen foods would be used the first time in the U.S. space program. The cost of the Skylab food was $26.35 per man per day. Twenty percent more food than required would be carried. There would also be a rescue food supply of 16 days for three men. (Ross, W Post, 5/10/73, El)
nasa held two Skylab 2 press briefings at Johnson Space Center as the astronaut crew, orbiting the earth in the Orbital Workshop launched May 14, carried out experiments and solar photography. At an Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) briefing Dr. Robert Noyes of Harvard College Observatory said the experiment to look into the outer solar atmosphere “exceeds our wildest expectations. Every object that we’ve tried to look at, we’ve done successfully and we have seen . . . entirelynew and different phenomena.” For the first time there had been enough spatial resolution to see the fine structure. Data received by viewing the sun at different heights in the corona had established the existence of two fundamental structures—points of emission 12 900 km (8000 mi) in diameter and a cloud of relatively cool material emersed in the very hot corona. The structures should provide information on heat sources and physical properties of the corona. Dr. Robert Mac-Queen, High Altitude Observatory astronomer, said that a high point of the ATM experiments had been detailed examination of the corona for 45 consecutive hours, identifying the material making up the solar wind passing into the corona. At a solar-flare activity briefing Dr. Guiseppe Vaiana, American Science and Engineering, Inc., scientist and a principal investigator on Skylab, described the TV coverage of the solar flare photographed by Astronaut Paul J. Weitz: “What you are seeing is the great event of the day.” The flare had a double structure in the active region. A portion of it outlined the magnetic field of one polarity on one side and the other polarity on the other side, with a center neutral line. Two bright spots were seen on both sides of the neutral line. The flare extended 100 000 km (62 000 mi) up from the solar surface and covered 21/2 trillion sq km (1 trillion sq mi). It had peaked in intensity 3 min after it had been discovered by Weitz and decayed during the following 30 min. (Transcript)
m/g John B. Hudson (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems of Air Force Systems Command, became a lieutenant general and afsc Vice Commander. He succeeded l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who became Vice Commander, AF Logistics Command, (afsc Newsreview 10/73, 1) October 1—6:	National Space Week was observed by 32 states to honor Nasa’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1]. The governors of the states had responded to a request by members of the Federation of Americans Supporting Science and Technology (fasst). Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker said: “The declared policy of the United States, that ‘activities of space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind,’ has established our country as the scientific and technological leader in space. NASA has coordinated the efforts of scientists and engineers in every field, the aerospace industry and educational institutions.” (fasst Release, 10/30/73) October 1—18:	A 47-member NASA delegation led by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney met with Soviet counterparts in Moscow for two weeks of discussions of technical problems of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission scheduled for July 1975. Discussions culminated in an Oct. 18 midterm review of the project by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of the Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. Low had arrived in Moscow Oct. 14; his stay included visits to the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of Space Research, the Cosmonaut Training Center, and the Space Flight Control Center. In an Oct. 18 communique Dr. Low and Academician Petrov confirmed their satisfaction with the astp project status. All major milestones were being met on schedule and, Dr. Low said, progress made indicated that the scheduled launch date could be met. Soyuz orbital and Apollo docking module drawings had been exchanged and agreement had been reached that U.S. specialists would participate in preflight final checkout of flight equipment at the Soviet launch site. Specialists would be exchanged to fit-check compatible equipment at U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. Academician Petrov told the press that U.S. specialists would be permitted at the Soviet launch site “up to the very minute of launching.” During the visit U.S. officials learned the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 June 30, 1971, were caused by accidental triggering open of an exhaust valve rather than by a hatch leak. The valve tripped open just after the reentry capsule separated from the larger orbiting module in a maneuver including firing of 12 explosive bolts. At least two crew members tried to close the valve but were unable to move fast enough. Unconsciousness from rapid decompression came in less than 10 sec; ground tests showed it would take 27 sec to close the valve by hand. U.S. officials said they were satisfied that subsequent modifications to the valve and crank mechanisms—tested on two unmanned flights, Cosmos 496 and 573, and on the manned Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission —were sufficient to prevent reoccurrence of the accident. (NASA Releases 73-199, 73-224; Smith, NYT, 10/19/73; jsc, astp Briefing transcript, 11/19/73; O’Toole, W Post, 10/29/73, Al; Av Wk, 11/5/73, 20-21) October 2:	NASA held three Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center. At a postflight crew press briefing, Skylab 3 Astronaut Alan L. Bean —who had splashed down Sept. 25, after a 59-day mission working in the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) with crew members Dr. Owen K. Garriott and Jack R. Lousma—said that the crew’s health had been “good the whole time.” Sufficient exercise, meals on time, and plenty of sleep had accounted f or their happiness and well-being. Having a scientist-astronaut aboard had created a “greater variety of interchange around the dinner table,” making “a better mission for everybody.” The mission would have been “50% less productive if Owen had not been there. He added a great amount to it . . . because his point of view is, just different.” Garriott said that a longer mission would necessitate “a somewhat less strenuous program,” but he could have spent eight hours a day at the wardroom window with a camera in each hand and a good supply of film “and never have any tendency to become bored.” Lousma said he still felt “a little less energetic” than before the mission, but within two weeks “I’ll be back to the same condition.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the crew was “in very good shape” but still had dizziness with specific head movements. Strength of the flexor and extensor muscles had decreased 20%. The astronauts’ weights were steadily climbing toward their preflight weights. Early blood tests had shown the red cell mass was down an average of 12% for all three crew members. The blood plasma was also down 15% to 20%. In an overview of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that the spacecraft (Command and Service Module 118) and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue were being readied for Nov. 11 launch. Final decision on the launch date would be made after further evaluation of the mission. In preparation, 140 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment had been deleted from stowage. It had been replaced with another 150 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment, 60 kg (130 lbs) for Skylab experiments, and 70 kg (150 lbs) of special equipment for Comet Kohoutek observations. After Oct. 8—10 flight readiness tests, only servicing, stowage, pyrotechnic installations, countdown demonstrations, and launch would remain. CSM—119, the rescue vehicle, was being prepared and would be available for a Jan. 6 launch if needed. Alfred A. Bishop, Manager of the jsc Missions Office, said that, after the first two weeks of acclimation, the Skylab 4 crew would perform 28 man-hours of experiments each day, an increase from the 19 to 221/j man-hours on Skylab 3. The increase would provide an additional 200 experiment man-hours. The crew would observe Comet Kohoutek, perform 12 experiments using the Apollo Telescope Mount, observe Mercury crossing the sun Nov. 10, observe a solar eclipse, and perform 10 to 14 new earth resources experiment package passes. (Transcripts)
The first of six student volunteers in a Univ. of California at Davis experiment to determine if astronauts could survive social isolation was released after 105 days’ isolation in two small rooms. Dr. Don A. Rockwell, project manager, said the experiment had shown that astronauts should he able to adjust psychologically to long periods in space. (upi, W Post, 5/30/73, A4)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt received the traditional greeting from Congress following their Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. They were welcomed by the House of Representatives, since the Senate was not in session. Cernan told the House that Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s placement of the first U.S. flag on the moon in 1968 had been “a symbol of the courage and the dedication and the effort and self-sacrifice of 200 million people in this country who made that effort possible.” The act had “probably gained more pride and more respect throughout the entire world than any one thing that has happened ... in the entire 200-year history of our country.” With one step by Armstrong, “we are able to gain something that we had never really been able to grab hold of in my lifetime.” Evans said his stay in the CM had made him realize that earth, like spacecraft, had limited consumable resources and “somehow the human survival requirement means that we have got to conserve these resources and man must learn to adapt to his environment.” Schmitt said that, in obtaining knowledge through the Apollo program, man had evolved into entering universe. “Although the nature of that evolution was technological, I believe it will be marked a thousand years from now as a single unique event in human history” appearing “more distinctly even than history’s record of our use of atomic energy. It is at times unseemly, at times shortsighted but always human pathway through time, mankind found that its reach could include the stars.” (CR, 1/22/73, H372-4)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced it had adopted fuel-saving regulations permitting airlines to use flight simulators more in pilot training and flight checking. The new rules could save 200 000 cu m (50 million gal) of fuel annually and reduce flights by 9300. (faa Release 73-215) December 23:	Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper, astronomer and space pioneer, died of a heart attack at the age of 68, while visiting Mexico City. During his early career, Dutch-born Kuiper had discovered groups of dwarf stars, satellites of Uranus and Neptune, and an atmosphere surrounding Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. In the 1950s he became the first astronomer to measure Pluto’s diameter accurately and charted the equator and position of the poles of Venus. In the 1960s Dr. Kuiper became one of the foremost authorities on the moon, working in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor projects and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. (McFadden, NYT, 12/25/73, 24) December 24:	Fifth anniversary of the Christmas Eve reading of Genesis by the moon-orbiting crew of Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968) to TV and radio audiences that included one of every four persons on earth. The crew of Skylab 4 (launched Nov. 16 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14), second crew to spend Christmas in space, devoted Christmas Eve to searching for and opening gifts hidden for them in the Apollo command module before launch by colleagues in Mission Control. The packages included a 91-cm (36-in) green cloth Christmas tree beneath the gear they would need for their scheduled Christmas Day space walk and a surprise package stored in the CM locker. Mission Control also planned to transmit over a teleprint circuit a Christmas card depicting the sun, Skylab, gifts, and Santa’s sled. (A&A 1968; UPi, W Star-News, 12/24/73, Al)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt visited Kennedy Space Center to thank employees for their efforts in making manned exploration of the moon possible. Dr. Schmitt said man would explore Mars in the not too distant future. “The reason it is possible to talk this way and not be accused of talking science fiction is because there’s no longer science fiction. It’s now only science prediction.” (upi, LA Her-Exam, 2/21/73)
An Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial saluted Skylab as “a triumph of man’s ingenuity, endurance and indomitable spirit.” The May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission had been “a tremendous demonstration of why man is vital to the broad expansion of space missions that looms for the next decade, and it demonstrated on live television for every taxpayer who cared to watch exactly what the space shuttle is all about.” The first Skylab crew had salvaged 80% of a successful mission and a $2.5-billion investment from the prospects of total disaster, opened new vistas on the scientific work that could be accomplished from a space platform, and proved that man could live and work usefully for extended periods in space. (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/9/73, 7) July 9-20:	Apollo-Soyuz Test Project specialists from NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences met at Johnson Space Center. They continued development of trajectories and flight plans, agreed tentatively to a scientific experiment plan, and familiarized the Soviet crew of tbe July 1975 mission with the Apollo spacecraft. Participants included astp technical directors Glynn S. Lunney for the U.S. and Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev for the U.S.S.R., Apollo and Soyuz flight crews, the Working Group on Mission Model and Operational Plans, and members of the Working Group on Control and Guidance. The Soyuz cosmonauts [see May 24] attended lectures on and demonstrations of the Apollo spacecraft, docking model briefings, and crew activity discussions. Lunney and Bushuyev reviewed astp milestones and reaffirmed that they were on schedule. On July 14 the Soviet delegation heads and cosmonauts toured assembly and checkout facilities at the Rockwell International Corp. plant in Downey, Calif., where astp work was being carried out. Meeting results were announced by NASA in a July 20 communique. Progress had been reported on crew activities, control center operations, trajectories, and other operational aspects. Agreements were reached on November familiarization of the U.S. flight crews with Soyuz equipment in the U.S.S.R., a preliminary cosmonaut training plan in the U.S. in April 1974 and February 1975, and astronaut training in the U.S.S.R. in July 1974 and March 1975. The training plan was expected to be completed in November and flight procedures finalized by the end of 1974. Final selection of joint experiments would be made in October 1973. Flight safety reports would be exchanged. The U.S.S.R. had specified the Moscow Center of Control of Manned Space Flight near Moscow as astp control center and had announced that Cosmonaut Aleksey S. Yeliseyev would be U.S.S.R. flight director. The U.S. technical director and several U.S. working groups would attend U.S.S.R. ASTP meetings in October, (nasa Release 73—93; nasa Communique)
Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D-Fla.) introduced H.J. Res. 632 to redesignate Cape Kennedy Cape Canaveral. {CR, 6/20/73, H5158) June 21—23:	NASA considered but decided against plans to launch a special spacecraft to intercept and study at close range Comet Kohoutek, discovered in March. Kohoutek, 10 times brighter than any comet on record, would be visible from the earth in late 1973. The NASA Science Advisory Committee on Comets and Asteroids recommended a program “to maximize the scientific return from the unique opportunity” by using new and modified instruments and modified schedules on the Skylab Workshop orbited May 14; other spacecraft already in orbit, such as Oao 3 (Copernicus, launched Aug. 21, 1972) and Oso 7 (launched Sept. 29, 1971) ; and sounding rockets, balloons, aircraft, and ground-based observations. NASA would also use a Radio Astronomy Explorer, an Atmospheric Explorer, and Isis 1 (launched Jan. 30, 1969). The agency had considered launching a scientific payload on a Thor-Delta or Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle to examine a comet from the outer reaches of the solar system at short range for the first time, but decided that time was insufficient to prepare the specialized instrumentation required. (Adv Com minutes; NASA OSS; Sullivan, NYT, 6/16/73; CSM, 6/18/73; NASA Activities, 9/15/73, 161) June 22:	President Nixon sent a telegram to the Skylab 2 astronauts following their successful splashdown at the end of a 28-day earth orbital mission [see May 14-June 22] : “The successful completion of the first mission of Skylab is a source of intense pride for the American people. You have demonstrated that just as man can conquer the elements of earth, he can cope with the exigencies of space. You have given conclusive evidence that, even with the most advanced scientific and technological support in the world, the courage and resourcefulness of good men are still central to the success of the human adventure. On behalf of the American people, I welcome you home from the Skylab spaceship to spaceship earth. I also look forward to seeing you at San Clemente on Sunday.” {PD, 6/25/73, 828)
The Air Force announced award of a $2 056 889 cost contract to Utah State Univ. to study disturbed and undisturbed infrared atmosphere. Rocketborne instruments .would measure optical and infrared emissions, both natural and those stimulated by atmospheric dosing from a rocket-borne electron source, (dod Release 113-73) March 5—8:	nasa’s Fourth Annual Lunar Science Conference, at Johnson Space Center, was attended by more than 750 scientists from the U.S. and 12 foreign countries. Visitors included scientists from the U.S.S.R. who presented papers on Apollo lunar samples received from the U.S. At the opening session Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator said, “I can see at least a decade of fruitful analysis, synthesis, and integration of the information locked up in the material brought back and still coming back from the scientific stations left on the moon” in the Apollo program. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, California Institute of Technology scientist, described “lunar cataclysm.” Lunar dust brought back by Apollo astronauts had been estimated to be as old as 4.5 billion yrs. But most lunar rocks were less than 4 billion yrs old and none were younger than 3 billion yrs. The best explanation was that 3.9 billion yrs ago the moon was battered and bombarded on an unprecedented scale, creating so much heat that old rocks were destroyed and a new generation of rocks was created. Since then the moon might have experienced minor volcanic eruptions but nothing like that period of cataclysm. Some scientists believed the moon had cooled and gone into a period of hibernation. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of the State Univ. of New York said even the orange soil found by Apollo 17 astronauts had turned out to be 3.71 billion yrs old, an age disappointing to scientists who had believed the moon had been formed by more recent volcanic activity. Dr. Keith A. Howard, U.S. Geological Survey geologist, compared the lunar landslide found near the Apollo 17 landing site to a large, high-velocity avalanche on earth. Dr. Howard suggested that gas within the lunar soil had been released during the slide. Apollo 17 samples would be searched for evidence of fluids. One Apollo 17 instrument placed on the lunar surface had made an atom-by-atom search for evidence of lunar atmosphere. Although the moon had no atmosphere, traces of argon, neon, and helium had been found. Dr. John H. Hoffman, associate professor of physics at the Univ. of Texas, said only argon appeared to have been generated from the moon’s interior. Neon and helium apparently had been deposited by the solar wind. Conference attendees unanimously voted to congratulate NASA on completion of the Apollo program by sending a letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: The conception, design, and implementation of lunar exploration represented “an extraordinary human and technological achievement.” To explore another planet, it had been necessary for man “to achieve many successive levels of technological capability and to surpass formidable barriers. This was accomplished brilliantly by the dedicated engineers and astronauts of NASA in conjunction with skilled management. On this technical base a new branch of science has been built.” (Transcript; Goddard News, 3/73, 2; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; NASA Activities, 4/15/73, 67) March 5-9:	More than 1000 administrators, congressmen, and government, industry, and university scientists attended the Erts 1 Earth Resources and Technology Satellite Symposium sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center in New Carrollton, Md. Two hundred papers presented results from Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) experiments in agriculture and forestry, mineral resources and geology, environmental surveys, land-use mapping, and marine surveys. Dr. Marian Baumgardner, scientist at the Purdue Univ. Laboratory for the Applications of Remote Sensing, said results from Erts 1 study of semi-arid regions suggested that the satellite could identify and map vegetative, species, and management differences in range lands; gross soil patterns and differences related to agricultural and land-use-management problems and practices; areas of surface water and changes related to ground water recharge; crop damage by hail and windstorms; and areas of bare soil and related problems of erosion and conservation. Dr. William A. Fischer, U.S. Geological Survey scientist, said data from an Erts 1 study of Alaska had reinforced recent plate tectonic theories of a continuing mobility in the earth’s crust. The satellite had mapped fractures previously unknown or not put together as continuous structures in the earth’s crust. The fractures indicated “there has been a fundamental movement, extending deep down into the crust.” Dr. John Miller of the Univ. of Alaska said seismic data and Erts 1 identification of previously unknown fractures “has been an important input to the design of a bridge structure across the Yukon River . . . and possibly the pipeline.” (Transcript)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Support to Universities, Colleges, and Selected Nonprofit Institutions, Fiscal Year 1971 (nsf 73—300). Total Federal obligations (exclusive of loans) to institutions of higher learning increased in current and constant dollars. Current-dollar volume rose $253 million, or 8%, to a record $3480 million. Constant-dollar increase was 2%, the first increase since 1967. The first 100 universities and colleges in Federal support accounted for more than $2.4 billion during 1971, or 69% of Federal funds to all academic institutions. Private universities and colleges receiving Federal funds outnumbered public institutions receiving Federal funds 1242 to 1126, but public institutions accounted for 61% of total Federal obligations, 65% of degrees awarded, and 75% of students enrolled. In 1971 life sciences research and development funding was $741 million, or 48% of all Federal r&d obligations. Obligations for general support of NSF and National Institutes of Health science programs was $100 million, the same level as in 1970. The Atomic Energy Commission continued as the principal Federal agency funding academically associated r&d centers, with 64% of the $984 million Federal total. NASA and the Dept, of Defense awarded $312 million, or 32% of the total. (Text) During April:	Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt concluded the largest and most successful schedule of postflight public appearances undertaken by an astronaut crew. The tour, begun Jan. 12 in Los Angeles, included 57 stops in 25 states and the District of Columbia in 11 weeks. The astronauts met with 12 state governors and addressed state legislatures in Kansas, New Mexico, Georgia, Arkansas, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Colorado, and Washington. Activities Bureau Chief Eugene A. Marianetti of NASA’s Public Events Directorate said later that the astronauts had met no evidence of antispace sentiment, “only a lack of adequate information ... on the actual amount spent on the space program.” (NASA Activities, 5/15/73, 89)
Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Johnson Space Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., died in Houston at age 43. He had contracted a fatal illness in 1971. Dr. Gast had been on leave from Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory and, since 1970, had directed the lunar science team studying lunar samples at JSC. He had received the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service in 1970 and the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1972. He had been awarded the first Victor Goldschmidt Award of the Geochemical Society in 1972 and had been named to receive the James Furman Kemp Medal of Columbia Univ. in 1973 for directing the lunar rock study. (NYT, 5/18/73, 34; SF, 10/73, 389) May 18:	Newspapers commented on the Skylab 1 mission as engineers at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center prepared sunshades to cool down the overheated space station: New York Times: The “partial recovery from earlier disaster has set the stage for an unprecedented improvisation in space. Present plans are for the Skylab crew to blast off a week from today and install a sunshade or awning to replace the missing thermal shield. If that can be done, the temperature problem will be solved and the astronauts will be able to begin living in the space station and to carry out at least some of the projected experiments. All these plans transcend past space feats, and if successful, will mark a major advance in the nation’s space capabilities. But the task will not be easy and a happy ending is by no means guaranteed.” (NYT, 5/18/73, 32) Chicago Daily News: “The space station experiments not only look outward toward the sun and stars, but also down at the Earth. From 270 miles [435 kilometers] up, men can learn much about the planet, its resources and its weather that they can’t see on the ground. Much of the knowledge gained from Skylab can be expected to have practical application toward improving the quality of life on Earth.” (C Daily News, 5/18/73)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, issued a memorandum stating that private communications with astronaut crew members of the Skylah Orbital Workshop (to be launched May 14) would be permitted for morale, operational, and medical reasons. Private calls to families would be permitted once a week, without monitoring or public announcement. Private operational calls could be requested for “extreme operational emergency” and would be announced; paraphrases would be released to the public as appropriate. Private medical conversations would be scheduled daily and not announced. A daily medical bulletin on crew health would be issued to the public. (NASA Release 73—110, attaching memo)
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, scheduled for Nov. 11 launch to crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), completed training in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator at Marshall Space Flight Center. The astronauts had spent 80 hrs since April 1972 performing 24 different exercises in the simulated weightless environment to prepare them for the three extravehicular activities scheduled for their mission. The backup crew —Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind—would complete their training at MSFC Oct. 12. (msfc Release 73-145)
Results of Apollo 14 and 16 (launched Jan. 31, 1971, and April 16, 1972) heavy-particle dosimetry experiments were reported in Science by scientists from Johnson Space Center and the General Electric Research and Development Center. Earlier measurements using Apollo helmets as dosimeters had indicated that a significant 1% of certain nonregenerative motor-control cells in the bodies of astronauts in space would be killed by radiation from densely ionizing, heavy atomic nuclei with the current Apollo spacecraft shielding. Doses of heavy particles penetrating the CMs of Apollo 8, 12, 14, and 16 correlated well with calculated effects of solar modulation of the primary cosmic radiation. Differences in doses at different positions inside the CMs had indicated that the redistribution of mass within the spacecraft could enhance safety from the biological damage that would otherwise be expected on manned, deep-space missions. (Fleischer el al., Science, 8/3/73, 436-8)
Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory held the first public demonstration of its new heart pacemaker that used electric and electronic components designed by NASA for spacecraft use. The new pacemaker, smaller and longer lasting than conventional models, could be implanted more quickly and easily. It had no life-limiting components or radioactive emissions, was immune from outside interference sources, and could be recharged by patients at home. It incorporated modified space satellite power cells, (nasa Release 73—150; Cohn, W Post, 8/8/73) August 8:	Spare-time diversions of the astronauts aboard the Orbital Workshop in the May 25-June 22 Skylab 2 mission and in Skylab 3 since July 28 launch were described in a Christian Science Monitor article. Skylab 3 Astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, the first physicist in space, had been fascinated by the zero-g antics of his spiders Arabella and Anita and his mummichog minnows. Skylab 2 Astronaut Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had experimented with a big blob of water which floated before him instead of splashing on the spacecraft deck. The blob had taken on the form of the sun and planets as he spun it in space. He had blown it into a bubble with a straw and then had blown bubbles within the bubble. His Skylab 2 colleague, Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., had discovered that centrifugal force could impel him around the weightless spacecraft upright if he got himself off to a fast enough start racing around the Workshop. Other astronaut pastimes included “marooning” (doing acrobatics in remote sections of the spacecraft), “hamming it up” for TV and “home movies,” reading novels and poetry, ricocheting weightless rubber balls around the laboratory, and flying paper airplanes. (Salisbury, CSM, 8/8/73)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—in the 39th day of their mission aboard the Orbital Workshop [see Nov. 16-Feb. 8, 1974]—were participating in new tests developed by nasa scientists and heart specialists at the National Heart and Lung Institute to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on the heart, the New York Times reported. Space program doctors wanted data to help explain the smaller heart size, sudden drops in blood pressure when shifting quickly from a prone to upright position, and the smaller output of blood during exercise experienced by astronauts immediately after space flight. The new technique, called echo-cardiography, used sonarlike sound waves of extremely high frequency to produce internal pictures of the heart. The Skylab 4 crew had been tested using echo-cardiography for a week preceding launch. Repeat studies would be made aboard the recovery ship within hours after splashdown. The astronauts would be studied over the course of weeks and possible months to record the complete readaptation of the heart to gravity. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/24/73, 1)
A People’s Republic of China team of diplomatic and transportation officials arrived in Seattle, Wash., to discuss PRC purchase of 10 Boeing 707-320 transport aircraft. Boeing would train crews in Seattle and would assist with further crew training in Shanghai. (Av Wk, 2/5/73, 29) January 31:	Manned Spacecraft Center had named 10 investigators to receive the first Apollo 17 lunar samples, NASA announced. Five U.S. and five foreign scientists would receive allocations that included tiny rock chips and polished thin sections cut from three large rocks. Rocks 70035 and 75055 were dark gray basalts typical of material underlying the Taurus-Littrow valley; rock 76055—lighter colored recrystallized breccia that Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt had described as “anorthositic gabbro”—might have been part of the mountainside at one time. The first investigators had been recommended by the Lunar Sample Analysis Planning Team (lsapt). Most would attempt to determine sample ages by rubidium-strontium and argon analysis. Other studies would analyze trace elements and mineralogical content. Early allocations were being made with the stipulation that research be conducted so that results could be reported at the 4th Annual Lunar Science Conference scheduled for March 5-8. Additional preliminary allocations would be recommended by lsapt, including samples of orange soil found at Shorty Crater, (nasa Release 73-16)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., was named Executive Director of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics staff, succeeding Charles F. Ducander, who was retiring effective June 30. Committee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), said Swigert’s “broadly based skill and enthusiasm” would “aid in expanding the effort being made by the Committee to assure that our national space program and federal research and development will receive adequate support in the mid-1970s.” (AP, Houston Post, 4/14/73; Com Off)
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 276.8-km (172-mi) altitude. The objective was to test the performance of the rocket configuration that would be used for a series of calibration rocket (calroc) launches during the manned Skylab mission scheduled for May. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The calroc launches would provide a reference for the calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), calroc launches were also scheduled during the Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 missions, to acquire solar flux data on specific regions of the sun in conjunction with Skylab astronaut observations of the same regions with ATM experiments. Instrumentation on calroc would be similar to but smaller than that on the ATM. Black Brant VC would be used for all launches. Taking part in the program, managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, were Ames Research Center, Naval Research Laboratory, Harvard College Observatory, and the White Sands Naval Ordnance Missile Test Facility, (gsfc proj off; msfc Release 73-42)
President Nixon and visiting Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev signed, during White House ceremonies, Basic Principles of Negotiations on the Further Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and an agreement for scientific and technical cooperation in peaceful uses of atomic energy. The arms limitation document specified agreement on continued active negotiations to work out a permanent agreement to be signed in 1974, new agreements to be guided by recognition of each side’s equal security interests, application of weapon limitations to quantity as well as quality, subjection of arms limitations to verification by national technical means, modernization and replacement of weapons under conditions to be formulated, formulation of agreements on separate measures to supplement the existing Interim Agreement of May 26, 1972, and to continue measures to prevent accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons. The atomic energy agreement would establish a U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. At an evening Soviet Embassy dinner honoring President Nixon, General Secretary Brezhnev said: “The cause of developing Soviet-American relations is, indeed, moving forward. In 2 years, Soviet and American astronauts will fly into outer space to carry out the first major joint experiment in man’s history. Now they know that from up there in space, our planet looks even more beautiful, though small. It is big enough for us to live in peace, but too small to be subjected to the threat of nuclear war.” Brezhnev proposed a toast to President and Mrs. Nixon’s health and “to the further success of the great cause which we have succeeded in advancing during our present meeting, to the docking, on earth as well as in outer space, of man’s efforts and talents for the good of the peoples, to peace, friendship, and cooperation. . . .” (PD, 6/25/73, 810-21)
July 23:	Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Jack R. Lousma, and Dr. Owen K. Garriott received their final major medical examinations at Johnson Space Center before their July 28 launch to join the Skylab Orbital Workshop in near-earth orbit. Dr. Paul Buchanan, Chief of the JSC Health Maintenance Branch, said the astronauts “look good and they are ready to fly,” They would rendezvous and dock with the orbiting laboratory to live and work in it for 59 days before returning to earth. (Wil-ford, NYT, 7/24/73, 10)
Skyiab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Jack R. Lousma, and Dr. Owen K. Garriott concluded training for the second manned mission to the Skyiab Orbital Workshop, launched May 14. They practiced key flight maneuvers in a spacecraft simulator at Johnson Space Center and the complex countdown procedures to be used during the final two and one half hours before launch July 28. In an interview with the New York Times, Skyiab Program Director William C. Schneider said, “Everything seems to be going great.” (Wilford, NYT, 7/26/73; AP, B Sun, 7/26/73, A10)
Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz piloted their T—38 jet training aircraft from Johnson Space Center to Patrick Air Force Base near Kennedy Space Center to watch the May 14 launch of Skylab 1. ICSC technicians meanwhile tested the onboard batteries and emergency detection system on the Saturn V scheduled to boost the Skylab 1 Workshop into orbit. The Skylab 2 launch crew applied the protective covers that would shield the manned Apollo spacecraft during Saturn IB launch vehicle liftoff May 15. (upi, W Star & News, 5/13/73, 6; Wilford, NYT, 5/14/73, 24)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford—speaking in Beverly Hills, Calif.—congratulated Soviet Cosmonauts Vasily G. Lazarev and Oleg G. Makarov on the successful completion of their Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission. Stafford, U.S. crew commander for the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s planned 1975 space flight, spoke highly of the Soyuz flight and said he was happy that it had ended with success. He noted that many of the new systems that would be used on the 1975 joint flight were tested by Soyuz 12. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/1/73, B8)
Apollo 17 geologist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt testified on the legacy of the Apollo program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight in hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization: As man emerged “from the scientific revolution brought about by Apollo on the Moon with the simultaneous revolution brought about by new insight into the origins of ocean basins and continents on the Earth, we may begin to understand the great stresses and strains within our crust as ocean floors grow and continents move. These stresses and strains profoundly affect the everyday lives of people living within belts of present earthquakes and volcanic activity. Within future understanding of the frozen ocean of basalt of [Oceanus] Procellarum and the vast ridge and volcanic system that splits it, may lie the simplification of thought about past events that leads to the expansion of thoughts about present events. I will be the first to admit that these last comments give free run to the imagination. However, knowledge never becomes a resource until it is married to imagination. It is thus . . . that the scientific legacy of Apollo will be realized.” Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Marshall Space Flight Center Director and former Apollo Program Director, reported the status of the five scientific stations deployed on the moon during the Apollo program: The first station deployed by Apollo 12, in November 1969, “is still functioning over 3 years after its initial deployment in the very demanding environment of the Moon. . . . The fact that this equipment can stand these rigors of temperature and vacuum . . . and still function . . . demonstrates one facet of the technology we have developed.” All five stations were still functioning, though some of the experiments had been lost. The first total station, on Apollo 12, had been designed for a one-year life. “And yet we have had it over 3 years . . . and the seismometers worked beautifully all 3 years.” The superthermal ion detector was “working beautifully and had for 3 years, night and day.” NASA had “five seismic units just giving us beautiful information on the seismic tremors of the Moon and meteorite impacts, so now we can locate them fairly accurately.” Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences in OMSF, reported: “We are vastly wiser in many medical and technical areas for our ‘decade in space.’ Much has been learned about the effects of the space flight environment upon man. We have found that some body systems respond to space flight factors . . . with changes . . . observable in the period immediately following space flight. Occasionally changes have been noticeable during the inflight period of the mission. None of these changes has been of such a severity as to cause any real concern for man’s safety in space, but all changes are . . . being watched closely lest they have implications for long duration flight.” Cardiovascular responses which showed the greatest changes also appeared most amenable to regulation by inflight countermeasures, such as lower body negative pressure. Medication had not proved of value in treating either the cardiovascular deconditioning or the loss of exercise capacity. Countermeasures were also being investigated for the small bone density losses noted. A decrease in heart size had been noted in both U.S. and Soviet space crewmen and some Soviet crewmen had experienced postflight muscular difficulties. “Both astronauts and cosmonauts have also reported sensations resembling sea sickness during spaceflight. On the whole, however, U.S. astronauts do not appear to be excessively plagued by motion sickness symptoms. The growth of opportunistic microorganisms appears to be favored in the space environment.” (Transcript)
An Aviation Week & Space Technology cover photo showed orange and black particles brought back from the moon’s Shorty Crater by Apollo 17 astronauts during the Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. Particles were • described by the magazine as 20 to 45 ,/rm in size—“about the size of terrestrial silt.” They were “glass, but in a process of devitrification, that is transition from non-crystalline form to crystalline minerals.” The orange soil was “rich in titanium—8%—and iron oxide—22%—but is also high in zinc.” (Av Wk, 2/12/73, cover, 20)
Objectives of Skylab’s scientific and engineering experiments were outlined in a Kennedy Space Center press briefing. The 57 major experiment components aboard the space station scheduled for May 14 launch would provide data for 270 investigations in earth resources, solar astronomy, and materials science by 702 investigators and associates— 200 of them foreign. Dr. Edward J. McLaughlin, NASA Director for Space Medicine, said 20 life sciences experiments would provide “a comprehensive picture of the interactions of man with his environment and of various body systems that are influenced ... by the space environment.” They would deal primarily with the metabolic and cardiovascular systems, exercise capacity, and nutrition. Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, NASA Chief of Solar Physics, said the objective of Skylab astronomy was “the study of the stars, including the sun, and other objects in space such as planets,| comets, objects and libration points near the moon, and x-ray objects in the sky.” Emphasis would be placed on the study of solar activity known to influence general weather patterns and on solar flares, responsible for radio communication blackouts and interference. Skylab was unique in that it would be manned. The astronaut would be able to align the instruments and select targets of interest, taking advantage of phenomena as it occurred. Dr. Robert A. Parker, astronaut and Skylab program scientist, said that corollary experiments would study gas and particles surrounding the Skylab and their effect on sensitive instruments, collect micrometeoroids, study man-made disturbances in Skylab and their effect on instrument alignment, and study flammable materials and manufacturing techniques in the zero-g environment. (Transcript)
A Baltimore Sun editorial commented on the plight of Skylab 3 as the astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched
A technique of predicting probabilities that had been “absolutely mandatory” to the success of NASA’s Apollo program was being used by the Atomic Energy Commission to help determine the risk to the public of nuclear power plants, aec member and Apollo 8 Astronaut William A.	Anders said in testimony before the Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. The complicated technique of forecasting the reliability of mechanical systems and human beings using available data from similar activity components and subsystems was described by Massachusetts Institute of Technology nuclear engineer Dr. Norman C. Rasmussen during the nuclear reactor safety hearing. (Willard, W Post, 9/26/73) September 26:	Newspapers commented on the successful Sept. 25 splashdown of Skylab 3 [see July 28-Sept. 25], New York Times: “The word ‘triumphant’ is entirely appropriate because even at this early point it is evident that their 59-day stay in orbit was not only the longest manned space flight in history but also the most productive.” Skylab results to date had made two conclusions incontrovertible: “First, man can live and work effectively for long periods in space, a point particularly emphasized by the astronauts’ pleas in the last days of their journey to be allowed to remain longer in orbit. Second, stations in space are potentially as productive of scientific and technological benefits as the most optimistic predictions had suggested. There is every reason now to suppose that these benefits will range from the discovery of new mineral deposits on earth and early warnings about the formation and movement of storms to new and more effective methods of predicting the turbulence on the sun that interferes seriously with electronic communications on earth.” It could be taken for granted that “orbiting laboratories will become permanent fixtures in the heavens before too many years have passed. (.NYT, 9/26/73, 38) Chicago Daily News: The Skylab 3 astronauts had “earned their keep—and a place in the history of man’s conquest of the universe.” (C Daily News, 9/26/73)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, now an Eastern Air Lines, Inc., senior vice president, left Moscow after a visit to the U.S.S.R. at the invitation of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries. During the visit, which began April 28, Borman laid a bouquet at the Kremlin wall where Yuri Gagarin and other cosmonauts were buried and visited the cosmonaut training center and a Salyut orbital station mockup at Star City. In an interview he said that he believed the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz space flight was “the forerunner, the prototype to exactly the type of mission that we’ll eventually see going to Mars. It is very difficult to project the pace at which space exploration will go forward, because it doesn’t depend on technology so much as it does on economic and political action. But I think that by the end of this century we will have a manned earth mission to Mars.” (Tass, fbis—Sov, 4/30/73, L2; 5/3/73, G2; Moscow News, 5/19-25/73)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt began an 11-week schedule of public appearances throughout the U.S. with an appearance at the Super Bowl football game in Los Angeles. (NASA Activities, 5/15/73, 89)
Newspapers commented on the Skylab missions as Skylab 2 astronauts activated the Apollo Telescope Mount aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop, following repairs to the damaged spacecraft they had joined May 25 [see May 14-June 23]. Miami News editorial: “To us, the conquest of the moon, and now the building of a space station, demonstrated that this nation can accomplish just about anything it sets its mind on. The secret lies in the magic word, commitment. With the kind of commitment we pledged to the space program, we could indeed surmount the housing crisis, the crime crisis, the energy crisis, or any other crisis.” (M News, 5/29/73) Wall Street Journal article: Skylab Vs successful in-orbit repair had wide implications for the U.S. space program’s future. “When the three Skylab astronauts erected a heat shield over their damaged space station, they both saved their mission and paved the way for future launching of two other missions in the $2.5 billion space-station program.” They also had provided NASA with “a powerful argument for new manned-flight projects.” NASA could contend that “the value of man in orbit has been proven in practice as well as in theory.” While budget shortages would preclude any attempt to capitalize on Skylab’s success before the space shuttle evolved, it had armed NASA against congressional critics of manned space flight. (Spivak, WSJ, 5/29/73) New York Times columnist Russell Baker: “The space program until now has seemed less malevolent than most new ventures in technology, but to people watching those incessant countdowns at Cape Kennedy it has also seemed pointless.” Lunar exploration had been “wonderful” but “it didn’t really open any horizons for most of us, and it was certainly hard to see how it was going to improve man’s lot.” Skylab, by contrast, was wonderful. “There they are way up there—270 miles [435 kilometers] in the sky. They are attached to 100 tons [90 700 kilograms] of machinery which stretches out through space a distance of 118 feet [36 meters], about the length of an exciting pass play in the National Football League. And what are they doing? Repair work. They are fixing some of the machinery which doesn’t work right.” This was space with a purpose. “We ought to be asking why NASA didn’t make this approach from the beginning instead of going after moon dust. The repair industry in this country could very well be rejuvenated by this trip, and not be a moment too soon, either.” (NYT, 5/29/73, 31)
Winners of an Army competition to develop the new advanced attack helicopter were announced by Secretary of the Army Howard H. Callaway. Bell Helicopter Co. and Hughes Helicopters & Hughes Aircraft Co. would compete in a flyoff with two prototypes per contractor. The flyoff winner would install and test the required subsystems for night vision, fire control, navigation, and communications. Values of the initial development contracts were $44.7 million to Bell and $70.3 to Hughes. (dod Release 316-73) June 22—July 28:	During unmanned operations of the Orbital Workshop, launched May 14, the Apollo Telescope Mount observed the sun’s chromospheric network, prominences, coronal transients, solar limbs, lunar libration clouds, and solar eclipses. Active atm operations were discontinued July 16 because the experiment pointing and control system’s primary pitch-rate gyroscope failed. An astrophysics particle collection experiment exposed outside the Workshop would be retrieved by the Skylab 3 crew, scheduled for July 28 launch. Sample panels of thermal coatings exposed on the airlock module also would be returned. Neutron analysis detectors, a student experiment, were monitored, (nasa prog off) June 23:	NASA held a Skylab 2 crew medical status briefing at Johnson Space Center. Dr. William R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the condition of Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz had improved over their June 22 splashdown condition. Conrad was in excellent shape, Weitz had no residual effects from the vestibular disturbances of the previous day, and Kerwin was “a thousand percent better” from the cardiovascular standpoint but still had some residual vestibular effects. (Transcript)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
An Atlanta Journal editorial commented on space program spinoff as the Skylab 2 astronauts began routine business after having freed the stuck solar array wing on Skylab 1 (launched May 14) : “The ambitious and expensive Skylab program is in trouble and daring measures are being taken to stabilize the planned programs it was to introduce. Before the screams of those who would dissolve the space program reach the astronauts aboard Skylab, it might be well to consider some spinoffs from the space program that preserve and lengthen the lives of those who cry for its cessation.” Spinoffs included noise abatement, smog detection, medical devices, and fabric fireproofing. “The value of the space program is not up in the air; an awful lot of it is down to earth.” (Atlanta JC, 6/8/73)
The dizziness and nausea of Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz on their return to the earth June 22 were probably due to problems of the inner ear, the Wall Street Journal quoted Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Johnson Space Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, as saying. The symptoms had occurred particularly when the men moved their heads from side to side. Dr. Hawkins had theorized that the fluid in the semicircular canal, whose movement transmitted impulses via tiny hairs in the ear to the brain, was out of action because of the long period of weightlessness. When the astronauts had come under the sudden influence of gravity, the inner-ear mechanism became unusually sensitive to almost any head movement. Ordinary movements could produce the symptoms of motion sickness. The inner-ear balancing mechanism could adapt to gravity quickly. Dr. Kerwin, the most affected, had returned to normal after 12 hrs. (Bishop, WSJ, 6/25/73)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate Richard J. O’Melia to be a member of the Civil Aeronautics Board succeeding Secor D. Browne, who had resigned effective March 1. The nomination was submitted to the Senate Sept. 7 and confirmed Nov. 20. {PD, 9/10/73, 1056, 1070; cab pio) September 7; NASA held a Skylab solar activity briefing at Johnson Space Center, while Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma completed their 42nd day working aboard the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientist Joseph Airman said that a flare photographed by the Skylab 3 crew was about 17 times the cross-sectional area of the earth and “optically the biggest flare we’ve had during ATM and perhaps the biggest for this entire year.” Within 30 min after the event “high energy protons made it from the Sun to the earth as a consequence of this flare.” Confirmation had also been given by x-ray satellites and by short-wave fade-out and other ionospheric disturbances on the ground of a very intense x-ray event. Within two days, with the arrival of subsequent particles, an aurora would be visible at the latitude of Chicago and enough geomagnetic activity would occur to disrupt power lines in high latitudes. Hirman said that the flare had created enough energy to “run everything in the United States and the rest of the world combined for 500 years.” (Transcript)
The Skylab 1 Investigation Board appointed to determine the cause of the anomaly that lost the Orbital Workshop’s meteoroid shield and one solar array wing during launch May 14 reported its findings and recommendations to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. The Board, chaired by Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin, said the most probable cause was inadequate venting of the pressure in a tunnel beneath the shield. Differential pressure buildup in the tunnel had forced the shield away from the Workshop shell and into the supersonic air stream. The shield then broke the tiedowns holding the solar array wings onto the spacecraft. About 10 min into the flight one solar array wing was torn away completely when it was struck by the exhaust plume of the 2nd-stage retrorockets. The remaining solar array wing would not deploy until the astronauts cut the strap which had curled around the wing and penetrated the metal fairing housing the array. The Board had found that “the significance of the aerodynamic loads on the meteoroid shield during launch was not revealed by the extensive review process” and recommended that complex, multidisciplinary systems like the shield “should have a designated project engineer who is responsible for all aspects of analysis, design, fabrication, test and assembly.” There was no evidence that the shield’s design deficiencies had resulted from or been masked by the Skylab management system. “On the contrary, the rigor, detail, and thoroughness of the system are doubtless necessary for a program of this magnitude.” (nasa Release 73-135; Lundin testimony before Sen Com on Aero and Space Sci, 7/30/73) July 14:	Sweden had handed the 25-nation Geneva disarmament conference a list of 925 nuclear weapon tests carried out from World War II through April 25, 425 of them after the August 1963 signing of the treaty banning all experimental nuclear blasts above ground, Reuters reported. The majority of the 425 had been underground tests, but China and France, which did not sign the treaty, had continued atmospheric nuclear testing. (NYT, 7/15/73, 7) July 15:	The countdown for the July 28 launch of Skylab 3 began at Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn IB launch vehicle would boost the Apollo spacecraft and its three-man crew into earth orbit to rendezvous and dock with the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), where astronauts would live and work 56 days in space. The countdown was the first for a manned Saturn launch in which the flight crew would not participate with the ICSC launch team in a dress rehearsal. The rehearsal had been eliminated because of the performance record of the Saturn IB and V. The countdown would include a simulated T-zero, ignition, and liftoff with a fully fueled launch vehicle on Complex 39, Pad B. (ksc Release 163-73)
U.S. Patents Nos. 3 744 480 and 3 744 794 were granted to Marshall Space Flight Center physicist Raymond L. Gause and engineers Raymond A. Spier and Bobby G. Bynum. They had invented the ergometer installed in Skylab 1 (launched May 14) to evaluate the astronauts’ muscular output and heart rate and also the harness that held the astronaut to the ergometer in zero-g or earth environment. (Pat Off Pio; Jones, NYT, 7/14/73, 31)
NASA held two Skylab 1—2 postmission briefings at Johnson Space Center. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told a NASA press conferC ■ 3 ence that, “as near as we can tell, essentially all of the objectives that were anticipated for this mission have been completed. And needless to say none of us really dreamed that this could be done at the time that the meteoroid shield failed to deploy. So it exceeded our wildest expectations at that time.” Skylab 1-2 could be symbolized by a hammer, and the Skylab 2 astronauts could be characterized as “the master tinkerers of space.” The mission’s anomalies had made no major impact on NASA’s budget. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said at a crew medical status briefing that the astronauts had “looked rather wobbly and unsteady when they got out of the spacecraft.” The crew—aware of the increased pull of gravity—had said they felt as if they were “very heavy . . . like about a two-G load.” All three men had experienced dizziness, lightheadedness, and some nausea. Astronaut Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin felt more of these effects than Charles Conrad, Jr., and Paul J. Weitz. His blood pressure had dropped to a critical level 25 min after splashdown and he had to inflate his spacesuit to force the blood back up from his legs to his brain. During medical tests aboard the recovery ship Ticonderoga, Conrad had performed at his premission level. Weitz had experienced a sudden drop in blood pressure and pulse rate while on the bicycle ergometer but had recovered within a five-minute rest period. Kerwin had demonstrated more of the vestibular disturbance and was unable to complete any of the tests. (Transcripts)
Apollo 17 geologist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt was among 10 young Government employees named to receive the 25th annual Arthur S.	Flemming Award for outstanding contributions to Federal management and science, the Washington Star and News reported. The Schmitt citation was for “total performance as a scientist and astronaut, including geological training of early Apollo flight crews, and as lunar module pilot for Apollo 17.” Awards would be presented at a Washington, D.C., luncheon sponsored by the Downtown Jaycees Feb. 29. (W Star & News, 2/22/73; NASA Special Notice, 2/26/73)
The first scientific report on the findings of the Soviet remotely controlled lunar explorer Lunokhod 2 (launched Jan. 8 aboard Luna 21) during its 37-km (23-mi) traverse of the moon’s surface had been published in Pravda, the New York Times reported. Chemical analysis of the soil had shown a decrease in iron content and an increase in aluminum as Lunokhod had traveled from the plains into the foothills of the Taurus Mountains. Samplings taken near the landing site in the Lemonnier Crater at the eastern end of the Sea of Serenity had shown 6% iron and 9% aluminum. The ratio changed to 4% iron and 12% aluminum near the uplands. The change in content of aluminum was a distinctive feature of lunar geology; on the earth the amount of aluminum remained constant in continents and the ocean bottoms. Soviet scientists hoped to compare the lunar soil data with samples returned by the Apollo 17 astronauts (launched Dec. 7, 1972), who explored theTaurus-Littrow Valley 225 km (140 mi) away. (Shabad, NYT, 12/17/73, 66)
NASA Public Information Director Richard T. Mittauer died of Hodgkin’s disease in Alexandria, Va., at age 46. He had joined NASA in 1959 and had received a NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work on the 1971 Mariner Mars mission. (W Star & News, 7/2/73, B5) July 2:	The Skylab 3 mission to carry the second crew to work and live aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop (launched May 14) would be launched no earlier than 7:08 am EDT July 28, NASA announced. Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean (commander), Dr. Owen K. Garriott (science pilot), and Jack R...Lousma (pilot) would conduct scientific and technical experiments for 56 days. Splashdown was scheduled for 8:38 pm edt Sept. 22 in the Pacific, (nasa Release 73-125)
A St. Louis Post Dispatch editorial commented on the repair of the Skylab 1 Workshop [see May 14-June 22] as its Skylab 2 astronaut crew surveyed the U.S. heartland from space: “Now that Skylab is operating under something approaching full power, scientists will be able to judge how well man can exist for prolonged periods of weightlessness and whether experiments they carry out cannot be duplicated or outperformed by machines. The Skylab astronauts have managed to establish conditions under which the mission may receive a fair test and that is of paramount importance, for had they failed, the manned space program, for budgetary reasons, might have come to a halt.” (St. Louis P-D, 6/10/73) June 11:	Skylab 3’s Saturn IB launch vehicle and Apollo command module were moved from the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, for the July 27 launch of the second Skylab crew—Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. The astronauts would join the Skylab Workshop (orbited May 14) for 56 days of experiments and observations, (ksc Release 124-73; W Post, 6/12/73, A13)
Newspaper editorials commented on the repair of the Skylab Workshop by Skylab 2 astronauts as the mission, begun May 14, continued to pursue its objectives of photographing and studying the solar atmosphere. The Philadelphia Inquirer found “vast excitement in the Skylab adventure beyond potential dividends and the high drama of the suspense itself.” The astronauts’ repair of the Workshop “tells us, all jokes aside, that Americans have managed an accomplishment of delicacy, complexity and force that would have been beyond the imagination of all but a few visionaries a decade ago. That tells us, all doubts aside, that America can do wonders when it sets its mind to it.” (P Inq, 5/30/73) New York News: “We hope the lesson learned will not be lost on those who decry the ‘expense’ of manned space exploration. If we had relied on push-button robots instead of human ingenuity, it’s a good bet Skylab would have ended up a complete washout.” {NY News, 5/30/73) Christian Science Monitor: “Much of the technology spurred by space has applications nearer home. For example, modest solar-energy devices have already arrived on the market for home and commercial use after solar-energy pioneering in space. But even without such applications the Skylab venture would represent a remarkable manifestation of the problem-solving talent especially needed now that Americans are waking up to problems they hardly knew they had.” (CSM, 5/30/73) San Francisco Chronicle: “Who could feel anything short of total admiration for the undeniable courage of the astronauts for venturing into an oven of 125 degrees Fahrenheit [325 kelvins] to carry out their endangered mission? The coolness and confidence of men who reckon the limits of what they can do and then run the risks of approaching those limits while their defective vehicle is speeding in space at 17,500 [28 200 kilometers] an hour are something to celebrate.” (SF Chron, 5/30/73)
Skylab’s contribution to better understanding of solar processes, leading to possible generation and control of solar energy for earth use, was described by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers in a speech before the Poor Richard Club in Philadelphia: The sun was the “original model of nuclear energy,” understanding of which could lead to fusion control and its efficient use for power generation. “The Skylab investigators are concerned with this and also with explaining how solar events affect the Earth, particularly solar flares that trigger auroras and disrupt radio transmission. Because sunspot activity correlates with temperature and density variations in the Earth’s upper atmosphere, it is conceivable that the injection of energy into the atmosphere by solar particles may trigger world-wide weather phenomena. Our astronauts saw flares shooting up 100 000 miles [160 000 kilometers] above the surface and they watched giant snakelike clouds erupting in the corona that disturbed radio transmissions here on Earth. Two massive flares exploded on the Sun, producing auroral lights on Earth; . . . each one could supply the world’s energy needs for the next 500 years.” (Text)
nasa published The Quiet Sun (nasa SP-303) by Skylab 4 Astronaut Edward G. Gibson. In the foreword Dr. Leo Goldberg, Kitt Peak National Observatory Director, said the up-to-date textbook of solar physics was “written from the point of view of a physicist seeking to understand and interpret solar observations in the framework of theoretical physics. This orientation as well as the primary purpose of the book combine to make it a unique and valuable contribution to the literature of solar physics, and a superb textbook for college-level and graduate students.” (Text)
A Chicago Tribune editorial commented on “the brave men of Skylab” as the Skylab 2 astronauts (launched May 25 as the first crew to man the Skylab 1 Workshop launched May 14) continued to conduct experiments in space: In repairing the Workshop’s protective shield they had “behaved with such matter-of-fact competence, tinged with homely humor and flashes of exasperation when things refused to go right, that one almost overlooked the fact that this was an act of incredible sustained bravery.” (C Trib, 6/11/73)
Rep. J. Herbert Rurke (R-FIa.) introduced three resolutions: H.J.R. 358 to provide for a portion of the moon to be displayed in the Capitol; H.J.R. 359 to establish an Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct a memorial at Kennedy Space Center in honor of U.S. astronauts; and H.J.R. 362 to redesignate Cape Kennedy Cape Canaveral. (CR, 2/21/73, H1061) February 22:	Presidential Reorganization Plan No. 1, abolishing the Office of Science and Technology and the National Aeronautics and Space Council [see Jan. 26 and July 1], was reviewed by the Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Executive Reorganization and Government Research. Chairman Abraham A. Ribicoff (D-Conn.) said, “Historically, Congress has allowed the President wide latitude in organizing his own office and so far no opposition has developed to this plan,” but added that questions had arisen as to whether the plan downgraded the voice of the scientific community within the Executive branch. Frederick V. Malek, Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget, said it was “no longer necessary to have a single office within the Executive Office specifically directed to science and technology.” National Science Foundation Director H. Guyford Stever, newly designated Science Adviser to the President, said that nsf had “many inputs to the scientific community and they have many inputs to nsf” and that he expected the routes for advice to remain open. (CR, 2/22/73, D128; Sci & Govt Rpt, 3/1/73, 7)
A New York Times editorial commented on the successful Sept. 27—29 Soyuz 12 manned mission: “The purpose . . . was not primarily to set new records. Its main goal was to test the latest improved version of the Soyuz spacecraft. . . . Americans as well as Soviet citizens have reason to rejoice. ... In 1975 present plans call for the historic docking of a Soviet Soyuz craft with a United States Apollo vehicle. Thus Soviet and American astronauts must want each other’s space ships to be as safe as possible. And beyond the docking experiment in 1975 lies the prospect of a future fully integrated Soviet-American joint space program.” (.NYT, 9/30/73, 12) During September:	Soviet plans for a reusable space shuttle had been revealed by Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov and Soviet Academician Andrey Shikarin, according to a Vienna correspondent quoted by Interavia. The Soviet shuttle would consist of two vehicles coupled pick-a-back, each in delta configuration and designed for hypersonic operating speeds. One would be the booster, the other the orbiter. The spacecraft was designed for horizontal takeoff from a runway. The manned booster would carry the orbiter until it attained a 22-km-per-sec (4900 mph) speed corresponding to a 2- to 3-g acceleration. The stages would separate at about a 30-km (19-mi) altitude and the booster would descend in a controlled glide to land on the runway. The orbiter would accelerate to a more than 100-km (60-mi) altitude, complete its mission, and glide back to the earth. Construction was expected to begin during the 1970s. {Interavia, 9/1973, 945)
French hydrogen bomb testing in the Pacific was “a moral outrage and a diplomatic embarrassment,” a Washington Post editorial said, “but it is also a political fact, and one likely to become more rather than less important as the 1970s unfold.” As a strategic weapon the French nuclear striking force was relatively elementary, lacking warheads to fit into long-range missiles, multiple warheads, long-range missiles, and missile-carrying submarines. “As a political force, however, the force de frappe is quite real. As [the late President Charles] de Gaulle intended, it is virtually certain to give France a larger voice in the evolution of European affairs than it otherwise would have.” (W Post, 3/5/73, 26) May 3-4:	European Space Research Organization (esro) representatives met with U.S. space officials in Washington, D.C., to negotiate a draft Intergovernmental Agreement and draft a nasa-esro Memorandum of Understanding. Both agreements would cover U.S.-European cooperation in sharing costs of space shuttle development. The European countries, through ESRO, would fund and develop the $300- to $400-million Spacelab, a supporting system important to realization of the space shuttle’s full potential. The Spacelab would facilitate joint-use programs with U.S. and foreign astronauts, (nasa Release 73—191) May 4:	Major countdown demonstration testing of the first two Skylab launch vehicles and their spacecraft on Kennedy Space Center Pads 39A and B, with crew participation, had been completed, NASA announced. Both launches remained on schedule for May 14 and 15. The three astronauts earlier in the week had been pronounced physically fit for the 28-day mission, after completing medical examinations at Johnson Space Center, (nasa Release 73-92)
The Univ. of California at Davis successfully completed a 15-wk, NASAsponsored study to determine how astronauts on extended space missions would cope with isolation [see May 18]. Six male students, in groups of three, lived in 3- by 5-m (11- by 17-ft) rooms with bathrooms and closets. Interior lighting was controlled to interchange day-night cycles and provide long periods of uninterrupted light barely bright enough to read by. Each room was monitored by closed-circuit TV. The students, selected from 100 volunteers, were paid $1600 each to participate. Dr. Don A. Rockwell, codirector of the study, said it had proved that, while space explorers should be able to live without sex for extended periods, they needed someone outside their spacecraft to whom “they could blow their tops” from time to time. (AP, W Post, 6/27/73)
NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had approved results of the Feb. 26-March 3 Moscow meeting of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine, NASA announced. The Group had agreed on common medical procedures to permit comparison of pre- and postflight data on astronaut and cosmonaut body functions. (NASA Release 73-79)
The Space Science Board of the National Research Council released HZEParticle Effects in Manned Spaceflight. The report, prepared for NASA by the Board’s Radiobiological Advisory Panel to the Committee on Space Biology and Medicine, concluded that the high-energy, heavy-ion irradiation encountered by astronauts outside the earth’s magnetosphere or in high-inclination earth orbits would have negligible biological effects for periods of less than two years in space, (nrc Release)
A Science editorial commented on the energy crisis: “A combination of environmental concerns and energy shortages is fostering wide-spread beggar-your-neighbor attitudes. Everyone wants cheap, unlimited energy, but all are prepared to fight tooth and nail to protect the environment and to prevent the location of energy facilities in their vicinity. It so happens that we are going to have neither cheap energy nor a perfect environment. Moreover, if we do not learn how to think nationally rather than parochially and to balance energy needs against environmental concerns, we are headed for trouble.” (Abelson, Science, 10/16/73, 657) November 17:	Soviet Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov discussed progress and problems of the astp to date in an interview published in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya. Generally, everything was progressing according to plan, but “as yet there is no unified search and docking system either on our or the American spacecraft. Only now are designers creating such a system on Apollo and Soyuz.” Spacecraft design and technical difficulties were being overcome, but there had been many problems. Personal relations between U.S. and Soviet crews and experts were very good: “The American astronauts are knowledgeable and highly skilled specialists. Suffice it to say that my opposite number, Colonel [Thomas P.] Stafford, has flown in space three times. Among ourselves we call the program . . . ‘the meeting on the Elbe’ in space. It was in 1945 that Soviet and American soldiers marked their joint victory over fascism by meeting on the Elbe. Thirty years later we dream of marking a victory over the accursed ‘cold war’ with a unique space ‘meeting on the Elbe.’ ” The language barrier had not yet been surmounted. “We are learning English, the Americans are learning Russian. It is said that Russian is the more difficult. But Stafford is courageously surmounting the barrier. Recently we were visited by Dr. [George M.] Low, deputy director of NASA, Eugene [N.] Cernan and Tom Stafford. Stafford made an entire speech on the space meeting [see Oct. 1-18] in relatively fluent Russian. And I assumed the role of translator.” (fbis-Sov, 12/6/73, B3)
The training version of Apollo 17 lunar roving vehicle (lrv), participating in President Nixon’s inaugural parade, required replacement of two batteries to negotiate the distance from the Capitol to the White House, because batteries had only 30-min life. Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt watched the battery change from an automobile following the lrv in the procession. [.Av Wk, 1/29/73, 13) January 21:	NASA established the Office of Management Planning and Review with James R. Elliott as Director, under Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. The Office of Management Development was abolished and its personnel and responsibilities transferred to the new office. Elliott had joined NASA in February 1962 and had been a senior management consultant in Office of Management Development. (nasa Ann)
NASA held an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project news briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. U.S. Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said the U.S.S.R. had agreed to lower the Soyuz cabin pressure to within 350 newtons per sq cm (5 lbs per sq in) of Apollo pressure during the July 1975 joint docking mission, to eliminate two-hour depressurization for each crew member before transfer to the other spacecraft. The change Would permit time for all three astronauts and two cosmonauts to fly in the others’ spacecraft. Previously, Only two astronauts had been scheduled to make the transfer. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the U.S. crew, said “the mission is going to be one of the most difficult . . . because it involves a different country, different language, different operating techniques. . . . But it can certainly open the doors for future cooperation between the countries, can enhance our capabilities” for progress together. Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who would fly his first mission since he was disqualified from Project Mercury’s Aurora 7 flight (launched May 24, 1962) because of an erratic heart rate, said, “I think I’ve been pretty fortunate. And I don’t believe in looking back at the past too much except in relation to what benefit it will give me in the future.” Astronaut Vance D. Brand, who would make his first space flight, said, “I am really happy to get on this mission. I think as we look back over the years, it’ll be regarded as a very historic thing . . . having the doors open between the Soviet Union and the United States.” (Transcript)
The U.S. flight crew for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission was announced by NASA. Prime crew: Thomas P. Stafford, commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; Donald K, ) Slayton, docking module pilot. Backup crew: Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Louama. Support crew: Richard H. Truly, Robert F.	Ovennyer, Robert L. Crippen, and Karol J. Bobko. Joint crew training would begin in the summer of 1973, when Soviet cosmonauts would visit the U.S. for several weeks. U.S. astronauts would spend an equal time in Russia in the fall of 1973. (NASA Release 73-15)
A New York Times editorial commented on the manned Skylab 2 launch: “The possibility of repairing a damaged spaceship, now brought to the fore by the last two weeks’ developments, points up one of the advantages of man’s presence in space. If something goes awry with an unmanned spaceship, and there are no arrangements for bringing repair men to it, it is more probable than not that little can be done to save the mission. Now the world is faced with a major effort to overcome unexpected difficulties by assigning additional duties to the astronauts originally involved. The success or failure of these repair efforts in the period immediately ahead will provide important evidence for the future debates between the advocates of manned and unmanned efforts to explore space.” (NYT, 5/25/73, 32)
August 19:	Former Presidential Staff Assistant Guy W. Simpler assumed the newly established NASA position of Special Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Institutional Management (for Executive Recruiting). The position had been established to provide for key personnel recruitment at top level. Simpler had been responsible for search assignments for subcabinet-level positions at the White House. (NASA Hq WB, 8/31/73) August 20:	Twentieth anniversary of the first successful Redstone missile launch Aug. 20, 1953, from an improvised pad at Cape Canaveral (now Cape Kennedy), Fla. The Redstone, developed for the Army by Dr. Wernher von Braun and his rocket team, was the first truly ballistic missile in the U.S. The Mercury-Redstone vehicle launched NASA’s Freedom 7 May 5, 1961, on the mission carrying Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as the first American in space, (msfc Release 73-112)
Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold replied to former astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary’s June 5 New York Times article in a letter published by the Times: “nasa believes that it is only with the public interest in manned flight that it can continue to collect the funds needed to feed its organization. Is it not time to evaluate the national priorities and to inform NASA of the result? The space successes of the next decade or more will be in the fields of greatly expanded communication systems, better weather prediction and earth surveys and in the deeper understanding of the earth and the solar system that space science can bring. It is true that this looks like hard work and not much glamour, but it is a program the country could stand behind, even in the face of occasional failures.” NASA could and would carry out such a program if public support was evident, “and many persons inside NASA would be much happier if the facade and the make-believe of the present era could be abandoned.” (NYT, 6/19/73, 36)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D—Wash.), introduced S. 2782 to establish a National Energy Information System, to authorize the Dept, of the Interior to undertake an inventory of U.S. energy resources on public lands and elsewhere, and for other purposes. (CR, 12/6/7.3, S22002) December 7:	A major reorganization plan that included two key directorates at Johnson Space Center had been announced by Dr. Christopher C.	Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, the jsc Roundup reported. Effective immediately, the reorganization would not be implemented fully until February 1974. Flight Crew Operations and Flight Operations would be combined into a new Flight Operations Directorate devoted entirely to space flight and aircraft activities. A new Data Systems and Analysis Directorate would provide institutional and programmatic data systems and analysis and the onboard software for the space shuttle. Pilot astronauts in the former Flight Crew Operations Directorate would be assigned to the Astronaut Office in the new Flight Operations Directorate. Scientist-astronauts would be assigned to Astronaut Offices in the Science and Applications and Life Sciences Directorates. Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht and Flight Control Div. Chief Eugene K. Kranz would be Director and Deputy Director of the new Flight Operations Directorate. They also would continue in their present assignments through completion of the Skylab program. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would be Chief of the Flight Control Astronaut Office. Howard W. Tindall, Jr., and Lynwood C. Dunseith had been named Director and Deputy Director of the Data Systems and Analysis Directorate. Astronaut Owen K. Garriott was Deputy to Director Anthony J. Calio of the Science and Applications Directorate; Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt would be Chief of the Science and Applications Astronaut Office. Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin would be Chief of the Life Sciences Astronaut Office, which also would include astronaut physicians F. Story Musgrave and William E. Thornton. In addition to their duties as space shuttle crew candidates, Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Eugene A. Ceman had been assigned duties in project management. Haise would be Technical Assistant to the Space Shuttle Orbiter Project Manager, Duke would be Technical Assistant to the Acting Manager for Space Shuttle Systems Integration, and Cernan would be Special Assistant to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Manager. Of 37 astronauts on active flight status, 26 were pilots. Of these, 16 would participate in space shuttle activities; 10 had been assigned to the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Eight scientist-astronauts would work in the Science and Applications Office, and three in Life Sciences. (Roundup, 12/7/Ti, 1)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin astronomy experiment to a 171.9-km (106.8-mi) altitude. The second, launched 50 min later, carried a Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment to a 154.5km (96.mi) altitude. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 13:	The decision to launch Skylab 4, the third and final mission to man the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), at 9:01 am EST Nov. 16 was announced at a Kennedy Space Center press briefing by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider. The replacement of eight damaged fins discovered on the Saturn IB launch vehicle Nov. 6 was complete and additional precaution had been taken by retrofitting an aluminum block over two lower brackets on each of the tail fins. Cracks found on the aft interstage structural beams Nov. 12 were left untouched after stress tests showed that the cracks would not worsen even under the most extreme aerodynamic stress. “We know of nothing today that would keep us from going,” Schneider said. Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue arrived at Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., from Houston to participate in the countdown, which was ordered resumed. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Past, 11/14/73, A24)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council 1969—1973, to be a Commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission for the term expiring June 30, 1978. The nomination was confirmed Aug. 2. Anders would succeed James T. Ramey, whose term had expired. {PD, 7/23/73, 914, 920; CR, 8/2/73, D960)
The Senate confirmed the nomination of Col. Michael Collins (usaf, R.) to be a brigadier general. Gen. Collins, Apollo 11 command module pilot, was Director of the National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 4/6/73, S6858; NASA Astronauts)
“The public has grown increasingly sanguine about NASA’s manned missions, almost considering them routine, because of the agency’s perfect safety record on manned missions.” The Aug. 2 oxidizer leak had shown “that the missions are anything but free of hazard, and the mental stress imposed upon the three astronauts must be intense. We hope, of course, that the mission will continue for the full 59 days and that the astronauts will then make it home safely. But if there is any serious question about the condition of the Apollo ship, then NASA certainly should exercise its option of sending a rescue ship up to Skylab and ending the mission in advance of schedule.” (B Sun, 8/5/73) August 6:	A Chicago Sun-Times editorial commented on space rescue capability as the Skylab 3 astronauts, manning the Orbital Workshop since July 28, conducted their first extravehicular activity: “There is a certain amount of calculated risk involved at this period of space experimentation. In a real emergency Russia might be able to help out with one of its spacecraft. When the shuttle program becomes effective, a reusable winged spaceship could be made ready for launching in two hours.” Meantime, “all we can do is trust that the good luck, astronauts’ skill and inventiveness of the space program people that have provided magnificent results to date continue during the current series of missions.” (C Sun-Times, 8/6/73)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, would retire from NASA to become President of the Univ. of Texas Health Science Center April 1, 1974, nasa announced. The new position had been created to bring all the health-oriented schools and services of the University under one administrator. Dr. Berry, an Air Force flight surgeon since 1951, had been Chief of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the School of Aerospace Medicine and Chief of Flight Medicine in the Surgeon General’s Office before coming to NASA on loan in July 1962. He accepted appointment as Chief of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Medical Operations Office in August 1963. Dr. Berry had participated in the early medical evaluations leading to selection of the original seven Mercury astronauts in 1958 and had continued to work with NASA throughout the project. He was appointed Director for Life Sciences at nasa Hq. in September 1971. His honors included the NASA Exceptional Service Medal and the nasa Distinguished Service Medal. Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said Dr. Berry’s “work in determining the ability of man to function and work in space for long periods ... is an important contribution to the future of the space program. The University of Texas is to be congratulated in obtaining the services of an outstanding medical researcher and administrator.” (nasa Release 73-284; nasa pao)
The Senate confirmed Skylab 3 Astronaut Jack R. Lousma to be a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps. He had held the rank of major. {CR, 10/20/73, S20947)
Skylab 4 crewmen Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue began a 21-day prelaunch isolation period geared to a possible Nov. 10 launch. The astronauts would crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) in the third and final manned Skylab mission. The isolation would minimize the exposure of the crew to infectious disease, (nasa Release 73—220) October 21:	Not since the 1947 first report of what came to be known as “flying saucers” had there been “such widespread reports of unidentified flying objects, or ufo’s, as in recent days,” the New York Times said. They had ranged from a report of a flying V formation of lights in Rochester. N.Y., to press accounts of “strange creatures with weirdly shaped heads” stopping cars on Route 90 in Gulfport, Miss. Two men in Pascagoula, Miss., had said they had been taken aboard a UFO by creatures with crab-claw hands [see Oct. 12]. The Federal Aviation Administration had said that no reports of special significance had been submitted by airline pilots, and an Air Defense Command spokesman had denied that any UFO had been detected in the last three weeks. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/21/73, 65) October 23:	Two fuel tanks on the Saturn IB launch vehicle scheduled to launch the Skylab 4 astronauts toward a Nov. 10 rendezvous with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) buckled slightly after fueling at Kennedy Space Center. The dome-shaped top sections of the tanks sank after ground crews pumped 163 cu m (43 000 gal) of kerosene fuel into the Saturn IB’s four giant tanks and then drained some off to prevent expansion or overpressurization. A plastic cover protecting the tanks from a rainstorm prevented air from rushing into the aluminum tanks as the fuel was drained. The resulting vacuum buckled the tanks inward. Metallurgy experts were flown to KSC from Marshall Space Flight Center to assess the problem. (W Star-News, 10/24/73, A23; AP, B Sun, 10/24/73)	.
Newspaper editorials commented on the safe Sept. 25 return of Skylab 3. Baltimore Sun: The mission had been “an immense scientific success which produced unprecedented and extremely valuable data especially on solar activity.” It would be “mere superstition to believe nature is co-operating with man by producing solar flares and comets just when we would most like to have them. But the Skylab missions so far have had a lot of good luck.” (B Sun, 9/27/73, A14) Miami Herald: “All told, the Skylab missions appear to promise rewards even greater than the enlargement of knowledge created by the Apollo moon voyages. The outreach of the human mind is inexorable.” (M Her, 9/27/73) Chicago Sun-Times: “With casual aplomb, the astronauts performed their sophisticated experiments, floated weightlessly through, outside and around the Skylab, and fixed their spacecraft like mundane mechanics when something went haywire. It all seemed so routine. In the austere domain of space, as on Earth, how quickly does the miraculous become absorbed into the commonplace.” (C Sun-Times, 9/27/73) Christian Science Monitor: “Even those most intimately involved with the space program, slated now for more international participation as well as applause, would admit we may now but dimly grasp the full significance of our space sorties.” The names of the Skylab 3 astronauts would, nonetheless, be added “to the list of welcomed home heroes of mankind’s young space chapter.” (CSM, 9/27/73) Philadelphia Inquirer: “Space exploration has matured to space work. During 59 days in earth orbit—more than doubling the space flight record set earlier this year by three astronauts in the same Skylab—assignments were carried out with diligence and precision. Scientific experiments and observations could “produce long-range dividends, not immediately apparent.” Despite NASA’s extraordinary safety record space was “a hostile environment posing hazardous challenges to courageous men. But the richest rewards in space will come not from derring do but from workmanlike execution of assignments with down-to-earth relevance to needs of mankind.” (P Inq, 9/27/73)
Newspaper editorials commented on the successful conclusion of Skylab 2 the day after splashdown. Baltimore Sun: “The Skylab experience, it is said, shows once again the value of man over computer, or rather of man-plus-computer over computer alone, in the exploration of space; and that may be one of its lessons. The larger lesson is that human curiosity and human intelligence are still operating in regions of concern beyond the day-by-day, and will keep on so operating.” (B Sun, 6/23/73) New York Daily News: “The venture proved . . . that man is needed in space to repair and regulate equipment when something goes wrong. But for the skill, coolness and courage of astronauts Conrad, Kerwin and Weitz, the entire Skylab project would have wound up as an expensive washout.” (NY News, 6/23/73)
Appointment of Roald Sagdeyev as Director of the Soviet Space Research Institute was announced in Vestnik, monthly publication of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Sagdeyev replaced Georgy I. Petrov, who went into voluntary retirement. Sagdeyev, a nuclear physicist, had been made a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences in 1964 and had become a full member in 1968. Before his appointment as Director, Sagdeyev had specialized in plasma physics at the Nuclear Physics Institute in Novosibirsk. (AP, W Post, 9/23/7$, Al; 9/24/73, A21) September 2—7:	The 66th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) was held in Dublin, Ireland. U.S. participants included Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan and Apollo 16 commander John W. Young. The 1972 fai Gold Space Medal was presented to Cernan in recognition of the Dec. 7-19, 1972, final Apollo mission which had “accomplished all of its goals and magnificently concluded the extraordinary and highly successful Apollo program.” Cernan also received t'he 1972 De la Vaulx Medal for his absolute world record of 21 hrs 32 min 44 sec for “Duration of Stay Outside his Lunar Module ‘Challenger’ Spacecraft,” set during Apollo 17. Young received the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for “remarkable leadership, skill, daring and dedication” as commander of the April 16-27, 1972, Apollo 16 mission and the V. M. Komarov Diploma, on behalf of himself and Apollo 16 Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II and Charles M. Duke, Jr., for successful completion of all but one of the mission’s 33 major experiments. The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Aeronautics was awarded to the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration “in recognition of its outstanding contribution to air traffic efficiency and safety by the development of the now fully operational Automated Radar Terminal System” (arts). The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Astronautics went to Boeing Co. Aerospace Group for design and production of the lunar roving vehicle (lrv) used during the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions. The Paul Tis-sandier Diploma was presented to Kay A. Brick for “her outstanding contributions to women’s aviation over the past 23 years” as a member and Chairman of the Board of the All-Women’s Transcontinental Air Race “Powder Puff Derby.” (naa News, 9/73, 1—2; faa Release 73— 155; A&A 1972) September 3:	The U.S. had “discreetly blocked” Soviet attempts to purchase 10 ilc Industries’ Apollo lunar-configured spacesuits, Aviation Week & Space Technology'said. The U.S.S.R. had been told that U.S. export of such technology could not be approved. (Av Wk, 9/3/73, 11) September 4:	World atlases were inaccurate in delineating outer boundaries of polar icecaps according to imagery returned by Nimbus 5 (weather satellite launched by NASA Dec. 10, 1972), NASA announced. A Goddard Space Flight Center study had shown that synoptic photos from Nimbus 5 clearly indicated polar regions underwent large-scale changes in a short time. Boundaries between the multiyear icepack around the North Pole and the large areas of first-year ice varied significantly within one freezing season. Even greater changes occurred around Antarctica. Nimbus 5 also was measuring daily rainfall distribution over the earth’s oceans to indicate to meteorologists how much energy was being released into the global atmosphere. An electrically scanning microwave radiometer aboard the spacecraft was measuring rainfall rate and heat thus released to enable forecasters to understand a tropical storm or hurricane and predict its 24- to 48-hr intensity, (nasa Releases 73-176, 73-175)
A New York Times editorial criticized the inclusion in the FY 1974 Federal budget of $5.8 million for further studies of the supersonic transport’s possible effect on the stratosphere: “While there may be no harm in pursuing a scientific study of the question, the Government’s intent clearly goes beyond pure research or the problem raised by foreign and military supersonic planes. A high Administration official has bluntly stated that the study would be ‘prefatory to possible introduction of an SST program at a later date.’ The option ‘is held open.’ With an array of fiscal, political and scientific factors against it, the case for the SST at this late date would seem to rest solely on the advantage to a tiny handful of people crossing the oceans in three or four hours instead of six or seven—scarcely a reason for reviving a discredited project which is still being liquidated at public expense.” (NYT, 4/17/73, 39) April 18:	nasa released a preliminary timeline of the Skylab missions scheduled to begin with the Skylab 1 launch of the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm EDT May 14 from Kennedy Space Center. The Skylab 2 mission, carrying the first three crewmen, would leave the pad at 1:00 pm EDT May 15 and dock with the orbiting laboratory at 8:40 pm edt. At 8:30 am May 16 the tunnel would be pressurized and the astronauts would enter Skylab. On the 28th day, at 8:46 am June 12, the crew would reenter the command module, undock, and return for splashdown at 1:44 pm, 1300 km (800 mi) southwest of San Diego. Skylab was to operate for eight months in earth orbit, occupied at intervals by three-men crews who would make scientific and technical investigations and observations related to such areas as earth resources, physiological effects of long-duration weightlessness, solar phenomena, and metal processing in zero-g conditions. (NASA Release 73—78)
The last Apollo splashdown party given by National Space Club in Washington, D.C., had the theme “Salute to Apollo: Man’s Promise for the Future.” The program included remarks and messages from President Nixon; Vice President Spiro T. Agnew; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President and President-Aerospace Group William B. Bergen; and Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr. Former President Lyndon B. Johnson who had died during day, had sent a message commending space pioneers who had “made the Apollo miracle a living reality. It has been more . . . than an amazing adventure into the unexplored and the unknown. The Apollo program has been and will endure as a monument to many things—to the personal courage of some of the finest men our nation has produced—to the technological and managerial capability, which is the genius of our system—and to a successful cooperation among nations which has proved to all of us what can be done when we work together with our eyes on a glorious goal.” Master of Ceremonies Peter S. Hackes of National Broadcasting Co. eulogized President Johnson as “the policy father of the space program.” A message from Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), former Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Apollo program had been an “outstanding example of government, industry, and university cooperation and has really shown brilliance of management and technological competence.” An Apollo film was narrated by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director. Dr. Petrone said the Apollo program had taken 12 yrs “and I don’t look upon this as curtains at the end of a play. It’s like the curtain at the end of the first act. It’s just beginning.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said President Johnson had been instrumental in achieving congressional support for the space program. Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders recalled President Johnson as “a very large man, very down to earth” who had the spirit of an astronaut, but was “a little too big” to be one. (Program; Texts; Smyth, W Post, 1/23/73, B2; ri pio)
Construction of the $22-million runway for the space shuttle was begun at Kennedy Space Center after a brief ground-breaking ceremony at the construction site northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. Dr. Debus, KSC Director, said the shuttle would lead to a “new era of international transportation to and from space” and the “boom and bust of the 1960s of this community and the activities of the government will be changed to a more steady—more reliable—situation.” The 90-m wide, 4600-m long, 40-cm thick runway would accommodate a 75 000-kg spacecraft returning from space at a 15° to 20° angle and at a speed of nearly 295 km per hr. More than 8000 km of grooves in the surface would permit drainage and prevent hydroplaning while " landing in the rain. To reduce the speed of the returning shuttle, astronauts would have the help of brakes, parachutes, and a net at the end of the runway. The runway was scheduled for July 1976 completion. (Spaceport News, 4 April 74, 1, 5; McElheny, NYT, 2 April 74, 22)
Medical tests of Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—begun after their 8 Feb. splashdown—continued on board the U.S.S. New Orleans. All three astronauts reached their maximum preflight work rates on the bicycle ergometer. Each astronaut completed the full run on a whirling chair, reaching a rate of 30 rpm while making 150 head movements with no problems. A test of muscle function showed no significant decrease. As soon as the men had landed, the pull of gravity had compressed the vertebrae of their spinal columns, removing the inch or more of height gained in weightlessness. Carr had gained slightly in weight; Pogue had lost one kilogram and Dr. Gibson a little more than two. (McElheny, NYT, 11 Feb 74, 7)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue had experienced a harrowing last hour in space when they could not get commands to the secondary control system, which pointed the spacecraft heat shield at the correct angle during reentry. After discovering a leak in the prime reaction control system, the astronauts tried and failed to activate the secondary system. “Our hearts fell and our eyeballs popped,” Carr said at a 22 Feb. Johnson Space Center press conference. Carr, commander of the mission, instead had used a manual procedure to bypass the computer controlling the engine’s firing and guided the spacecraft to a safe on-target splashdown. The press later quoted a NASA spokesman as saying that the failure to activate the backup control system was “just a matter of a switch not being thrown.” (O’Toole, W Post, 15 Feb 74, Al; upi, Richmond Times-Dispatch, 16 Feb 74; Maloney, H Post, 23 Feb 74)
A digital computing cardiotachometer developed for monitoring beattobeat heart rates of astronauts training underwater was being used in two Birmingham, Ala., hospitals, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The device, designed to operate with a standard electrocardiographic unit, employed an electronic digital system to use the time between two consecutive heart beats to calculate the patient’s pulse rate. A numerical display showed the subject’s pulse rate 0.3 sec after detecting his second heart beat, (msfc Release 74-140)
Analyses of light flashes seen by crew members of the last Apollo missions, tentatively attributed to cosmic ray nuclei penetrating the head and eyes, were reported by Univ. of Houston and Johnson Space Center scientists in Science magazine. Three kinds of flashes—the spot or star-like flash, the streak, and the cloud—had occurred randomly, with no apparent preference for one eye over the other. Astronauts saw many more flashes during translunar coast experiment sessions than in transearth coast, although the cosmic ray flux appeared to be the same inside the spacecraft during both coasts. No physiological explanation was found for this difference in frequency of flashes. (Pinsky, et al., Science, 8 March 74, 957-958)
The Navy had selected International Business Machines Corp. Electronic Systems Center as prime contractor for the light airborne multipurpose system (lamps) helicopter, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Under a $13.8-million contract, IBM would develop and test a prototype antisubmarine warfare and avionics and weapon control system for installation and integration in a helicopter furnished by the Navy. (Av Wk, 8 April 74,24) 8 April-3 May: Some 75 Soviet aerospace specialists—including U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev, prime crewmen Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, Flight Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and training officer for astp crews Valery F. Bykovsky—joined U.S. astp astronauts and specialists at Johnson Space Center to continue technical discussions and planning for the July 1975 joint astp mission. Agreement was reached that specialists and flight crews would visit the U.S. launch site in February 1975 and the U.S.S.R. launch site in May 1975, for familiarization with the spacecraft and to test compatible equipment. NASA had defined no technical need for U.S. representatives at the Soviet launch site during actual liftoff; U.S. specialists would be in the control center. Apollo docking module and Soyuz life-support-system tests were reviewed, in addition to safety assessment reports on control systems and spacecraft manufacturing test and checkout. Schedules for each of the five joint experiments—ultraviolet absorption, biological interaction, microbial exchange, multipurpose furnace, and artificial solar eclipse— were approved. Agreement was also reached on the basic approach and content of the joint flight readiness review, to be held in May 1975. The U.S.S.R. crew and U.S. astp Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton walked through hundreds of procedures for the first time as crews, to verify the integrity of the docking module that would connect the Soyuz and Apollo command and service modules. At a 26 April press conference Stafford demonstrated his proficiency in the Russian language by answering newsmen’s questions in Russian. Cosmonauts and astronauts agreed that “we’ve no problem in language.” One cosmonaut said, “Our work is considerably better when the American crew speaks Russian and our crew speaks English.” Glynn S. Lunney, astp Technical Director for the U.S., said during a 3 May press briefing that the work in the U.S. and jointly was on schedule. The progress “has been good and . . . gratifying.” Prof. Bushuyev said that “there can be no longer any doubt that we will be successful in preparing for and achieving our joint flight in July 1975.” (jsc Roundup, 12 April 74, 1; astp Communique; Press briefing transcripts, 26 April 74, 3 May 74)
President Nixon wired salutations to Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue aboard the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans after their successful splashdown at 11:17 am edt. The astronauts, launched 16 Nov. 1973, had set an 84-day space flight record in the Orbital Workshop. The President said: “On behalf of the American people, I salute Skylab’s third crew of astronauts on their safe return to earth. They have successfully completed man’s longest space journey and brought to an end one of the most scientifically productive endeavors in the history of human exploration. From the Skylab program, we have learned that we can live and work in space for long periods of time. And we have found that the results of these efforts can be of enormous practical value to life on earth. “Skylab now joins the ranks of the Santa Maria, the H.M.S. Beagle, the Spirit of St. Louis, and the Eagle. Each of these great vehicles has carried us beyond the contemporary limits of human knowledge into a new comprehension of our own possibilities and a new definition of our own destiny. We welcome the men of Skylab home, and we salute them and all their predecessors who have launched us on this great adventure.” {PD, 11 Feb 74,193; A&A 1973) .
American Broadcasting Co. Science Editor Jules Bergman recalled tales of astronauts in a TV Guide article and noted that, with the splashdown of Skylab 4, an incredible era of space flight had come to an end. In 30 manned flights the U.S. had moved from the first 15-min sub-oibital flight to 12 Americans walking on the moon and then finally to the near-routine Skylab endurance missions. It would be a long while before someone set out for the planets, a trip which would require far more advanced propulsion systems than now available. But “we will go to the planets. . . . We will go beyond Jupiter. We will go beyond this solar system and eventually build starcraft to go so far that man’s only limit will be his imagination and ingenuity. But the mission clearly for the next decade is this Earth: it is the only home man has at the moment.” (TV Guide, 2 March 74)
A New York Times editorial noted that the 8 Feb. safe return of the Skylab 4 astronauts “was considered so certain that the television networks had decided well in advance not to broadcast the splashdown.” It “really was a public tribute to the high technical achievements of the Skylab program and of previous manned American space projects.” With Skylab’s record and dividends, “the case for a permanent manned station in space can now be regarded as proved.” (NYT, 10 Feb 74)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) praised the Skylab 4 astronauts (launched 16 Nov. 1973) on the eve of their splashdown after a record 84-day mission, concluding the Sylab program. On the floor of the precedented.” After damage to the Orbital Worshop during its 14 May House of Representatives Rep. Teague called the Skylab record “un-1973 launch, the three crews had repaired and altered the systems, exceeded their expected workloads, and returned vast amounts of useful information on earth rseources, solar phenomena, physical science, life sciences, and technology. The crews had spent 41 hrs in extravehicular activity and 171% days in earth orbit, demonstrating that man could live indefinitely and work productively in space. To date the U.S. manned space program had amassed 30 flights with some 21 850 hrs of active operation in space. “These programs— Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab—have made direct contributions to our daily lives as well as new scientific knowledge. . . . Skylab has amply demonstrated that space can be used for practical purposes.” (CR, 7 Feb 74, E533) _ _ _
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Chief of the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center and Apollo 17 astronaut, began a 90-day assignment as special assistant to the NASA Administrator to coordinate NASA’s effort in energy research and development and facilitate NASA aid to other agencies working on energy research, (nasa Release 74-37; Off Energy Prog, interview, Aug 74)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Apollo 17 astronaut and now Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator for Energy Research and Development, testified in Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on FY 1975 authorizations: One of the most important contributions NASA could make to energy research and development was the application of managerial techniques developed in the space program, permitting programs, schedules, and budgets to be defined and then adhered to without major degradation of the original goals. “This mission-oriented approach to research and development and its broad integration of the great capabilities and imagination of industry will... be applied just as successfully to the critical problems that face the Nation and the world in energy.” (Transcript)
NASA authorized two flight kits for Apollo-Soyuz astronauts: an official flight kit, containing selective items for memorabilia, and an astronaut preference kit, containing 20 personal items selected individually. Special flight items having particular significance for the mission would be suggested by the Director, Johnson Space Center, and approved by the Administrator. (NASA nmi 8020.19B)
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)
George Cunningham, paralyzed from the neck down in a high school football game, was the first quadriplegic to use a device developed for astronauts disabled in space, the Baltimore Sun reported. He could place a telephone call, control a radio or TV, open the curtains in his hospital room, or call the nurses’ station by blowing into a tube. The device, Nu-Life, made up of two tiny video display screens and a miniature computer, was operated by inhaling and exhaling into a plastic tube or controlled by eye rotation, a turn of the head, or a touch of the tongue. (AP, B Sun, 21 March 74, A3) 23 March-5 April: NASA’s Mariner 10, launched 3 Nov. 1973, became the first spacecraft to explore Mercury, during a 12-day flyby of the planet— returning some 1700 TV photos and much new information on its atmosphere, surface, mass, and shape. The incoming encounter sequence began 23 March at 5 600 000 km from Mercury, transmitting the clearest photos yet taken of the tiny planet. Although most of the photos were recorded on tape before transmission, real-time photos with reduced resolution were sent to analyze the reflective properties of Mercury at different lighting angles. By 28 March photos were showing the-planet to he heavily cratered like the moon. During the incoming near-encounter, from 17 to 3% hrs before encounter, 18 frames were transmitted. Mosaics were made for locating smaller areas photographed later at higher resolutions. Spacecraft instruments identified an extremely thin atmosphere surrounding the planet, containing helium at concentrations above lunar levels and small amounts of neon, argon, and possibly zenon. Mariner 10 passed within 704 km of Mercury at 4:47 pm edt 29 March, within 56 km of the aim point. Data were transmitted without interruption over the 150 000 000-km distance until earth occultation began at 4:50 pm edt. Radio signals were recovered following the 12min occultation. Photos of the planet—described by scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory as “superb”—showed details less than 1.6 km in size and covered almost half the planet’s surface, which was pocked with craters as deep as 32 km and between 8 and 160 km wide. Giant cracks in the surface suggested high heat beneath. Some ancient volcanic activity was seen in a few rille-like ravines that crossed the craters and domelike hills. Absence of halo craters indicated young craters probably had been covered by the dust storms that constantly swept the planet. At a jpl press briefing following the encounter, Dr. James C. Fletcher said onboard instruments showed that Mercury had an unexpected magnetic field, estimated to be 1 % that of the earth. The magnetic field was measured at 90 to 100 gammas at the spacecraft’s closest approach, with an extrapolated value at the surface of 100 to 200 gammas. As Mariner 10 raced by Mercury on 30 March, photos of the morning side of the planet showed a much smoother region than the rugged area seen under the afternoon sun. The north pole region appeared much less pitted and flatter than the south pole. Instruments found that Mercury was two-thirds iron, making its density greater than previously believed and probably responsible for the unexpected magnetic field. Concentrations of uranium and thorium were comparable to those on the earth. Preliminary results, presented at a 31 March press conference at jpl, included a Mercury mass measurement 100 times better than previous ones, a detached well-defined bow shock wave, a temperature varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side (— 300°F to 800°F) with no thermal anomalies detected, opaque surface soil with the top few centimeters 1.0 to 1.5 times as dense as water and 50% as porous, and high-energy electrons in the mev range observed from 700 to 5000 km above the surface. An ultraviolet scanner had detected what appeared to be an egg-shaped moon moving in orbit around Mercury, but the Mariner navigational team later identified the object as a dim but very hot star, known as 31 Crater in the constellation Corvus. Despite a power anomaly, Mariner 10 continued to transmit TV pictures in real-time at 117.6 kilobits per sec and tape-recorded frames at 22.05 kbps. TV imagery was discontinued 5 April when the resolution became equal to that of earth-based telescopes. All mission events were accomplished as planned and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. The spacecraft was expected to swing back by Mercury in September, (nasa mor, 24 April 74; jpl Press Kit, 19 March 74; NYT, 24 March 74, 30 March—1 April.74; W Post, 29 March—1 April 74; W Star-News, 28 March 74; LA Times, 20 March-1 April 74)
The International Aeronautical Federation held its 25th Congress in Amsterdam with the theme “Space Stations, Present and Future.” Among speakers, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, U.S. and Soviet commanders in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, stressed how well joint work and understanding had advanced. A paper by Daniel J. Shramo of Lewis Research Center, with B. R. Foushee and P. J. O’Leary of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., described the Centaur primary upper stage for solar system exploration and its potential adaptation as an upper stage for the space shuttle. A Ukranian Academy of Sciences research team reported on experiments in the formation of melts in weightlessness with radiant heating and on prospects of using solar energy for space engineering. Comparative studies of metal solidification had suggested that a more uniform distribution of short-grained structures under weightlessness might become the basis of space technology, with the added attraction of using the sun as an energy source. The team had built a prototype solar plant that could be mounted on a spacecraft or used in a vacuum chamber on the earth. Soviet medical investigations during the flights of Soyuz 12 (launched 27 Sept. 1973), Soyuz 13 (18 Dec. 1973), and Soyuz 14 (3 July) were reported by Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko and others. Findings indicated that prolonged exercises, full and partial spacesuits, and gravity-simulating fittings had reduced effects of weightlessness during the space flight and after the crew’s return. Although reports of initial adaptation symptoms were similar to American findings, the Soviet paper also noted that cosmonauts had reduced vestibular symptoms by deliberately slowing down movements, especially head movements. Prof. Hilding A. Bjurstedt, Head of the Dept, of Aviation Medicine at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, received the 1974 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for studies of physiological responses to environmental stress. Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, was elected iaf President (iaa Ann Rpt, 28 Aug 74; Parks, SF, Feb 75, 42-50; Program, 25th iaf Congress; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74, 21) During September: Large-scale verification tests of the “rectenna” receiving system for microwave energy transmission were run at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA. A microwave energy transmission system was being developed to determine the possibility of transmitting energy through space. The tests established a new record for microwave power transmission, delivering one kilowatt over a 1.6-km range. The 10-yr program had increased DC-to-DC efficiency of transmissions from 17% to 50% and efficiency of the rectenna in converting radio frequency to dc from 25% to 78%. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 15 Oct 74, 57-60)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, who splashed down 8 Feb. after 84 days aboard the Orbital Workshop, completed a third day of post-splashdown tests before a brief welcoming ceremony at dockside in San Diego, Calif. The astronauts then flew to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., for a reunion with their families. Medical tests would continue throughout the week and the three men would continue to eat the precisely controlled diet begun three weeks before their 16 Nov. 1973 launch. (McElheny, NYT, 11 Feb 74,7)
The first prototype B-l intercontinental strategic bomber was unveiled at Palmdale, Calif., by the Air Force and Rockwell International Corp. Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger told on-lookers that the new aircraft was needed to complement the U.S. arsenal of land-based and submarine-based missiles. Although smaller and lighter than the B-52 it was meant to replace, the B-l could fly farther and faster, carry almost twice the payload, and use a shorter runway. Powered by four 133.4-kilonewton-thrust (30 000-lb) turbofan engines and lifted by variable geometry, or “swing” wings, the bomber could fly efficiently at speeds in excess of mach 2. The projected cost of production models— $76.4 million each—made the future of the aircraft controversial and uncertain, (dod Release 505-74; Getler, W Post, 27 Oct 74, A6; Wright, NYT, 27 Oct 74,43) 26 October—4 November: An agreement for NASA to submit life sciences experiments for flight aboard the next available Soviet biological satellite was negotiated during the fifth joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine in Tashkent, U.S.S.R. The first U.S. experiments would be passive specimen modules, completely autonomous from spacecraft power, life support, and data-recording systems, and would require no operational commands from the ground during flight. NASA would prepare descriptions of the proposed experiments in December and deliver flight hardware by 15 Aug. 1975. U.S. investigators would also participate in pre- and postflight studies of blood and tissue samples from animals flown aboard the next Soviet biological satellite. The protocol was confirmed by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences 4 Dec. Representatives also discussed preparations for the joint July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission; exchanged results from Apollo, Skylab, Cosmos, Salyut, and Soyuz programs; and discussed pre- and postflight examinations, vestibular training, and crew reaction to flight. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 16 Dec 74, 42-3; NASA Release 74-237; NASA Int Aff, interview, 17 Oct 75; Moscow Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, BIO; 8 Nov 74, U1) 27 October-2 November: The 67th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) convened in Sidney, Australia. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was presented the 1973 fai Gold Space Medal for his role as Skylab 2 commander, and Astronaut Alan L. Bean was presented the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for his role as Skylab 3 mission commander. Both men also received the De la Vaulx Medal for their successive space duration records. (naa News. Oct 74, Dec 74,1) 28 October-9 November: Luna 23, second Soviet lunar mission of 1974, was launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tvuratam into a parking orbit with 246-km apogee, 183-km perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.5° inclination, where the “automatic station” was separated and launched on a near-to-planned trajectory to the moon. After a 31 Oct. flight path correction, the spacecraft on 2 Nov. entered a, lunar orbit with 104-km apogee, 94-km perigee, 117-min period, and 138° inclination. On 4 and 5 Nov. the orbit was changed to 105-km apogee and 17-km perigee. The spacecraft landed in the southern part of the moon’s Sea of Crisis 6 Nov., but rugged terrain damaged a device designed to take rock samples from a 2.5-m depth. The planned drilling and collection of lunar soil had to be abandoned for a reduced equipment-testing program. Work with the station was discontinued 9 Nov. (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, Ul-2; 10 Nov 74, Ul; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4 Nov 74, Ul; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74, 13; SF, April 75,152) _
The success of Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount solar experiment was more than a milestone in space exploration, Dr. John Eddy, solar physicist of the Boulder, Colo., High Altitude Observatory, said in a New Scientist article. This battery of the world’s most advanced telescopes lofted to the ideal observation site had clarified previous theoretical sketches of the vertical extent of the sun’s chromospheric structures. Spicules, which outlined the giant circulation cells of the chromosphere and extended through the transition region, disappeared at temperatures of 1 million K in the low corona, suggesting that the magnetic field lines diverged in the corona. First results from the atm x-ray observations destroyed the common concept of a homogeneous background corona, which had served as a basis of modern coronal physics, and revealed that the corona was composed almost entirely of closed loop structures fitting magnetic field lines calculated from observed photospheric fields. Reasons for the ATM success included the large-scale and highly sophisticated instruments, large data-storage capability, efficiency of instrument operation, operation of the six instruments in concert, extensive ground support, and astronaut interest and training. Program results would be shared by scientists in many countries and the program appeared a good investment, in scientific yield per dollar spent. (New Scientist, 21 March 74, 738-741)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first U.S. man in space and the fifth man to walk on the moon, announced his retirement from NASA and the Navy effective 1 Aug. During his 5 May 1961, 14.8-min Mercury -Redstone 2 mission, Shepard flew his Freedom. 7 spacecraft to a 186.2-km altitude and initiated the U.S. manned space program. He commanded the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission 31 Jan.—9 Feb. 1971. Shepard would join the Marathon Construction Co. of Houston, Tex., as a partner and Chairman, (nasa Release 74-203; A&A 1961)
Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974), announced he would leave the NASA astronaut corps 30 Nov. 1974. Dr. Gibson, a scientist-astronaut since 1965, would join Aerospace Corp. of Los Angeles as a senior staff scientist, specializing in the interpretation of solar data gathered during the 171 days of manned operation in the Skylab program. He had held primary responsibility for the 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount operation on Skylab 4, making extensive observations of solar processes, (jsc Release 74-246)
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., defeated Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum in the Ohio Democratic primary in his third try for nomination to the U.S. Senate. Glenn’s first try for a Senate seat in 1964 had ended when injuries from a fall forced him out of the primary. In 1970 Metzenbaum defeated Glenn, in the primary. Glenn became the first U.S. astronaut to orbit the earth 20 Feb. 1962. (Farrell, NYT, 9 May 74, 2: A&A 1964; Hope, W Star, 6 May 70, Al)
“No other person who has flown in space has captured the experience so vividly,” Henry S. F. Cooper said in a review of Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut’s Journeys by Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins. Although the book was “long and rambling,” touching a great many bases in Collins’ career from Air Force test pilot through Gemini 10 and Apollo, “it is something new under the sun to find an astronaut who isn’t afraid to express his feelings.” Collins was best at single impressions, . “little snapshots,” still sharp and clear five years after the lunar landing. Two days out on the mission, “ ‘The moon I have known all my life, that two-dimensional, small yellow disk in the sky, has gone somewhere to be replaced by the most awesome sphere I have ever seen. . . . This cool, magnificent sphere hangs there ominously, a formidable presence without sound or motion, issuing us no invitation to invade its domain.’ ” Collins had cast off the “diffidence astronauts normally wear like spacesuits to protect themselves from prying earthlings. ... ‘I have been places and done things you simply would not believe. I have dangled from a cord a hundred miles up; I have seen the earth eclipsed by the moon, and enjoyed it. I have seen the sun’s true light, unfiltered by any planet’s atmosphere. I have seen the ultimate black of infinity in a stillness undisturbed by any living thing. ... I do have this secret, this precious thing that I will always carry with me.’ ” (NYT Booh Review, 11 Aug 74,1)
A Federal grand jury had charged Charles R. Riser of Maryland with mail fraud in setting up Andromeda Space Covers, a mail-order firm selling fake space exploration items, the Baltimore Sun reported. Fifteen persons had paid for golf balls driven across the moon by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., during the January 1971 Apollo 14 mission, but he had used only two balls and these were still on the moon. The assistant U.S. attorney on the case said that astronauts might be called to state whether signatures on other souvenirs were authentic. (Erlandson, B Sun, 14 Sept 74, B20)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, launched 16 Nov. 1973, discussed their changed attitudes during an inflight press conference held on their 48th day aboard the Orbital Workshop. Science Pilot Gibson said that from space “you see the Earth as one unit, you see the Sun as a star, and you can see all the other stars out there . . . and just the number ,of possible combinations . . . which could create life, . . . makes [life elsewhere in the universe] seem very much more likely.” Pogue said that the mission had had a great spiritual impact on him. “At the beginning of the mission, I tried to operate like a machine. . . . Now I’m trying to operate as a human being within the limitations I possess.” Now he would “feel much more inclined toward humanistic feeling toward other people.” (Transcript)
The U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating the Skylab program on the first anniversary of the launching of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. The yellow, red, blue, and black stamp depicted the Workshop and Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin as they worked in space to repair the spacecraft, which had been damaged during launch. (Tower, NYT, 28 April 1974, 30)
Photographs and visual observations made by astronauts aboard the Skylab Orbital Workshop had revealed eddies embedded in warm-water currents flowing poleward from equatorial oceans, Robert E. Stevenson of the Office of Naval Research reported in a Nature article. Observations from Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973-8 Feb. 1974) over four ocean areas had confirmed initial evidence from Caribbean photographs taken on Sky-lab 2 and 3 (25 May-22 June, 28 July—25 Sept. 1973) that eddies with vortices of 5500- to 37 000-m dia were present wherever other conditions were suitable, regardless of water temperature. Findings were also confirmed by the Navy’s Weather Reconnaissance Squadron Four with bathythermographs. Formerly, turbulence had been difficult to document because of limited oceanographic techniques, insufficient information about such features, and the lack of photos from orbital platforms which enhanced the ocean and atmosphere manifestations of the eddies. (Nature, 23 Aug 74, 638-40)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt became NASA Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs. He headed NASA’s new Office of Energy Programs, supporting Federal agencies responsible for energy research and development. The office consolidated functions previously performed by other Headquarters offices. Dr. Schmitt, science pilot on the Apollo 17 lunar landing mission, had been Chief of the Science and Applications Directorate in the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. He had been on temporary assignment at Headquarters as Special Assistant to the Administrator for Energy Research and Development since 29 Jan. (NASA Ann, 16 May 74)
Dr. Robert A. R. Parker, scientist-astronaut and program scientist for the Skylab mission, had been named Chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, Johnson Space Center announced. Dr. Parker succeeded Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, who had been named Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs at NASA Hq. in May. The s&ad would serve as an interface between eventual space shuttle payload users and nasa and participate in the shuttle flight research program. Dr. Parker had been named a nasa scientist-astronaut in 1967 and had been a member of the support crews for the Apollo 15 and 17 missions. (JSC Release 74-186)
John M. Thole had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science effective 1 Sept., NASA announced. Thole would succeed Vincent L. Johnson, who had retired. Former project manager for the Applications Technology Satellite at Goddard Space Flight Center, Thole had joined gsfc in 1960 and had held a variety of project management positions since that time, (nasa Ann, 26 Aug 74) 26 August-20 September: Thirty NASA engineers and technicians met with U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences counterparts in Moscow as joint preparations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s July 1975 flight continued. On 8 Sept, another group of 47 specialists and engineers headed by U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney arrived in Moscow for 2 weeks of meetings with the Soviet group headed by U.S.S.R. Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev. The project directors announced plans for joint prelaunch tests at the U.S. launch site 1-8 Feb. 1975 and at the U.S.S.R. launch area 5-13 May 1975. Flight crews and technical specialists from both countries would participate. Soviet specialists also announced plans to fly a manned Soyuz mission to test ASTP-related systems. NASA would be informed of further details before the flight to permit tracking. Thirteen U.S. flight controllers were also spending two Weeks in Moscow beginning 15 Sept., meeting with Soviet controllers for familiarization and training, including briefings on Soviet Mission Control Center operations, Soyuz spacecraft systems, and the mission flight plan, (jsc astp Press Communique, 20 Sept 74; jsc Roundup, 13 Sept 74; jsc Release 74-250) year in space. Dr. G. D. Whedon of the National Institutes of Health stated that weightlessness could threaten capable musculo-skeletal functions during space flights lasting up to three years unless measures could be developed to prevent significant losses of calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen. Continued loss of calcium could cause astronauts to break their backs or legs and could promote formation of kidney stones. Dr. William E. Thornton, life scientist in the jsc Astronaut Office, reported that by Mission Day 3 all Skylab crewmen had lost more than 2000 cc (2 qts) of extravascular fluid from calf and thigh; at recovery, a sharp reversal was noted. The Thornton team suggested that the reason for the shift was the intrinsic and unopposed lower limb elasticity, which forced venous blood and other fluids toward the head. Other investigators reported that such cardiovascular changes as the heart’s decreased ventricular size and the suppression of red blood cell production was the body’s accommodation to weightlessness. These physiological changes had been the expected response to a lack of exertion; they reversed after the astronauts’ return to earth, (jsc Roundup, 30 Aug 74,1-2; JSC proj off, interview, 12 Aug 75; Altman, NYT, 1 Sept 74,14)
The U.S.S.R. cosmonaut corps was being built up at same time the U.S. astronaut force was dwindling, a Miami Herald article said. The Herald quoted Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, who had visited the U.S.S.R. during training for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, as saying : “Star City (where most of the cosmonauts live and train) looks like a boom town. There’s no doubt the Soviets have a vigorous ongoing manned space effort planned for the next five or six years.” He said that the number of buildings in Star City had tripled in the previous two years, with more under construction. The total of 75 to 80 cosmonauts was a sharp increase over the estimated 55 of five years ago. In contrast the U.S. astronaut corps had fallen to 34 from a peak of 60 during the Apollo program, with only three training for a flight. Stafford said he did not believe the U.S.S.R. had any new spacecraft under development hut rather planned for the continued use of the Soyuz as a workhorse. (M Her, 21 Aug 74)
Evidence revealed during U.S.—U.S.S.R. planning for the joint 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had indicated the Soviet Union was never in the race to the moon, the Associated Press reported. U.S. officials had learned the Soyuz capsule was designed for relatively brief earth orbital flights and for ferrying cosmonauts to and from a space station, but it could not make a journey to the moon. AP quoted Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, a member of the astp planning team, as saying, “Our Apollo spacecraft is far, far more sophisticated and has got a greater capability than their Soyuz. That doesn’t say the Soyuz is no good. It was just built for a different job.” In addition, Soyuz was designed to be controlled from the ground or by preautomated devices. “Their spacecraft ... is designed around a philosophy that it doesn’t need a man to fly.” Cernan said that the U.S.S.R. “had no major over-all goal like landing on the moon. Their goals were all to be first. Get the first iron ball in orbit. Get the first man there . . . the first woman . . . the first multiman spacecraft.” By proceeding in this way, politically they “gained some significant firsts.” (Benedict, H Chron, 7 June 74)
Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Jack R. Lousma, launched
Astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield was presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1973 by Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas in a ceremony at National Geographic Society Headquarters. Hartsfield received the trophy—presented annually to the Air Force employee who made the most significant contribution to U.S. progress in space—for his part in saving the $2.5-billion Skylab program. Hartsfield, serving as capsule communicator during the Skylab 2 mission (25 May-22 June 1973), played a key role in preparing and evaluating crew procedures and equipment for transporting, installing, and deploying the parasol sunshade to protect the Skylab Orbital Workshop after it had been damaged during its 14 May 1973 launch. Hartsfield also had been instrumental in developing procedures for installation by the Skylab 3 crew (launched 28 July 1973) of a compact, lightweight replacement package for the failing gyroscopes in the Skylab attitude control system, (ngs Release, 8 Oct 74)
Federal support to universities and colleges had declined 7%, to $3823 million, during FY 1973 in the first decline since 1970, the National Science Foundation reported. The drop had been largely the result of a $267-million decrease in funds from the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare but other significant decreases were posted by nsf, down $40 million; Dept, of Defense, down $11 million; and NASA, down $8 million. Federal funds for academic science activities totaled $2463 million, 5% below 1972. Two science fields had shown an increase in Federal r&d support between 1972 and 1973'. Life sciences’ $934 million was a 4% increase; engineering’s $204 million was up 6%. (nsf Highlights, 15 July 74) 15— 16 July: Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1—first U.S. domestic communications satellite, launched by NASA 13 April—began operations during inaugural ceremonies in New York and Los Angeles. Russell W. McFall, Chairman of the Board and President of Western Union Corp. transmitted the first message, from New York to Los Angeles, using the original Morse key to tap “What hath God wrought!” It was the same message sent by inventor Samuel F. B. Morse 24 May 1844 over the first experimental telegraph, a 65-km line between the Capitol in Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md. Regular commercial operations began 16 July, providing services for Westar J’s first two commercial customers, American Can Co. and Bank of America. (Westar Inaugural Transmission press kit, 15 July 74) 16— 29 July: NASA launched Aeros 2 (Aeros-B) aeronomy satellite for West Germany from Western Test Range at 4:51 am pdt on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle into polar orbit with an 879.0-km apogee, 221.3km perigee, 95.65-min period, and 97.44° inclination. The NASA mission objective—to place the Aeros 2 satellite in an earth orbit permitting successful achievement of the scientific objectives—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 26 July. The scientific objective was to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of the main absorption. The long-range objective of the satellite, which carried one Goddard Space Flight Center and four West German experiments, was to provide a model of the ionosphere from which upper atmospheric conditions could be predicted. By 29 July the vehicle and experiments were performing satisfactorily and the West Germans were initiating spacecraft operations. A July 1965 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany had provided for a series of cooperative satellite projects. The Aeros program, the second in the series, was authorized by a 10 June 1969 agreement and Aeros 1 was launched 16 Dec. 1972. The 1974 contract between NASA and the West Germany Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (bmft) for the Aeros 2 launch provided for reimbursement of NASA for launch vehicle and services. NASA would also provide one experiment, tracking, and backup for data acquisition, bmft was responsible for development of spacecraft and instrumentation operation and control of the satellite after launch, and data reduction and analysis except for the gsfc experiment. The spacecraft reentered 25 Sept. 1975. (nasa mors, 30 Nov 72, 8 & 29 July 74; NASA Releases 69-91, 74-183; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 75) The 1969 launch of Apollo 11 was commemorated 16 July by ceremonies at Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. At 9:32 am edt, the moment of launch, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., unveiled a plaque designating the site a National Historical Landmark. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the thousands of guests: “No matter our achievements, ... we cannot relax our pursuit of knowledge, for we must face the coming crises of our time. Every effort must be made to see that the opportunity which our technology presents is not lost. We may be sure that the opportunity will not occur soon again, if ever. To fail now would mean a ravaged environment and depleted resources— a plunge into a new and terrible Dark Age from which there would be no return.” Unless “we continuously restore the fund of basic knowledge, we shall ultimately exhaust it. . . . “Some day we will establish scientific outposts on the Moon, and even tap its mineral resources. And in the not-too-distant future astronauts may tread the surface of Mars and the glaciers of the moons of Jupiter in search of extraterrestrial life. . . . The future began here at 9:32 a.m. on July 16, 1969. At that moment on July 16 in the year 2069, launch windows to Mars, Neptune, and Pluto will be open. Will we fly through those windows? I think we will.” In 19 July ceremonies at the San Clemente, Calif., Western White House, Armstrong presented President Nixon a plaque bearing the names of each astronaut who had represented “this country in a flight above the surface of the Earth.” President Nixon told Armstrong the greatest contribution to the space program was not the exploration or technology but the “spirit you and your colleagues . . . have had the opportunity to demonstrate.” The Smithsonian Institution hosted 20 July activities marking the day of the landing. Speaking on the Mall in Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Under Secretary Robert A. Brooks said Apollo 11 had been a “dramatic demonstration . . . that progress in human affairs does not spring full blown from the efforts of one man or group of men. What we saw was the culmination of the efforts of hundreds of scientists and engineers from Leonardo da Vinci ... to the Apollo 11 astronauts. Each built on what his predecessors had accomplished until the accumulation of knowledge made possible the kind of quantum leap forward represented by the Apollo Program.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, called the day of the landing “the day man ended an era of one-planet civilization and began a new age as traveler and colonizer of the universe.” Despite difficulties, men would “make more of these steps into the vast but exciting reaches of the solar system.” A 21 July service at the Washington Cathedral in Washington, D.C., dedicated the Space Window donated by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator at the time of the landing. The window, designed by Rodney Winfield, depicted whirling orange, red, and white stars and orbiting planets on a deep blue and green field. A thin white trajectory, representing a manned spacecraft, emphasized man’s minuteness in God’s universe. During the ceremony, Armstrong presented a 7.18-g, 3.6-billion-yr-old lunar rock, brought from the moon by Apollo 11, to the Cathedral. The rock would be inserted into a hydrogen-filled plexiglass container embedded as the centerpiece of the window. (PD, 22 July 74, 815; NASA Activities, 15 Aug 74, 5-14; transcript; program)
Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight in NASA’s FY 1975 authorization hearings on early results from Skylab’s earth resources data. Perhaps the most interesting so far was the unconfirmed indication of mineral deposits near Ely, Nev. The Skylab earth resources experiment package had also identified several areas of citrus fruit fly infestation on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande, demonstrated the use of remote sensing for snow mapping, identified new urbanization patterns in Phoenix, Ariz., and inventoried vegetation patterns in California test sites. A Baltimore-Washington area photo and similar imagery for 12 other cities were being used by the Dept, of Interior to test their use for updating the 1970 census. Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, astronaut on the 25 May-22 June 1973 mission to man the Orbital Workshop, testified that Skylab astronauts were healthy, happy, and not under significant stress during their long flights. After initial decreased appetite, an astronaut had a feeling of well-being with normal thirst and appetite, although he had a continued feeling of fullness in the head and tended to assume a peculiar posture with neck extended and moving backwards and elbows, hips, and knees flexed at 20° to 30°. He tended to become sleepy and required frequent exercise to restore vigor and alertness. His voice had a peculiar nasal quality. After the third day he was virtually immune to motion sickness.. Without gravity, there was no automatic sensation of up and down and without vision he could quickly get lost. Dr. Harry C. Gatos, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist and Skylab materials processing investigator, testified Skylab experiments had shown that segments of crystals partially regrown in space exhibited none of the inhomogeneities from dopants (electronically active chemical elements) that characterized earth-grown crystals and inhibited their efficiency. In addition to preparation of special materials for electronic and medical uses, materials processing studies in space would provide an understanding of the structures of materials and permit preparation of materials to perform closer to their theoretical limits. Crystal-growing technology was developing new means to create and store power and could, within five years, provide a practical economic basis for using solar power. (Transcript)
With the 8 Feb. splashdown of the Skylab 4 astronauts, 1816 employees at Kennedy Space Center saw their jobs come to an end, the Baltimore Sun reported. The Sun quoted a NASA spokesman as saying that by 30 June the contractor and Civil Service work force at ksc would be 9450. The latest group to be laid off included mostly contract employees for Boeing Co., General Electric Co., and International Business Machines, Inc. (AP, B Sun, 12 Feb 74, A9)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
In a Skylab awards ceremony at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented Group Achievement Awards to the Skylab Program Offices at msFc, Kennedy Space Center, Johnson Space Center, and NASA Hq. and to special Skylab teams. Dr. Robert A. Parker, NASA astronaut and Skylab program scientist at JSC, received an Outstanding Leadership Medal. Dr. Fletcher also presented 28 individual Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medals to principal investigators for Skylab experiments and to Comet Kohoutek scientific investigators, (msfc Release 74-227; Marshall Star, 27 Nov 74) Questioned about a newspaper article saying the Viking lander might sink deep into Martian surface dust, Dr. Petrone said that tests mentioned in the article had been made some years earlier, not “two weeks ago” as reported. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified that the lander’s footpad area had been increased since the earlier tests and that radar observations had indicated the proposed landing sites for the first mission appeared “well within the capability” of the lander. Sites for the second mission were still being studied. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 20 Nov 74, A3) 22 November-6 January 1975: NASA launched Skynet IIB, a U.K. military communications satellite, for the U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Office as agents for the U.K. Ministry of Defense. The satellite was launched on a three-stage Thor-Delta launch vehicle from Eastern Test Range at 7:28 pm est into an orbit with a 36 965-km apogee, 185km perigee, and 24.6° inclination. The apogee kick motor, fired at 8:10 pm est on 24 Nov., circularized the orbit with an apogee of 36 595 km, perigee of 35 896 km, period of 24 hrs 19.4 min, and inclination of 2.2°. The spacecraft then drifted to its geosynchronous station at 50° E longitude over the Indian Ocean. NASA adjudged the launch a success 6 Jan. 1975. The first-generation Skynet A and B had been developed for the U.K. in the usaf’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) and launched by NASA 21 Nov. 1969 and 18 Aug. 1970. Skynet IIA failed to achieve a satisfactory orbit when launched 18 Jan. 1974 and reentered 25 Jan. The launch of Skynet I IB had been delayed from 19 Nov. by a defective component in the Delta 2nd-stage attitude control system. (nasa mors, 7 Nov, 5 Dec 74; 6 Jan 75; gsfc Wkly SSR, 21-26 Nov 74; NASA Release 74-303; AP, W Post, 12 Nov 74, C5)
Three Intelsat IV communications satellites transmitted the Muhammad Ali-Joe. Frazier boxing match in New York City to 17 countries. The three-hour match, won by Ali by a decision, was transmitted to Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nicaragua, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Thailand, United Kingdom, Venezuela, and Zaire. (ComSatCorp Release 74-6; W Star-News Library) 28 January-1 February: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 10th Annual Meeting and Technical Display 28—30 Jan. and 12th Aerospace Sciences Meeting 30 Jan.-l Feb. in Washington, D.C. “Spaceship Earth—A New Perspective” was the theme of the meeting, chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President of Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning. At the honors banquet 30 Jan. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for 1973 for scientific, engineering, and organizational contributions to manned and unmanned space missions, beginning with the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958. Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Space Physics Branch, was given the aiaa Space Science Award for 1973 for his leading role in the Pioneer missions and his contribution to man’s understanding of interplanetary space. The Goddard Award was shared by Paul D. Castenholtz, Rockwell International Corp.; Richard C. Mulready, United Aircraft Corp.; and John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology—for significant contributions to the development of the practical liquid oxygen and hydrogen rocket engine. Winner of the aiaa History Manuscript Award for 1973 was Dr. William M. Leary, Jr., Univ. of Georgia historian, for “The Dragon’s Wings: The China National Aviation Corporation and the Development of Commercial Aviation in China.” Carroll H. Woodling, Chief of Johnson Space Center Crew Training and Simulation Div., received the de Florez Training Award for advancing development of space flight simulators and for flight training programs. The G. Edward Pendray Award was awarded to Frederick I. Ord-way III, Univ. of Alabama, for his contributions to the literature recording the history and benefits of the space program. Willis H. Hawkins, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., was awarded the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for contributions to the design and development of aerospace vehicles— including vertical take-off, transport, interceptor, and supersonic fighter aircraft-—and to missile and space programs including ramjet and reentry test vehicles. The Lawrence Sperry Award went to Dino A. Lorenzini, Air Force Academy, for developing a modern inertial guidance test facility incorporating computer-control, data-acquisition, sensor-excitation, and seismic-isolation technology. . Dr. Harold A. Rosen, Hughes Aircraft Co., received the Spacecraft Design Award for contributions to the development of satellite communication systems, including the spin-stabilized synchronous-orbit spacecraft concept and commercial systems. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace of the Air Force Systems Command delivered the von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Composites,” pointing to a need for competitive cost and innovative design to realize the advantages of composites in material, fabrication, and configuration. The Dryden Research Lecture was delivered by Herbert F. Hardrath, Langley Research Center, who reviewed the use of fracture mechanics to choose materials, configure safe and efficient structures, specify inspection procedures, predict lives of flawed structures, and develop the reliability ofcurrent and future airframes. Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of the GE Space Div., was installed as 12th president of aiaa. The 19 new Fellows elected included Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director; John P. Campbell and John P. Reeder, LaRc; and Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. Inducted as Honorary Members were Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.). (AdcA, Mar 74; AIAA Bull, Jan 74; aiaa Releases, 21 Dec 73; aiaa History Newsletter, 24 May 74; Ksc Release 14r-74; arc Astrogram, 18 Jan 74, 1; Marshall Star, 30 Jan 74,1)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue briefed members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the Skylab program: Carr said that, in space, material samples such as paper, teflon, nylon, and neoprene-covered nylon were self-extinguishing when ignited, because of a lack of convection. Polyurethane, however, burned “like something soaked in gasoline. ... I am very certain that we will never ever see polyurethane foam in a spacecraft.” Dr. Gibson said that a leg muscle problem that had hindered previous Skylab crews in their ability to walk and run upon return to earth had been solved by a very crude treadmill device used to simulate walking and running. “We worked at it every day, and the condition we came back in was good testimony to the utility of that device.” Pogue narrated a dramatic presentation of slides taken from the Skylab Workshop—of mountainsides eroded by stripmining, forests denuded by the clearcutting of timber, cities obscured By smog, and rivers and lakes muddied by pollution and silt. He said that the astronauts had been constantly amazed how clearly such effects could be seen from their perch in space. “It has an emotional feedback.” Carr said that it had become “very, very clear . . . that we don’t have a whole lot of places to live comfortably on this Earth and we must take care of it.” Dr. Gibson said that the crew would like to see future missions make more use of man’s capability to use his own judgment in data collection. “We would like to see instruments with high-data capability which could be pointed and selectively operated.” Carr said that, “if you are going to use man in space, he is going to be happy if he can use his own judgment and ... is productive. If he is nothing but a switch twiddler working against the clock, he is going to become very bored, and he is going to have psychological problems.” (Transcript)
Johnson Space Center announced two personnel changes: Astronaut John W. Young, veteran of four space flights, had heen named Acting Chief of the Astronaut Office in the Flight Operations Directorate. He was replacing former Astronaut Office Chief Alan B. Shepard, Jr., who would serve as senior adviser to Young. Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart had heen named Director of User Affairs at NASA Hq., effective 1 May, replacing Albert T. Christensen, who would return to private industry. The User Affairs Office maintained close ties with users of NASA’s applications program and ensured a flow of information and that the programs were responsive to user needs. (JSC Releases 74-71; 74-72)
NASA announced selection of 39 scientists to provide experiments for the 1978 Pioneer twin missions to Venus. The selection, made from 162 scientists who had submitted proposals to NASA, included one scientist each from Germany and France. The scientists would participate in a detailed study of the planet, including composition, structure, and radiation field of its atmosphere; nature of the clouds; and magnetic and radiation environment of the planet, (nasa Release 74-155) 24 June—12 July: Eight U.S. astronauts—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, Donald K. Slayton, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, Jack R. Lousma, Robert F. Overmyer, and Karol J. Bobko—took part in training in Star City, near Moscow, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. A ninth, Eugene A. Cernan, took part in the first two weeks of training, representing the Johnson Space Center Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. In addition to studying Soyuz spacecraft systems, the astronauts trained with the Soviet flight crews in simulators and mockups. They also continued planning procedures and checklists for the joint mission, (jsc Release 74-121; JSC Roundup, 30 Aug 74) 25 June-19 July: The Salyut 3 research station and—nine days later—the Soyuz 14 spacecraft carrying a two-man crew were launched into nearearth orbit to establish a U.S.S.R. manned orbital workshop. Salyut 3 was launched at 4:55 am local time 25 June (7:55 pm EOT 24 June) from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with 252-km apogee, 213-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to improve the station’s design, onboard systems, and equipment and to perform scientific research during space flight. By 30 June Salyut 3, which consisted of two cylinders more than 21 m in length and weighing some 18 500 kg, had been raised to a near-circular orbit with a 268-km apogee and 265-km perigee. Soyuz 14 was launched 3 July at 11:51 pm local time (2:51 pm EDT) from Baykonur Cosmodrome carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich, commander and veteran of the 12 Aug. 1962 Vostok 4 mission, and Yuri P. Artyukhin, flight engineer, to rendezvous with Salyut 3. The launch was seen by Soviet citizens by delayed broadcast on Moscow TV. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 338-km apogee, 201-km perigee, 89.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said during a 4 July Tass interview that the main objectives of the mission were “testing methods and systems of controlling the craft, improvement in the life-sustaining complex, [and] exploration of new possibilities of using both separate craft and groups of space objects to accomplish scientific and applied tasks in a nearearth orbit.” Tass also reported that a 4 July trajectory correction placed the spacecraft in an orbit with a 277-km apogee, 255-km perigee, 89.7min period, and 51.6° inclination. All spacecraft systems were successfully checked out and the crew was reported to be in good health. The Soyuz 14 cosmonauts rendezvoused and docked with Scdyut 3 on 5 July during their 17th orbit, successfully demonstrating techniques the Soviets would use during the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project maneuvers. After docking, Popovich and Artyukhin checked the station’s onboard systems and microclimate and entered the 99-cu-m three-room laboratory. During their 15-day mission the cosmonauts studied geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, atmospheric formations and phenomena, physical characteristics of outer space, and manufacturing techniques, as well as testing the Salyut space station’s improved design and solar-panel energy system. The crew also studied the influences of space on the human organism and exercised to prevent loss of muscle tone, using an onboard comprehensive trainer to simulate running, jumping, and weight lifting. . Tass reported 15 July that some Soviet scientists considered terminating the mission because unexpected, intense solar flares 4-8 July dramatically increased the radiation exposure. However, because the flares subsided and the space station’s orbit prevented excessive exposure, the crew’s work was not disrupted. While the cosmonauts worked in space, two Soviet researchers lived in a duplicate station on the ground, simultaneously performing the same work. All commands relayed to the orbiting Salyut 3 were first checked on the ground and alternate versions of decisions for unforeseen situations were calculated. On 8 July the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew, in training at Star City for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, telegraphed congratulations to the Salyut 3 cosmonauts on their “great success.” They said they looked forward to meeting the two after their “happy return.” By 18 July the crew completed most experiments and began transferring equipment to Soyuz 14. After checking out spacecraft systems, the cosmonauts undocked 19 July. Retrorockets were fired, parachutes deployed, and Soyuz 14 softlanded at 5:21 pm Baykonur time (8:21 am edt) 140 km southeast of Dzhezkazgan 2000 m from the planned target after 15 days 17 hours 30 min in space. The crew left the spacecraft unaided, and on-the-spot medical checks showed the cosmonauts’ health was “good.” All mission tests were reported completed. For the first time, a U.S.S.R. orbital mission had been in touch with mission control continuously because of maritime tracking. Salyut 3 was the third space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew on Soyuz 10 docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. A second crew, launched 6 June 1971 aboard Soyuz 11, entered the orbiting station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days. The three died during reentry when an open valve evacuated air from the spacecraft. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973 but apparently an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 20-26 June, 3—10 July 74; gsfc SSR, 30 June, 31 Aug 74; Tass, FBis-Sov, 25 June-23 July 74; UPl, W Star-News, 14 July 74; Browne, NYT, 9, 20 July 74; SBD, 9, 27 July 74; A&A 1973)
Johnson Space Center announced award of a 12-mo, $300 000 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. Denver Div. to study technical and operational concepts for manned and automated assembly of space systems from the space shuttle orbiter. Martin was asked to consider use of manipulative devices, an astronaut maneuvering unit, and simple docking systems, (jsc Release 74-251) _ _
The TV film “Houston, We Have a Problem” was criticized by former astronaut James A. Lovell, commander of the aborted Apollo 13 moonlanding mission (launched 11 April 1970), in a letter to the NASA Administrator, Dr. James C. Fletcher. The fictitious film focused on the personal lives of the Mission Control team that brought the crippled Apollo 13 spacecraft back to earth. Lovell said the film was “in poor taste”; the safe return of Apollo 13 was one of NASA’s finest hours and “it is not necessary to resort to soap opera plots to enliven the . . . story.” (Carmody, W Post, 1 March 74, C7)
Intention to nominate Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as Administrator of the new Energy Research and Development Administration was announced by President Ford as part of a major reshuffling of key energy posts. Dr. Seamans—former nasa Deputy Administrator, Secretary of the Air Force, and President of the National Academy of Engineering— was reported by the press as selected over former NASA Administrator Thomas 0. Paine and two other candidates to head the new agency replacing the Atomic Energy Commission. Former astronaut and Atomic Energy Commissioner William A. Anders was to be nominated Chairman of the new Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the former aec Chairman, Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, to the new position of Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs. Dr. Seaman’s nomination was sent to the Senate 2 Dec. and confirmed 12 Dec. Anders’ and Dr. Ray’s were sent to the Senate 4 Dec.; Anders’ was confirmed 12 Dec. and Dr. Ray’s 13 Dec. (pd, 4 Nov 74, 1382-3; 9 Dec 74, 1546; CR, 4 Dec 74, S20620; 12 Dec 74, S21317; 13 Dec 74, S21497; O’Toole, W Post, 16 Oct 74, A10; 30 Oct 74, Al)
The Apollo 16 command module (launched 16 April 1972) went on public display at the Alabama Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The CM, called Casper, had carried Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and John W. Young to the moon and back during the fifth successful lunar landing mission. (Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 1)
The first Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), placed on the moon by Apollo 12 astronauts in November 1969, had far exceeded its one-year life expectancy and was still functioning, along with instruments in alsep packages from Apollo 14 through 17, nasa announced. From alsep magnetometers, Dr. Palmer Dyal, Ames Research Center lunar investigator, had calculated that the moon had a magnetic field 1000 times weaker than the earth’s, with an iron content about 9% by weight, in contrast to the earth’s 30%. The heat flow measured by alsep instruments was half the earth’s, indicating differentiation and upward concentrations of radioactivity early in the moon’s history. Seismometers had uncovered a new class of moonquakes originating at depths of 100 km or less below the lunar surface. Dr. M. Nafi Toksoz of Massachusetts Institute of Technology earlier had reported that preliminary information indicated the moon had a small core less than 800 km across, lying inside a molten shell 600-1000 km down from the surface, where deep moonquakes had been detected. Seismic, magnetic, and heat-flow data had also suggested that the moon was further along than the earth in its evolutionary history, (nasa Release 74-313; NASA prog off, interview, 17 Nov 75; McElheny, NYT, 18 Nov 74)
The European Space Research Organization decided to award a $226million, six-year contract to vfw—Fokker/ERNo Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor heading a European team to design and develop Spacelab, the reusable, manned laboratory to be carried into orbit on NASA’s space shuttle in the 1980s. The unanimous decision, made at a Paris meeting of esro’s Administrative and Finance Committee, followed six weeks’ evaluation of two industrial proposals. The second proposal had been submitted by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm. The contract provided for delivery of one Spacelab flight unit, fully qualified and ready for installation of experiments, by April 1979. Two engineering models and three sets of ground support equipment and initial spares would also be delivered. Spacelab, to be reusable for 50 missions of 7 to 30 days each, would permit scientists and engineers to work in earth orbit in shirtsleeve comfort and without extensive astronaut training. The first launch was scheduled for 1980. (esro Release, 5 June 74)
Former Mercury astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., the first American to orbit the earth, was elected U.S. Senator from Ohio by a wide margin over his Republican opponent, Ralph J. Perk. Glenn had withdrawn from a 1964 senatorial bid after a fall affected his inner ear. In 1970 he lost the Democratic primary to Howard M. Metzenbaum, who in turn lost the general election to Robert Taft, Jr. Metzenbaum, appointed to fill the vacated seat of William B. Saxhe in September 1973, lost to Glenn in the 1974 Democratic primary. (Farrell, NYT, 6 Nov 74, 37)
Fraudulent transmissions to Johnson Space Center purporting to be from Skylab 4 astronauts, working in the Orbital Workshop since their 16 Nov. 1973 launch, were heard during a telephone call to New York City from Unifi, Inc., in North Carolina. The supposed astronauts described “an approximately 10-megaton explosion” on the spacecraft as they took military photos of silos over Moscow. After the “astronauts” said they were sending scrambled messages “on channel 5 and channel B,” they were heard supposedly speaking to President Nixon at the White House. They acknowledged that their wives had been notified and were being flown to Houston. The voices then reported that their “secret documents and equipment” had been jettisoned. The transmissions then abruptly ended. The press later reported that 12 other persons had heard similar “space messages.” A Houston area telephone company employee was later'taken into custody. (Anderson et al., W Post, 19 Feb 74, B17; jsc Hist Off, interview, 9 Dec 75)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue (launched 16 Nov. 1973 in the final mission to crew the Orbital Workshop) set a new record for the longest manned ' flight time in space, completing 59 days 11 hrs 9 min at 10:10 pm edt and surpassing the time set by Skylab 3 on its 28 July-25 Sept. 1973 mission. Skylab 4 had been given a go-ahead 10 Jan. for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a planned 84-day mission. (A&A 73)
Tass commentator Georgy Sergeyev commented on the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project: The success of Skylab and the first flight of Yuri A. Gagarin, the space walk of Aleksey A. Leonov, and the exploration of the moon by American astronauts, were only “milestones along the road of exploration of outer space.” ASTP would be another step. The joint Soviet-American mission had become possible, not only because of the efforts of scientists, but also because of the “conditions of a favorable political climate established in Soviet-American relations as a result of the fruitful . . . summit meetings.” The main task was to see that “these changes become irreversible.” astp would go a long way toward “making space exploration really internationalist.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 14 Feb 74, B6)
President Nixon was briefed on the space shuttle and the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at Johnson Space Center. Following a tour, the President and Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented the Sky lab 4 astronauts with NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal. Nixon praised the efforts of the “great American scientific, mechanical, and clerical communities” for their contributions to the space program. “You have contributed to . . . the spirit of a great country, which means always look out toward the unknown, go there, take any risk, make any sacrifice, and never be discouraged because sometimes you may fail.” Of the astp, President Nixon said that although systems of government were different, the U.S. wanted “to cooperate with the Russian people and with all the people on the earth in anything that will advance the cause of science, the cause of health, the cause of a better life foT all our children, as well, of course, as the cause of peace.” (jsc Roundup, 29 March 74,1; PD, 25 March 74,345-347)
The leadership of “NASA’s other hero,” former Administrator James E. Webb, was recalled by Julian Scheer, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in the Washington Post: The fifth anniversary of the 20 July 1969 Apollo 11 lunar landing would bring toasts to former astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and others. But it had been Webb’s “incredible leadership” which had made the event possible. Webb had “fought the Bureau of the Budget for every nickel” and usually got his way. In Congress, few believed he was not a scientist or engineer. He dazzled them with his knowledge of the technical as well as his management of the vast NASA program structure. “But it was in the internal workings of NASA where his strength lay.” He had an uncanny knack for “standing back and looking at the big picture.” He never took on a problem without coming up with as many as four options and, for Webb, every option was an opportunity. Abruptly in 1968, Webb resigned. Most of the major Apollo decisions had been made. “Almost shockingly, it was less than a year away from the first manned lunar landing. Had he . . . waited just a while longer, he could have basked in the moment of tremendous glory.” (W Post, 21 July 74, C6)
NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin as Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in the Office of Manned Space Flight, effective 1 Aug. In his new position Griffin would plan for the most economical and flexible operation of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. Griffin, who was Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs before this appointfnent, would be replaced by Dr. Joseph P. Allen, an astronaut assigned to the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. (NASA anno 17 July 75)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton began a 3-wk preflight medical isolation at 12 pm CDT. Called the flight health stabilization plan, the isolation limited the astronauts to specific working and training areas at Johnson Space Center. In offhours they were being housed in special mobile homes. Only previously screened personnel, wearing surgical face masks, could come into face-to-face contact with the astronauts. (JSC Release 75—59: Ezell e£ al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 313)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt, the only scientist astronaut to walk on the moon, had announced his candidacy for U.S. Senator from N. Mex., the Washington Post reported. A Republican, Dr. Schmitt would oppose Democratic Senator Joseph M. Montoya, who was expected to seek reelection. (IF Post, 10 Sept 75)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics presented its Haley Astronautics Award to Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue at the AIAA-American Geophysical Union Conference on the Exploration of the Outer Planets, in St. Louis, Missouri. The award was presented “for demonstrated outstanding courage and skill during the recordbreaking 84-day Skylab mission.” During the mission, which had begun 16 Nov. 1973, the crew had successfully completed 56 experiments, 26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed subsystem objectives, and 13 student investigations. They also collected extensive earth-resources data and logged 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount data, making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 3 Sept 75, 4) 20 September—5 October: Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton and their families visited the U.S.S.R., joining Soviet ASTP cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov and their families for a goodwill tour of the Soviet Union. The two crews had not met since they said goodbye in space during their historic mission [see 15—24 July]. After greetings at the Moscow airport with wide grins, bear hugs, and back slaps, Stafford told the airport crowd in Russian, “We are very pleased to be back in the Soviet Union again. Now we can say our joint work has been fulfilled successfully. I am confident that our flight will serve progress and peace on earth.” During the welcoming ceremonies Boris Petrov, U.S.S.R. Chairman of the Intercosmos Council, told the Americans, “The Soviet people were glad to see your success and are eager to welcome you on earth and in the Soviet Union.” The astronauts, cosmonauts, and their families visited Star City on 21 Sept, to thank the Soviet space community for its work on the ASTP mission. “For 2 years Star City was a second home to us,” Stafford told the crowd of Soviet space workers. “Thank you for all your work.” The astronauts’ families laid flowers at the memorial to Yuri Gagarin, first man to fly in space. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton presented Star City with a plaque bearing the Soviet and American flags and exchanged other gifts with the Soviets. On 22 September Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee, met the ASTP astronauts and cosmonauts at the Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each as “hero” and congratulating them on their historic mission, saying it would “pave the way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the 35min reception he told the crews of his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear arms. “Both sides—the United States and the Soviet side—should make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations, really good, in all aspects, from every point of view,” he said. On 23 Sept, the two crews and their families began a six-city tour of the Soviet Union that took them to Leningrad, Kiev, Volgograd, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tbilisi. Everywhere the crews were swamped by enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of up to 3000 persons waiting on comers and at airports for hours to cheer the spacemen. “The hospitality is fantastic,” Stafford remarked at Volgograd. The New York Times reported that each appearance of the spacemen was greeted with applause and cheering and they responded with waves and autographs. The astronauts ended their Russian tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell press conference back in Moscow. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton praised the “enthusiastic people with warm hearts” they had met during their tour. During the press conference—held exactly 18 yr after the U.S.S.R. had launched the first manmade satellite, Sputnik 7, on 4 Oct. 1957—Stafford encouraged continued cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. in such areas as lunar and planetary exploration, space medicine, space meteorology, and earth environment. The three U.S. astronauts and their families flew to London for an overnight stay before flying back to Houston on 5 Oct. (B Sun, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75; NYT, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75)
NASA announced the appointment of David R. Scott as Director of Flight Research Center to replace Lee R. Scherer, who had become Director of Kennedy Space Center. Scott had been an astronaut on Gemini 8 (16 March 1966), on Apollo 9 (3 — 13 March 1969), and on lunar landing mission Apollo 15 (26 July—7 Aug. 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, Scott served as technical assistant to the Apollo Program Manager at Johnson Space Center, and as special assistant for mission operations and government-furnished equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA anno, 18 April 75)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.), a critic of the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, reported that the Soviet Union had bugged the conversations of U.S. astronauts and technicians at the Moscow space center before the July space flight. Using information received from two sources and confirmed through official channels, Sen. Proxmire said that the bugs were discovered while the astronauts and technicians were watching a televised Soviet hockey game. Wanting a closer view of the game, U.S. astronaut Robert F. Overmyer moved his chair nearer the TV screen, causing a wire leading from the chair into the floor to snap. The Washington Post quoted a spokesman for NASA as confirming the incident, but saying there was no evidence the wire “had anything to do with a listening device.” (AP, W Post, 2 Aug 75; Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 17)
Most of the 40 participants at a space-food exhibition banquet in Zvezdny Gorodok, U.S.S.R., found the meal tasty but not very filling, the Washington Post reported. Presiding over the affair, cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, Soviet commander for the scheduled July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, said that after the third day of spaceflight, when an astronaut’s appetite improved, he could consume four meals a day. The banquet menu included fruit juices, coffee, borsch, cabbage soup, bite-sized bread, and a compote of cucumber, chicken necks, and kidney. During the dinner Leonov revealed that the Soyuz 18 cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, launched 24 May and in orbit aboard the Salyut 4 space station, would continue in orbit during the ASTP mission and would probably remain in orbit for another month. (Piper, W Post, 27 June 75, A2)
The development of space law, which had begun about the time of the launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 in 1957, was a unique process. “The problems are both literally and symbolically out of this world,” NASA General Counsel Neil S. Hosenball said in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Star. Does any state have the right to claim the natural resources of celestial bodies? Were earth’s criminal and civil laws applicable in space? What was the difference between establishing a planetary base and planting a nation’s flag? Which court would rule on extraterrestrial squabbles? These were some of the questions lawyers and politicians would have to consider in the space age. Few precedents existed, and no judge had yet heard a case in a legal dispute originating outside the earth’s atmosphere. In fact, a world court, recognized by all major powers, did not exist. In 1962, a United Nations ad hoc committee on peaceful uses of outer space had developed principles later incorporated into the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. These included a ban against military activity in outer space and against any nation’s claiming a section of space or a planet as its own. Other treaties dealt with specific points such as the rescue of astronauts and the registration of spacecraft and space stations. Hosenball stressed that most charters and treaties were drawn up ahead of time in anticipation of problems likely to occur as space exploration expanded. The Sentinel quoted G. P. Zhukov, chief legal counsel of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, as saying that detente between , the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had been assisted by the success of “legal regulation in space. . . . Man’s foot had not yet stepped on the surface of-the moon and we had already formulated what man could and could not do on the moon. The law was ahead of science.” (Orlando Sentinel Star, 12 Aug 75)
President Ford, in a White House ceremony, presented the National Space Club’s Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Skylab 4 Commander Gerald P. Carr on behalf of the nine astronauts who inhabited the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched 14 May 1973) during periods in 1973 and 1974. The astronauts were cited for their “exceptional accomplishments in the Skylab program .... When the entire mission was jeopardized the first crew, through uncommon ingenuity, saved the mission. The scientific content of the program is of extraordinary significance, in all disciplines. The demonstration that men can live and work in space for extended periods sets the stage for future exploration of space.” At the Space Club’s 18th annual Goddard memorial dinner, the following awards were presented: Award Recipient (Affiliation) Citation Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Memorial Trophy NASA Skylab Astronauts Charles P. Conrad Joseph P. Kerwin Paul J. Weitz Alan L. Bean Owen K. Garriott Jack R. Lousma Gerald P. Carr Edward G. Gibson William R. Pogue For their exceptional accomplishments in Skylab program Astronautics Engineer Award John M. Thole (NASA) For direction of the OSO and ATS programs Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award NASA-Fairchild Industries Ats 6 team For demonstration of a significant advance in space communications Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship Dr. Bruce F. Smith (NASA) For demonstrated abilities in addressing, theoretically and experimentally, a broad range of astrophysical problems Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Scholarship Alice K. Babcock (Georgetown Univ.) To continue higher scientific education Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Historical Essay James E. Oberg (USAF) For essay, “Russia Meant to Win the Moon Race?” Nat’l Space Club Press Award Roy Neal (NBC) For resourcefulness in reporting the U.S. space effort {PD, 14 April 75, 372; program)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Donald K. Slayton, and Vance D. Brand participated in a 9-hr exercise at Kennedy Space Center to test the Apollo spacecraft’s internal systems, earth-landing systems, and instrument packages. The astronauts climbed into the Apollo, which was inside a huge altitude chamber, to test the systems at simulated altitudes of up to 61 000 m while cabin pressure was maintained at 34 474 newtons per sq m. Pressure inside the cabin was also lowered to zero to test the integrity of the astronauts’ space suits. On 16 Jan. the U.S. backup crew for the mission, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma, participated in a similar exercise. (/VASA Activities, Feb 75, 11; KSC Release 5—75)
Doctors had rechecked x-rays of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s lungs taken before the 15 July launch and found that they also had shown a shadow revealed by postflight x-rays, Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, NASA’s ASTP physician, said at a Johnson Space Center press briefing. Dr. Nicogossian said that the spot had not been noticed before because the x-rays were difficult to read and the spot had been covered by normal vasculature and bony structure. Only a 6 Aug. tomogram [see 25 Aug.] had verified that the shadow was a lesion. Dr. Nicogossian said the nitrogen tetroxide inhaled by the ASTP astronauts during reentry [see 15—26 July] had not been shown to have caused or increased the size of the lesion. Dr. Nicogossian added that, if cancer were diagnosed during the surgery, the usual medical procedure was to remove a part of the lobe, but he did not think that would prevent Slayton from flying in the future. Slayton said that he felt “pretty damn lucky” that the lesion had been discovered when it was. “This thing could have been discovered before the flight. . . . And I could have easily gotten jerked off the flight, so that would have been bad. Secondly, if we hadn’t had the gas in the cockpit on reentry, . . . [the doctors] could very easily not have picked this thing up until my next annual physical which is 6 or 8 months off.” Then it would have been a “lot tougher” to fix. Slayton, one of the seven original U.S. astronauts, had been grounded in 1962 because of an erratic heart rate, first detected in 1959, but had been returned to flight status March 1972 in time for assignment to ASTP. He told the briefing that he hoped to be out of the hospital within 7 days and back to work in 2 wk, and on flight status again within a month. (Transcript, ASTP PC—63, 20 Aug 75)
NASA and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had agreed on a joint tour of the U.S. and the Soviet Union by the 5 crew members of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission [see 15—26 July], U.S. astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton would join Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov on 21 Sept, in Moscow for a 2-wk tour of the U.S.S.R. Plans for the U.S. tour were not disclosed. (NASA Release 75—230) In another paper Rango reported that low-resolution meteorological satellite data and high-resolution earth-re sources satellite data had been used to map a snow-covered area over Wyoming mountains. Predictions based on satellite data of the April through June 1972 streamflow were within 3% of the actual total. Also, composite results from 2 yr of data over the mountains indicated that Landsat snowcover observations could be useful in predicting runoff and seasonal streamflow. James C. Barnes of Environmental Research and Technology, Inc., reported that the earth resources experiment package (EREP) flown aboard the 1973—74 Skylab Orbital Workshop missions had provided the first opportunity to examine reflectance characteristics of snowcover in several spectral bands from the visible to the near infrared. Results indicated that near-infrared methods could distinguish between snow and water droplet clouds and could detect areas of melting snow. (NASA Hq WB, 28 Feb 76, 2; NASA SP—391, text) The evidence was consistent with calculations made in 1971 by Canadian astronomer Dr. Michael W. Ovenden. Dr. Ovenden’s studies of irregularities in the orbits of planets, especially Uranus and Neptune, suggested that a major disruptive event had occurred in the solar system approximately 16 million yrs ago. He had arrived at this time by age-dating carbon-bearing meteorites that had fallen to earth, and theorized that the event could be explained by the explosion of a huge planet 90 times the size of earth. During the meeting Dr. Stuart Bowyer, Univ. of Calif, astronomer, surprised the 740 astronomers attending the meeting by reporting that a Univ. of Calif, telescope flown aboard the Apollo spacecraft during the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [see 15—26 July] had picked up the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation of a star. EUV, a small segment of the spectrum between normal ultraviolet and x-rays, had been considered by astronomers as practically invisible because of probable absorption by interstellar dust and gas. Dr. Bowyer said that the EUV had come from a white dwarf star 300 light yrs away in the constellation Coma Berenices. (NASA Gen Mgmt Review Rpt, 18 Aug 75, 9; Alexander, LA Times, 26 Aug 75)
Canada would develop the remote manipulator system (RMS) for NASA’s Space Shuttle to permit astronauts inside the Shuttle Orbiter to deploy or retrieve payloads in space, NASA announced. Canada would fund the $30 million project, providing the first flight unit to NASA without charge in 1979. Canada would also supply flight units for follow-on Orbiters. Costs for these units would not include charges for Canada’s research and development. (NASA Release 75 — 135)
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) inserted into the Congressional Record a summary of the Central Intelligence Agency’s report on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The summary indicated that “although the Soviet have experienced many space problems the prospects for a successful mission are good.” The report continued that the Soviet preparations were more extensive and thorough than for previous efforts, and that past failures had occurred at a phase during the mission which would not jeopardize U.S. astronauts should there be a recurrence. The report did point out that the Soviets had encountered severe problems in space. (CR, 14 July 75, S12511)
Marshall Space Flight Center was seeking industry proposals for procurement of parallel definition studies of the atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space (AMPS) payload, a reusable research facility to be integrated with Spacelab. The proposed 12-mo studies were to define an overall AMPS program with special emphasis on ground- and flight-support systems and subsystems, systems engineering and integration, and ground/orbital operations with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. AMPS, a single laboratory system flown with the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments and observations in atmospheric science, magnetospheric physics, and plasma physics. (MSFC Release 75—172) 4—6 August: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, at its 1975 aircraft systems and technology meeting in Los Angeles, Calif., presented the following aerospace awards. Award Recipient (affiliation) Purpose Aircraft Design Walter E. Fellers (Northrop Corp.) For 30 yr of outstanding achievement in design and development of fighter aircraft to meet rapidly changing requirements Octave Chanute Alan L. Bean Jack R. Lousma Dr. Owen K. Garriott (NASA Skylab 3 astronauts) For outstanding contributions to manned space flight and scientific research. Using the most sophisticated instruments ever flown in space, crew performed scores of scientific experiments and observations vastly expanding man’s knowledge and enhancing quality of life on earth 38th Annual Wright Brothers Lecture Henri Ziegler (Airbus, France) Topic: International Cooperation in Aerospace Projects: cooperation between European industries and between Europe and United States (AIAA Release, 22 July 75)
The U.S.S.R.’s Baykonur cosmodrome, located in the city of Leninsk near Tyuratam, was three to four times as big as Kennedy Space Center, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander Thomas P. Stafford said at an ASTP press briefing at Johnson Space Center. ASTP astronaut Vance D. Brand said that 50 000 persons inhabited the launch complex. The briefing followed the crew’s return from the Soviet Union where they had participated in the final training session before the scheduled July launch [see 14—30 April]. The astronauts said that at the Soviet spaceport they had been shown “everything we had a requirement to see,” the launch pad, spacecraft, test and checkout facilities, automatic checkout equipment (ACE) rooms, and crew quarters. The one “drastic difference” between the tour received by the Soviet cosmonauts in the U.S. and that of the American astronauts in the U.S.S.R., said Stafford, was “we didn’t go to Disneyland over there.” Astronaut Donald K. Slayton described the launch pad as “relatively simple.” The spacecraft, assembled on top of a railroad car, was hauled to the pad about 4 days before launch. The stacked vehicle was jacked up and set on the pad; after checkout, the vehicle was rotated to the proper launch azimuth. The booster was held to the pad by four support arms which were popped out of the way by counterweights once the vehicle started to move. Stafford said that Leninsk was a new city built in a desert. The continued construction activity indicated that the Soviets “are not slowing down one bit in their space program.” The Soviets had told their U.S. counterparts that they would continue to have several manned flights a year operating in low earth orbit. (Transcript)
NASA announced retirement from military service of NASA Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974) astronauts Gerald P. Carr and William R. Pogue effective September 1. Carr, a Marine Corps colonel, would remain with NASA as a civilian astronaut. Pogue, an Air Force colonel and an astronaut since April 1966, would leave NASA to become a vice president of High Flight, an interdenominational evangelistic foundation founded by former astronaut James R. Irwin. As crew members on Skylab 4 Pogue and Carr, along with Dr. Edward G. Gibson, share the world record for individual time in space of 2017 hr 15 min 32 sec. Pogue’s departure would reduce the number of NASA astronauts to 31. (NASA Release 75—233)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $59 950 contract to Abbott Laboratories for living human kidney cells to be used by U.S. astronauts in the German electrophoresis experiment during the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Abbott Laboratories would provide the cells as part of an experiment to find a way to isolate effectively the one kidney cell in 20 that produced the enzyme urokinase, an enzyme capable of dissolving blood clots. Because gravity made such separations difficult on earth, scientists hoped to develop new technology in the zero-g environment of space. The experiment was being developed, built, and tested by West Germany’s Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm Gmbtt. (MSFC Releases 75- 7, 75-13) mobile launcher inside the Vehicle Assembly Building on 13 Jan. Engineers began electrical and mechanical systems tests on the first stage and installed flame curtains and panels to shroud the outboard engines. The Saturn IVB second stage was mated to the booster 14 Jan. and the instrument unit added to the stack 16 Jan. A boilerplate unit simulating the Apollo command module was added 17 Jan. The boilerplate would be removed and replaced with the actual spacecraft, and the rollout of the entire vehicle to the launch pad was scheduled for March. The docking system and docking module were mated 17 Jan. after combined systems tests. The complete unit would be placed into the spacecraft adapter in February. Swing-arm launch-control center integration was completed 21 Jan. (KSC Release 165—74; MSFC Release 75—19; Spaceport News, 23 Jan 75, 3; 6 Feb 75, 3; Marshall Star, 2 Jan 75, 2)
The upper stage and instrument unit of the Saturn IB rocket that carried the U.S. astronauts into orbit for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project reentered the earth’s atmosphere at 9:45 pm EDT. The 14 100-kg stage and instrument unit, empty of 320 cu m of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, broke into pieces as they reentered over the Pacific Ocean. Reentry was activated by ground commands; excess fuel was dumped through the engine, slowing the stage and ensuring that disintegration came in a remote ocean area. (MSFC Release 75 — 160)
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)
Scientists believed that light flashes observed by Skylab 4 crew members during their 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974 mission as they flew through the South Atlantic Anomaly—a slight asymmetry in the earth’s magnetic field where the Van Allen radiation belt dipped unusually low over Brazil—were a previously unsuspected form of radiation, Science magazine reported. The radiation seemed to consist of atomic nuclei heavier than hydrogen which, when stripped of electrons, would carry multiple positive electric charges. The astronauts had seen the flashes when the spacecraft cabin was dark and they were preparing for sleep. Scientists suspected that the flashes were stimulated within the retina of the eye by the high-energy cosmic-ray particles. Normally earth was shielded from cosmic rays by the magnetic field, but strong penetrating cosmic rays could reach as far into the field as the Skylab orbit. Because the magnetic-field shielding of the earth weakened toward the geomagnetic poles, it was possible to predict variations in cosmic-ray exposure as Skylab moved away from the poles. During two test periods, light-flash observations of Astronaut William R. Pogue showed a close correlation with exposure variations. (Pinsky et al., Science, 30 May 75, 928—930; Sullivan, NYT, 29 May 75, 10) The new space agency’s symbol was a rounded “e,” for European, on a globe representing earth, with fine lines suggesting both orbit and axis and a white dot representing a satellite in space. (ESRO—ESA Releases 20 May 75, 23 May 75, 2 June 75) 30 May—8 June: The 31st Annual Paris Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport in France. New restrictions on flight demonstrations by high-performance aircraft, imposed by the French government after the 1973 Air Show crash of the Soviet Tu —144 supersonic transport, had placed the show’s emphasis on displays of the latest aerospace hardware and technology from throughout the world. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the general turndown in the economy throughout the western world had caused a decline of 20% in exhibitors from the 1973 show. France emphasized the cooperative nature of its major programs, displaying the French—British Concorde SST, the French—German Alpha Jet trainer-attack aircraft, the French—British Jaguar close-air support aircraft, and the multinational A—300B twin-engine wide-body transport. The U.S. pavilion reflected the changing environment at the show, reserving 66% of its floor space for company exhibits restricted to industry visitors; the remaining 33% contained exhibits open to the general public. In 1973 60% was exhibitor space and 40% for the general public. Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. displayed aircraft that were potential replacements for the Boeing 707 and McDonnell DC— 8 on commercial airlines. The Boeing aircraft, a three-engine member of the 7X7 family, incorporated the NASA-developed supercritical wing. “Blue Planet” was the theme of the public section of the U.S. pavilion which emphasized technological fallout and practical uses on earth of space technology. Included were full-scale models of the Viking spacecraft scheduled for launch to Mars later in the year, and of Martin Marietta Corp.’s large space telescope. The 80 participating British companies emphasized their country’s capability in avionics and equipment and aerospace technology. Among the new aircraft exhibited by the British were the BN2 Islander, a floating aircraft for service between islands; the Lock-spieser LDA— 1, for cargo and agricultural uses; and a new version of the BAC 111 fighter aircraft. West Germany’s display stressed its participation in international consortiums as a major hope for continuing growth. Messerschmitt— Boelkow—Blohm GmbH pointed out in its display that 70% of its revenues in 1974 had been derived from multinational projects. (Av Wk, 2 June 75, 14-20; 9 June 75, 12-17)
NASA announced that the U.S. tour by the five Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crewmembers had been postponed to 13 Oct. because of astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s scheduled lung surgery. The crew’s tour of the U.S.S.R., scheduled to begin 22 Sept., would continue on schedule [see 15 Aug.]. (NASA Release 75—236)
Air Force Systems Command Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory scientists were studying changes in human body weights and sizes as part of a NASA-requested anthropometric study to help engineers design cockpits and crew stations for future use. NASA engineers who wanted to lay out the Space Shuttle work station were concerned that body sizes of the pilots might change before the station was used. The scientists performing the study, using both current data and data that went back as far as the Civil War, estimated that in 1985 a pilot would average nearly 2 kg heavier and 1.5 cm taller than in 1967, when he had weighed 78.5 kg and was 177 cm tall. In addition to statistics, NASA requested drawing board manikins for designing the Shuttle’s work areas. The study had produced two 2dimensional manikins like cardboard dolls with movable joints; each manikin was articulated in nine places to represent typical ranges of body movement. A 95% manikin represented a person 189.0 cm tall; a 5% manikin, representing a 168.3-cm astronaut or pilot, was designed so that only 5% of the 1985 pilot-astronaut population would be smaller. An engineer using both manikins could design a crew station or cockpit that would accommodate 90% of all astronauts and pilots. (AFSC Release OIP 072.75)
The lung condition of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, who had inhaled nitrogen tetroxide fumes during Apollo reentry [see 15— 24 July], had improved, NASA Flight Surgeon Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian told reporters at a crew-status briefing. The astronauts had been transferred from the intensive-care unit of Tripler Hospital to other hospital quarters. Astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s x-rays showed a 70 to 80% improvement in the condition of his lungs; astronauts Vance D. Brand and Thomas P. Stafford had improved, but not as much. (ASTP Transcript PC—58)
The Saturn IB, used to launch three U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts into space [see 15—24 July], had experienced no unscheduled holds whatever during countdown, making it the most perfect launch of the Saturn series, Ellery B. May, manager of the Saturn Program Office at the Marshall Space Flight Center, said. Saturn 210, manufactured in 1967, was 10th of the IB series and had the oldest engine used. All Saturn launches had been successful and had met their objectives; although some had anomalies, such as leaks or faulty wiring, no major configuration changes were ever necessary. The ASTP mission marked the end of the Saturn series, but its impact on technology would continue. “Space Shuttle main engines (SSME) are an outgrowth of technology from Saturn engines,” May explained. The major difference between the two was that the Shuttle must have much higher pressure systems than ever before required and must be reusable. (MSFC Release 75 — 174)
Studies of the heavy particle cosmic-ray exposure received by the astronauts during the nine Apollo lunar orbital missions revealed a significant variation in exposure as a function of the amount of shielding and the phase of the solar cycle, Science magazine reported. The command module pilot, who remained in the spacecraft while the two other crew members landed on the moon, had received the least exposure. The ankle, the least shielded part of the body, received a higher exposure than the chest, which had greater shielding. A sharp rise in exposure had been evident beginning with Apollo 14 when mission times increased. Observed variations in flux from mission to mission—the flux during Apollo 16 and 17 was 2.4 times higher than Apollo 8 through 12—was attributed to solar modulation of the primary cosmic ray beam. Data obtained during the Apollo missions would be used for planning long-range missions and for estimating expected biological damage. (Benton et al., Science, Vol. 187, 263—5)
Successful lung surgery performed 26 Aug. on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Astronaut Donald K. Slayton revealed no evidence of malignancy, the Johnson Space Center Roundup reported. During the 2.5-hr surgery, doctors at the Texas Medical Center removed a triangular wedge that included the 4-mm nodule detected during postflight x-rays [see 20 Aug.] plus a small amount of normal surrounding tissue. Adjacent lymph nodes were biopsied and found normal; doctors found no signs of any other lesions. Slayton would remain in the hospital for 7 to 10 more days. (JSC Roundup, 29 Aug. 75,1)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronaut Donald K. Slayton entered Texas Medical Center to undergo exploratory surgery for a small lesion on his left lung. NASA physicians had discovered the lesion in x-rays taken during the astronaut’s postflight recovery from gas inhalation [see 25 July]. Slayton’s x-rays had shown a complete clearing of lung infiltrates but revealed a 4-mm discrete shadow. Specialized x-rays, called tomograms, taken 6 Aug. had confirmed that the shadow was indeed a lesion and not a part of the normal lung structure. NASA physicians, conferring with chest specialists at the Texas Medical Center, recommended surgery; all the doctors agreed that the lesion had not resulted from the gas inhalation. (JSC Release 75-69)
Rockwell International Corp. announced that its Electronics Research Div., under a contract awarded by NASA on 18 Feb. 1974, had developed a single-chip bubble-domain memory element with a capacity of 102 400 bits, believed to be the largest capacity memory device ever built. The new data recorder—a major milestone in NASA’s continuing program to develop an all-solid-state data recorder for future U. S. spacecraft—was one-third the size and one-half the weight of current equipment. It was expected to use half the power and have 10 times the life expectancy of present recorders. Objective of the effort was to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating high-capacity memory elements with reasonable yield and operating margins. (Rockwell Int’l Release ERD-1; LaRC proj off, interview, 18 Jan 77) 22 May—7 June: The U.S. and Peru launched more than 40 sounding rockets and balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for the Inca god of flight, to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere from Chilca Launch Range in Peru, a location on the magnetic equator where the earth’s magnetic field is horizontal. Instruments aboard the rockets and balloons measured the composition of the neutral and ionized atmosphere, density and temperature, wind shear, and turbulence. The measurements would be compared with data from Explorer 51 (Atmosphere Explorer—C, launched 15 Dec. 1973) and the ground-based Jicamarca and Huancayo Observatories. Tbe overall mission included the launch of 4 Nike-Tomahawks, 8 Nike-Apaches, 7 Super Areas, and 10 Super Lokis, as well as two balloons measuring 36 m in diameter and 12 ozonesonde balloons. Project Antarqui was a continuation of a NASA sounding-rocket program conducted during the 1964— 65 International Quiet Sun Year when 77 sounding rockets had been launched during the first 4 mo of 1965 from a sea-going launch platform, the USNS Croatan. Wallops Flight Center managed the program for NASA; the Instituto Geofisico del Peru arranged for the use of the range, supplied range operation and logistics support in Peru, correlated ground-based measurements from Jicamarca and Huancayo, assisted in recovery operations, and performed some preliminary work at the range. In addition to WFC, Goddard Space Flight Center, Dudley Observatory, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Univ. of 111., Penn. State Univ., Univ. of Denver, and GCA Corp. supplied scientific payloads for the sounding rockets and balloons. (WFC Release 75—6; NASA Activities, June 75, 14; WFC proj mgr, interviews, 11—12 Jan 75) 24 May—26 July: Tne U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 18, carrying cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 7:58 pm local time (10:58 amEDT). According to the Tassnews agency, the spacecraft entered orbit with a 247-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the purpose of the mission was “to conduct further experiments with the orbital research station ‘Salyut—4,’ started on January 12, during the joint flight of the delivery spaceship ‘Soyuz—17’ and the station ‘Salyut—4’ as well as to test individual elements and systems of the spaceship in various modes of flight.” During the first day in orbit Klimuk and Sevastyanov checked out essential spacecraft and life-support systems and prepared for orbital maneuvering. The crew switched on the main engines twice on 25 May to raise the spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and docking with Salyut 4. On 26 May Soyuz 18 approached the station by an automatic control system. At a distance of 100 km the crew took over control and manually docked the spacecraft with the Salyut 4 station in pitch darkness. After docking, the crew switched on the station’s lights and began activation and checkout of the onboard systems. The crew transferred equipment and boarded the station where they found a “Welcome to our common home” sign left by the station’s previous tenants, Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and Georgy Grechko. The cosmonauts reported that all systems were operating normally and that they themselves were in good health. By 28 May the station and spacecraft were in an orbit with a 349-km apogee, 338-km perigee, 91.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. During their 63 days in orbit, the cosmonauts studied the sun, planets, and stars in various bands of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation using several x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; investigated geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, photographing the U.S.S.R. in the medium and southern latitudes; studied physical processes in the earth’s atmosphere and in space; performed medical and biological research with particular emphasis on the impact of weightlessness on the human organism; and tested the station’s design and onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised a garden of onions and peas as a forerunner of providing self-sufficient food supplies in space. Tass reported that, for the first time during a space flight, the polar fights were investigated using integral photography and spectrography methods. Twice during the mission Klimuk and Sevastyanov spoke with cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov who were also in orbit participating in the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project begun 15 July. By 23 July the cosmonauts were preparing the space station for automatic operation. On 26 July at 3:56 pm Baykonur time (6:56 am EDT), Soyuz 18 and its crew undocked from Salyut 4. They softlanded 56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan at 7:18 pm Baykonur time (10:18 am EDT). ' Tass reported that by 27 July the cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood pressure fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned to normal. Decreases in erythrocytes and increases in leucocytes disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and resistance to functional tests had almost reached preflight baselines. Both Klimuk and Sevastyanov had lost some weight—3.8 kilograms and 1.9 kilograms respectively—during the mission. The Soyuz 18 crew’s 62-day 23-hr 40-min mission broke the previous 29-day 13-hr 20-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 17. The current world’s record for time in space was held by the Skylab 4 astronauts for their 84-day 1-hr 16-min mission, 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974. Salyut 4, which had been visited by the two crews of Soyuz 17 and 18, was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station on 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted experiments for 24 days but were killed during a reentry accident. Salyut 2 was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion of wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 and a two-man crew, carried by Soyuz 14, lived and worked aboard the station from 3—19 July 1974. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. 1974, returned to earth in 48 hr after an unsuccessful attempt to dock with the station, which itself reentered the earth’s atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 24 May— 28 July 75; GSFC WklySSR, 22—28 May 75; AP, B Sun, 27 July 75, A3; Lib of Congress, “S&T News Alert,” No 2600, 19 Sept 75) 27 May—14 June: A one-third-scale model of the Space Shuttle Orbiter was tested in Ames Research Center’s 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel, to gather low-speed flight data in support of approach and landing tests of the first full-scale Orbiter at Flight Research Center in 1977. In addition, data were gathered to calibrate the vehicle’s air data probes. The model, built by Shuttle prime contractor Rockwell International Corp., was 13.1 m long and weighed 20 400 kg. Additional wind-tunnel tests were scheduled for November 1975 and February 1976. (4-Strogram, 5 June 75, 1; Young, JSC aerodynamic subsystems mgr, interview, 21 April 77) In a speech, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Union M. Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s intention to play an important role in the peaceful uses of outer space; the programs of ESRO—ESA offered a particularly well chosen range of satellites for research and applications. Y. Demerliac, Secretary General of Eurospace—Groupement In-dustriel Europeen D’Etudes Spatiales—reminded the audience that since 1962 Europe had developed 43 satellites, including four communications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of the 104 ground stations or antennas in the network of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). More than two-thirds of these had been sold to non-European countries. Director General of ESRO Roy Gibson (United Kingdom) said the creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: the convention of the new agency gave it a specific mandate to work toward a rationalization of Europe’s space program which its predecessors ESRO and ELDO (European Launcher Development Organization) did not have. He hoped that the 3-day presentation of ESRO— ESA and other European programs would give the visitors an impression of the total competence and capability of Europe’s up-to-date, rather dispersed space effort. (ESRO Release 28 May 75)
At a Moscow exhibition of space art to commemorate the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, Soviet art glorified man’s role in space, whereas U.S. art emphasized technology, the Baltimore Sun reported. U.S. artists, commissioned by NASA and the National Gallery of Art to record the space program, showed basically factual treatments of blastoffs, launch towers, and mazes of steel gridwork. Artist Alden Wicks depicted Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building as “The New Olympus.’’ Men played subordinate roles in U.S. art; they swarmed through control centers or, as in Jamie Wyeth’s “Firing Room,” sat by the dozens in front of individual TV monitors. Engineers ministered to launch vehicles like priests before an idol. Even in the pen-and-ink drawings of individual astronauts, faces were diminished by the detailed minutiae of spacesuit and life-support paraphernalia. By contrast, man dominated the Soviet art. Artist Anatoly Yakushin depicted pioneer rocket theoretician Konstantin Tsiolkovsky against a geometric maze, but man controlled the idea. A painting by Boris Okorokov showed a young flight controller commanding abstract equipment, in contrast to Wyeth’s passive TV-monitor watchers. The irony of the two artistic visions was that they “reverse the technological visions of the nations’ manned space programs,” the Sun said. In reality, U.S. flights left much of the flying up to the astronauts, while the Soviets had kept their cosmonauts as passive as possible. Also included in the exhibition were paintings by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, the only one of the artists who had seen outer space. He painted cosmic scenes in brilliant colors: His deep space was not a flat black, but a composite of black and indigo, streaked with magenta and stars with violet coronas. The Leonov earth as seen from space was deep marbled blue with atmospheric sheaths surrounding it in hard-edged layers, pale hues close to the planet, darkening in stages to the night of Space. (B Sun, 16 July 75, A4)
During recovery operations of the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, the Apollo spacecraft would not be retrieved by helicopter as usual on Apollo missions, Dr. Donald E. Stullken, chief of Johnson Space Center’s Mission Support Branch, said during a press briefing. Instead, the recovery ship would steam up alongside the command module and haul it aboard using the ship’s boat and aircraft crane. Navy personnel would open the hatch and the crew would step out on the ship’s deck. Arnold D. Aldrich, deputy manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at JSC, said that the most extensive modification required for the ASTP mission was redesigning the Soyuz spacecraft to accommodate the newly added docking system. The front end of the Soyuz had been modified with respect to structural configuration, thermal design, and the requirement to fit all the new system under the launch shroud that covered the entire Soyuz during the boost phase. John E. McLeaish, JSC Public Affairs Officer, said that NASA would provide U.S. and Soviet air-to-ground communications, air-to-air communications, and U.S.- and U.S.S.R.-originated commentary for newsmen during the mission. All Russian would be translated simultaneously into English, using a “voice-over” technique; a few communication lines would transmit raw Russian with no translation. The U.S.S.R. would provide an interpreter to assist newsmen in the U.S. with interpretation or explanation, if necessary. Questioned about the political significance of the ASTP mission, U.S. crew member Donald K. Slayton replied, “I think we’d be naive to assume that this program is going to end all conflicts between our two societies, certainly. I think . . . it’s a step in that direction, but there’s little doubt in my mind that we’re going to continue to have conflicts in many different areas. However, if we can kind of break the ground and get at least one area where we continue to work constructively on something, we’re certainly not going to end up in any major confrontation.” (Transcripts)
Former astronaut William R. Pogue (USAF, Ret.) received the 1974 Thomas D. White Space Trophy during ceremonies at the National Geographic Society Headquarters in Washington, D.C. Pogue received the trophy—given annually to the military or civilian member of the Air Force who made an outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace—for his achievements as pilot of Skylab 4, third and final mission aboard the U.S.’s first manned orbiting workshop. The mission (16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974), longest manned flight in history, had established the foundation for future long-term missions in space. Pogue had retired from both the Air Force and the astronaut corps on 1 Sept. (DOD Release 456 —75)
The U.S.S.R. had turned down a U.S. invitation to participate in another joint manned space mission in 1976, Thomas O’Toole of the Washington Post reported a U.S. space official as saying. O’Toole reported that in 1974 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low had suggested to Soviet Academy of Sciences President Vladimir Kotelnikov that two Soviet cosmonauts and three American astronauts dock with a Soviet Salyut space station and work together in earth orbit for up to 2 wk. However, the Soviets had replied that they would undertake a repeat of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for 15 July launch) but could not prepare to fly an Apollo-Salyut in any reasonable length of time. The Post quoted Dr. Low as saying, “Any second American—Russian space flight will have to wait until the 1980s.” The Post also quoted Dr. Low as saying that NASA had suggested an Apollo-Salyut mission as early as 1971, but the Soviets had requested a change back to an Apollo-Soyuz mission during a presummit meeting in April 1972 just before President Nixon’s Moscow visit. Dr. Low said that the Soviets had said that it was too expensive to modify Salyut to accept both a Soyuz and an Apollo spacecraft at the same time. (O’Toole, W Post, 14 July 75, Al)
Soyuz 20, the unmanned Soviet spacecraft launched from Baykonur 17 Nov., docked automatically withSalyut 4 using onboard radio devices and computer installations for a program of “testing unit constructions and onboard systems. . .in joint flight,” Tass announced. Salyut 4, the orbiting space station, had been visited by the crew of Soyuz 17 for almost 30 days and by the crew of Soyuz 18 for more than 60 days. The Soyuz 20 mission had been analyzed as transfer of fuel to Salyut 4; in orbit since 26 Dec. 1974, the space station was thought to be running low on maneuvering fuel. Reporters had speculated that a new two-man crew might be sent to Salyut 4 later this year for a stay of 3 mo or longer that would break the 84-day record set by U.S. astronauts in 1974. The value of the automatic docking for resupply would be the economy of not sending men with each flight, although the Soviets had never indicated the cost of their launches. Tass reported that the “space complex Salyut-4— Soyuz-20” was in an orbit with apogee 367 km, perigee 343 km, 51.6° inclination, and 91.4 min period of revolution. (IF Post, 21 Nov 75, B14; NYT, 21 Nov 75, 25; FBIS No. 225, 19 Nov 75, No. 226, 20 Nov 75; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 108) 19 November—23 December: Atmosphere Explorer—E, third in a series of new deep-dipper spacecraft designed to investigate the ionosphere, was launched from Eastern Test Range aboard a Delta vehicle at 9:07 pm EST (0206GMT) into an almost perfect orbit: apogee, 3026 km; perigee, 157 km; inclination, 19.7°; period, 118.1 min. In orbit the satellite became Explorer 55. Major difference between the original and new generation of atmosphere explorers was the unusually large onboard propulsion system that enabled the later spacecraft to move themselves up or down in space by hundreds of km or go from highly elliptical to circular orbits. The name “deep-dippers” meant that the spacecraft could drop into the atmosphere and pull out again, taking measurements only while in the upper reaches of the thermosphere. This region, important because it absorbed most ultraviolet light and heat received from the sun and because movement of that heat determined the structure of the upper atmosphere, had been difficult to study because the altitude was too high for all aircraft and most balloons and too low for other satellites. The dipping orbit prevented accumulation of excessive heat in the metal skins of the AE spacecraft. Explorer 55 would also carry a backscatter ultraviolet spectrophotometer to obtain a vertical profile and density measurements of the ozone layer between 20°N and S; the measurements would be compared with those from Nimbus 4, launched in 1970, to evaluate the long-term accuracy of the Nimbus instrumentation. A mission operations report 23 Dec. said Explorer 55 had completed more than 400 orbits and all subsystems were performing well. (NASA Release 75— 290, 70-29, 72-212; KSC Release 266-75; SBD, 21 Nov 75, 114; KSC Spaceport News, 31 Oct 75, 3; MORs 13 Nov 75, 3 Dec 75, 23 Dec 75)
The unexplained loss of calcium by astronauts during prolonged manned missions “seems to be a slow persistent loss,” Dr. David L. Winter, NASA Director for Life Sciences, said during a press briefing. Data indicated calcium had been lost in space at the rate of 0.5% a month, a rate that showed “no evidence of leveling off.” Bones tended to lose calcium at varying rates, weakening selective bones. Scientists were studying various ways, including diet management, to compensate for the calcium loss. Dr. Winter said that the observed decrease in red blood cells during the Skylab missions was not because of red-cell destruction but rather a slowdown of the red-cell production. “We seem to have stumbled on a way in which red blood cell production is suppressed.” This mechanism, unknown before, would be a very interesting and important process to study. ' Physical criteria for the selection of astronauts for the Space Shuttle would vary according to function, Dr. Winter said. Pilots would be selected using very rigid criteria; these would not be imposed upon astronauts, i.e. mission specialists, whose function would be primarily scientific. Because the objective for Shuttle missions would be to get the best qualified scientists, it would be impossible to predict what size, shape, age, or sex these scientists would be. The purpose of the Shuttle was to permit anyone with a legitimate need to go into space; therefore, NASA’s approach would be to broaden the selection criteria as much as possible. (Transcript)
A planet’s size and bulk might be more important than its location in the solar system in determining whether it can support life, Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said in a New York Times article. Conventional scientific thought had always been that the chance of life’s evolving on a planet was narrowly restricted by the planet’s distance from its parent star. However, planetology—the study of comparative geology of the planets, made possible by space probes such as Pioneer, Mariner, and Viking—provided evidence for the newer theory. The most important single factor in the geology of earth-like planets was the amount of internal heat left over from their birth. Planets as large as earth conserved heat, losing it very slowly through volcanic action over long periods of time. Molten volcanic material carried gases, including water vapor, that had been trapped below the planet’s surface; the vapors condensed into oceans, other gases formed an atmosphere, and life began. Mariner’s photos of Mars had confirmed the existence of volcanoes; but, because of the planet’s relatively small size, these exhausted their internal heat supply and died out rapidly about 100 million yr ago. During its active period, Mars must have had in its atmosphere large volumes of volcanic gases, including water vapor; Mariner photos had shown what were apparently dry river beds. When the volcanoes became extinct, the water and atmosphere leaked away into space and the small planet was left dry and nearly airless. Any life forms found on Mars by Viking or future space probes would probably be fossils. The study of lunar material added another example to the comparative geology of earth-like planets: The moon rocks brought back by Apollo astronauts had revealed volcanic activity on the moon; because the moon was smaller than Mars, this activity had stopped even earlier and the gases and moisture escaped even more quickly, leaving another dry, airless, and lifeless body. Scientists concluded that Mars was cold and lifeless not because it was farther from the sun than earth but because it was smaller and geologically inert. If the earth were moved out to the orbit of Mars, the average temperature of the earth would drop somewhat but its insulating atmosphere, continually replenished by volcanic gases for some billions of years longer, would maintain a livable temperature over large areas of the surface. (Jastrow, NYT, 24 Aug 75, E7)
Astronaut Donald K. (Deke) Slayton had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Operations for Approach and Landing Test at the Johnson Space Center, announced Center Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. In the newly created position, Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the approach and landing test project for the Space Shuttle program. He most recently had been docking module pilot of the U.S. crew for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 75—314; JSC Release 75—100)
Former astronaut Alfred M. Worden, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Application Div., announced that he would leave government service, effective 5 Sept. Worden was also retiring from the Air Force after 20 yrs. During the Apollo 15 lunar landing mission (26 July— 7 Aug. 1971), Worden was command module pilot and, with fellow crewmen David R. Scott and James B. Irwin, spent 12 days 7 hr 12 min in space. Worden transferred to ARC in September 1972 as a research scientist in the Airborne Science Office. He was also Chief of the Systems Studies Div. before his appointment to the Application Div. In his announcement Worden said he would spend one year lecturing on “Spaceship Earth” and writing a book commissioned by the High Flight Foundation, an interdenominational evangelistic organization based in Colo. (NASA Release 75—248)
Dust storms had been observed on the moon every sunrise and sunset by a three-axis microparticle detector left on the moon by Apollo 17 astronauts during their December 1972 mission, a Nature magazine article reported. The article, based on a report by scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, said the GSFC scientists suspected that the dust was being lifted from the lunar surface and then driven away from the rising or setting sun by electrostatic fields associated with the transition from day to night, or vice versa. The finding supported a theory advanced 20 yr ago by Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., who had suggested that electrostatic forces transported dust from lunar highlands to lowlands, accounting for the smooth appearance of the lunar seas. Although the Apollo landings had shown that those seas had been formed by lava flooding rather than deep dust accumulations, their surface was covered with very fine dust. Also, because neither wind nor rain existed on the airless moon, some other process must have been responsible for the evident erosion. Electrostatic levitation was being suggested as one possible explanation. Because the lunar vacuum acted as an insulator, the dust cloud hugged the surface, reaching only between 20 and 30 cm high, explaining why it had been detected from a low angle by instruments on the lunar surface but never by orbiting astronauts or earth-based equipment. (Hughes, Nature, 10 April 75, 481—2)
Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
A decrease in the amount of ozone in the stratosphere would cause an increase in skin cancer in white (the most susceptible) Americans, Walter Sullivan wrote in a New York Times article. The findings were based on the combined results of a 1974 NASA study that used instrumented aircraft to profile ozone and nitrogen oxide in the stratosphere, the National Cancer Institute’s 1974 Third National Cancer Survey, and the Dept, of Transportation’s 3-yr study “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft” [see 21 Jan.]. The NASA study, which used high-altitude U-2 aircraft, confirmed that atmospheric ozone increased from the equator to the poles and was also influenced by regional and seasonal variations. Ozone molecules above the latitude of Houston were only three fifths as plentiful as above the latitude of Minneapolis. Correspondingly, the Cancer Institute survey showed an annual incidence of nearly 400 skin-cancer cases per 100 000 whites in Dallas, Tex., and less than half that figure in the Minneapolis area. These data, when combined with the DOT study, indicated that the number of skin-cancer cases in the U.S. would increase by 6000, or 1%, a year if 120 supersonic transports operated in the stratosphere for 4 hi daily, thus depleting the zone by 0.5%. (Lowenstein et al., Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, Nov 75, 2185— 90; Sullivan, ATT, 7 Feb 75, 11) 7 February—1 March: The eight prime and backup Soviet cosmonauts training for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joined with U.S. prime and backup astronauts in the U.S. to continue training for the joint mission. The cosmonauts—Aleksey A. Leonov, Valery N. Kubasov, Anatoly V. Filipchenko, Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, Vladimir A. Dzhanebekov, Boris D. Andreyev, Yury V. Romanenko, and Aleksandr S. Ivanchenkov—arrived in Washington, D.C., 7 Feb. and traveled to Kennedy Space Center the following morning. The group toured KSC 8 Feb. giving the cosmonauts their first glimpse of the U.S. launch complex. Col. Leonov commented that the pad from which Alan B. Shepard was launched in 1961 “is a very simple launch stand compared to the ones we use now.” Following a tour of Disney World in Florida 9 Feb., the cosmonauts spent 10 Feb. inspecting the Vehicle Assembly Building, where the Apollo would be stacked on the Saturn IB launch vehicle; the Launch Control Center firing room, from which the rocket would be controlled; and Launch Complex 39 Pad B, from which the Apollo spacecraft would be launched. Press coverage of the first Soviet visit to KSC noted that previous invitations for Soviet officials to visit KSC had been turned down,apparently because of Soviet unwillingness to reciprocate with invitations to Baykonur Cosmodrome. But in May U.S. astronauts would return the visit by going to the Soviet launch site. The astronauts and cosmonauts flew to Johnson Space Center to begin a 2-wk training period that included exercises in command and docking module simulators and mockups; joint language-training sessions; briefings on experiments, contingencies, and mission rules; and practice run-throughs of the planned joint activity days. Following a press conference at which U.S. and Soviet ASTP crew members were introduced to JSC employees, the Soviet cosmonauts returned to the U.S.S.R. in two groups, on 28 Feb. and 1 March. (NASA Release 75—34; JSC Release 75—07; NASA ASTP Status Report No. 7; Spaceport News, 21 Feb 75; JSC Roundup, 28 Feb 75, 1; McElheny, NYT, 10—17 Feb 75)
President Ford presented the Harmon Aviation Awards, given for outstanding feats of individual pilot skill, worthy of international recognition, and contributing to the art and science of flight. The 1974 Astronauts’ Trophy was awarded to the Skylab 2 crew who, during their 25 May to 23 June 1973 mission, became the first astronauts to successfully accomplish major repairs on a spacecraft in space. Skylab 2 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., accepted the award on behalf of himself and crewmembers Paul J. Weitz and Joseph P. Kerwin. President Ford presented the 1974 Aeronauts’ Trophy to the son of Malcolm S. Forbes for the latter’s series of 21 flights in a hot-air balloon that took him 4000 km across the U.S. from Coos Bay, Ore., to Gwynn Island, Va. The 1974 Aviators’ Trophy went to Col. Edward J. Nash, Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations of the 21st Air Force, for his 21 000-km round-trip airlift mission in a C —5 aircraft from the U.S. to Israel, and for his direction of continuous C—5 and C —141 operations from the U.S. to the Azores and on to Israel between 14 Oct. and 14 Nov. 1973. The 1973 Aviators’ Trophy was awarded to L/C Edgar L. Allison for piloting an HC—130H aircraft of the Air Force 57th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron nonstop on 20 Feb. 1972 from Taiwan to Scott Air Force Base, 111., a distance of 14 053 km, without refueling. This established a record for the longest straight-line nonstop flight in a turboprop aircraft. (PD, 5 May 75, 480—481)
Press briefings on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project were held at Johnson Space Center. ASTP participants would be conducting experiments in space sciences, life sciences, and applications, ASTP Project Scientist Dr. Thomas Giuli said at an experiments briefing. The five space-science experiments included a soft x-ray experiment to study radiation by scanning across the celestial mode, pointing at known discrete sources in the soft part of the spectrum from 2 kev to 0.1 kev, and investigating 10 specific x-ray sources known to emit only in regions below 2 kev. A helium-glow experiment would investigate temperature and density of the interstellar medium in the vicinity of our solar system by observing two special frequencies of extreme ultraviolet light emitted from the sun after they traveled into interstellar space, hit the interstellar medium, and were reflected back again. Other space-science experiments included a study of the sun’s outer atmosphere during an artificial eclipse created by maneuvering the Apollo spacecraft. During the “eclipse,” the Soyuz crew would photograph the sun’s corona. Among the earth environmental and applications studies was an experiment to measure neutral atomic oxygen and neutral atomic nitrogen of the earth’s upper atmosphere. Another experiment would try to devise a simple means of monitoring the aerosol content of the earth’s atmosphere. A water-resources management experiment, planned and coordinated with the government of India, would photograph the Himalayan area to map drainage patterns and water-reservoir locations. Life-science experiments included a study to observe optical sensations from cosmic rays experienced by the crew, an investigation of mutation in cells grown in space, and studies of the effect of space flight on the ability of microbes to infect humans and of changes in the human immunity system to resist infections under space flight conditions. . At a mission profile briefing, Kenneth A. Young of JSC’s Mission Planning and Analysis Div. said that plans called for a 9-day Apollo mission beginning 7.5 hrs after the launch of Soyuz by the U.S.S.R. The planned rendezvous period would be 2 days, with docking scheduled for the 30th inertial orbit, or third day in flight, of the Apollo spacecraft. Following much negotiation, U.S. and Soviet mission planners determined that the two spacecraft would dock over Soviet territory, providing real-time telemetry coverage for the Soviet Union, but at a location where NASA’s Ats 6 communications satellite could provide communications coverage to the U.S. The first handshake would take place over Spain. The spacecraft would undock on the 5th day and perform several joint experiments while separated. Soyuz was scheduled to land the following day. Apollo would continue unilateral experiments in orbit before landing at the end of the 9th day in space. Astronaut Richard H. Truly said, during a joint crew activities briefing, that while the Apollo and Soyuz were docked, all communications would be conducted in the language of the listener regardless of the nationality of the speaker. (Transcript)
NASA’s Airborne Infrared Observatory, a four-engine C—141 jet transport equipped with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, was dedicated to the memory of Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, the founder and former director of the Univ. of Ariz. Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. The Kuiper observatory, based at Ames Research Center, would fly at altitudes up to 13 500 m with the telescope operating through a cavity in the aircraft’s fuselage. Dr. Kuiper, who had died in 1973, had been one of the foremost authorities on lunar science. He had played an active role in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor programs and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, had directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. He also had participated in the Mariner 10 mission, launched 3 Nov. 1973 to Venus andMercury, and the Pioneer 10 mission, launched 2 March 1972 toward a December 1973 encounter with Jupiter. (NASA Release 75—149; A&A 73, 350)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs since May 1974, would resign effective 30 August. Previously, Dr. Schmitt had been chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, at Johnson Space Center. Selected as a scientist-astronaut by NASA in 1965, he had been the lunar module pilot on Apollo 17 (7—19 Dec. 1972) and the only civilian scientist to walk on the moon. Dr. Schmitt planned to return to his home state of N. Mex. to pursue geological consulting and personal activities. (NASA anno, 11 Aug 75)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) said in a speech on the Senate floor that he had asked the Central Intelligence Agency to assess the safety of Soviet manned space technology. “The inlaunch failure of another Soviet manned satellite last Saturday [7 April] reinforces my deep concern that the upcoming joint Apollo-Soyuz experiment may be dangerous to American astronauts. . . . The history of the Soviet-manned program shows an appalling lack of consistency. As soon as one severe problem is solved another occurs.” (CR, 9 April 75, S5527)
Flight Research Center pilots began flight tests as part of a cooperative industry-government program to measure noise levels of five business-class jet aircraft during various landing approach maneuvers. Object of the tests was to define noise characteristics for this class of aircraft and the effectiveness of alternate landing-approach procedures in reducing community noise levels. Using a Rockwell Sabreliner, Grumman Gulfstream II, Gates Learjet, Beech-Hawker 125 provided by the National Business Aircraft Association, and Lockheed Jet Star provided by NASA, FRC pilots flew four landing approaches over a microphone array. A normal 3° approach provided baseline information; a 3° decelerating approach with engines at reduced power, a 4° approach with normal power, and a two-segment approach starting with 6° angle and shallowing into a 3° approach provided additional data. (NASA Release 75-103) During practice sessions similar to those held in the U.S. 7 Feb.— 1 March, the participants practiced communications skills, transfer procedures, joint activities, and contingency situations, using the Soyuz simulator at the Gagarin Cosmonaut Center in Star City. On 19 April the crews visited the mission-control center at Kaliningrad and, on 28 April, became the second group of westerners to visit the Baykonur cosmodrome (French President Charles de Gaulle had been the first western visitor when he witnessed the launch of Cosmos 122 on 25 June 1966). At Baykonur the U.S. crewmen saw the actual flight hardware as well as the primary launch pad 2 km away, and the prime and backup crews each spent an hour in the Soyuz spacecraft. The astronauts later reported to the press that they had found no significant differences between the actual spacecraft and the simulators used during training. (Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 278—280; JSC Releases 75- 22, 75— 25; WPost, 30 April 75, A21 ,SBD, 18 April 75, 273; A&A 66, 223)
Charles M. Duke, Jr., an astronaut since 1966 and lunar mobile pilot on the Apollo 16 lunar landing mission (16—27 April 1972), announced he would leave NASA, effective 1 Jan. 1976. He would also resign from the Air Force after nearly 19 yr of service. DuringApo//o 16, Duke logged 11 days 1 hr 43 min in space, including a 71-hr 14-min stay on the lunar surface. He and John W. Young made 3 surface explorations of the Descartes region for a total of 20 hr 15 min of lunar excursion. Since April 1973 Duke had served as technical assistant to the manager for Space Shuttle systems integration. (JSC Release 75—74)
At an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew-status briefing, Richard S. Johnston, Director of Life Sciences, told reporters that Houston control could not make voice contact with the crew during Apollo reentry [see 15—24 July]. The first medical bulletin on the astronauts’ condition, received at Houston several hours later, had informed Houston officials of the crew’s eye and lung irritation. After splashdown, astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Donald K. Slayton had noticed that fellow crewman Vance D. Brand had passed out. He had revived after about 1 min when Stafford adjusted his oxygen mask and ensured a proper flow of oxygen. Johnston also said that preliminary diagnostic procedures had indicated that the crew did not have “any apparent medical problem at that time” but that x-rays had shown increased hylar markings originating from the center of the chest. The doctors elected to move the crew to sick bay and keep them under observation. The astronauts had been given cortisone to decrease the inflammation of their lung tissue and relieve the symptoms of cough and substernal discomfort. During the briefing, word came that the astronauts had arrived at Tripler Hospital in Hawaii where they would enter the intensive care unit. “They walked in smiling and they looked happy,” said JSC Public Affairs Officer Robert V. Gordon. (ASTP Transcript PC—56)
MSFC announced development of a new system of vehicle mobility that could greatly extend unmanned explorations on the surface of Mars and other planets. The concept grew out of work on the successful lunar roving vehicle that carried astronauts and equipment on extended exploration of the moon, far from the lunar module’s landing site. Scientists had regretted the lack of mobility of the Viking landers on the surface of Mars, because the data on atmosphere and terrain had been limited to the landing site. The new idea, called Elastic Loop Mobility System (ELMS), would use a continuous elastic-loop track in place of the landing pads; the track would distribute lander weight uniformly over a relatively large area, with suspension and drive systems on the spacecraft combined into a single lightweight package. The geometry of the loop would serve to provide “excellent mobility” on soft soils and smooth rides over hard and rough terrain. Tests on models revealed slope-climbing capability, high maneuverability, and power to surmount obstacles and cross crevasses. Combining the ELMS with existing Viking hardware would produce a mobile laboratory that could conduct scientific missions on the Mars surface for 6 mo along traverses up to 150 km. Recent reviews of a possible mobile-Viking mission to Mars, using the ELMS concept, considered extending the mission to 2 yr along traverses up to 500 km. The low ground clearance of the Viking spacecraft, together with the low ground-pressure tolerances on soft Martian soil, ruled out the use of wheels for mobility, as well as the use of conventional tracks because of high energy consumption and low operational reliability. Besides use of the MSFC-developed ELMS for planetary exploration, the U.S. Marine Corps had considered the system for a new generation of amphibious landing vehicles for the 1980s, a MSFC spokesman said. (MSFC Release 76-191)
Two “pilots of note”—Gen. James M. Doolittle and Neil A. Armstrong— had announced plans to establish a Charles A. Lindbergh Memorial Fund to support the work of young scientists, explorers, and conservationists, the New York Times reported. Gen. Doolittle, leader of the first World War II air raid on Tokyo, and astronaut Armstrong, first man to walk on the moon, would head a drive to raise $5 million for the fund by 20 May 1977, the fiftieth anniversary of Lindbergh’s takeoff on the first solo nonstop flight across the Atlantic Ocean. Income from the endowment, expected to be about $400 000 a yr, would be distributed to Lindbergh Fellows who “combine qualities that made [Lindbergh] a unique human being,” said Doolittle at a press conference. He told reporters Lindbergh “would have been happier with a living memorial than one out of bronze and stone.” Lindbergh, who died in 1974 at the age of 72, had continued in aviation as a test pilot and airline executive but had branched out into medical technology research and wildlife conservation in his later years, the NYT said. The fund’s sponsoring committee included representatives of the Explorers Club and the World Wildlife Fund, as well as other areas of interest to Lindbergh: aerospace, ecology, exploration, and science and engineering. Announcement of selections for fellowships would be made yearly on 21 May, anniversary of Lindbergh’s arrival in Paris after his 33-hr flight in Spirit of St. Louis. (NYT, 20 Oct 76, 22)
Fred W. Haise, Jr., astronaut on the Apollo 13 lunar mission of April 1970 that nearly ended in disaster, would command the first free-flight test of the Space Shuttle, Johnson Space Center officials announced. A research pilot for NASA since 1959, Haise worked at Lewis Research Center and the Flight Research Center before his selection as a civilian astronaut in 1966. He was technical assistant to the manager of the Shuttle orbiter project from April 1973 to January 1976. With Haise on the test Shuttle flight would be Air Force Lt. Col. Charles G. Fullerton, appointed astronaut in 1969, who had never flown in space. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly piggyback in 1977 on a modified Boeing 747 jet transport, then in free-flight testing and landing after release at about 8-km altitude. Haise and Col. Fullerton would guide the Shuttle to an unpowered landing at the Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif, to demonstrate handling and reusability. (B Sun, 25 Feb 76, A-7; W Post, 25 Feb 76, B 5; NASA Release 76-35; JSC Release 76-17)
NASA announced selection of Hamilton Standard Division, United Aircraft Corp., for negotiations leading to award of contract for development and production of space suits to be used by men and women during Space Shuttle flights. The basic cost-plus-award fee contract would cost about $15 million through Sept. 1980. The suit system, consisting of a basic suit and built-in support system including breathing-atmosphere and cooling components, would be adjustable instead of custom-made for each astronaut (as in earlier programs) and would come in small, medium, and large sizes to fit candidates varying in height from 1.5 to 2 m. Hamilton Standard would provide hardware and spares needed for 7 suits and support equipment, as well as training, manpower, and equipment needed to support the program at NASA field centers. Johnson Space Center would have technical direction of the contract. (JSC Release 76-46)
The organizational structure of a large earth-orbiting space station was the topic of a doctoral study at Fla. State Univ. for Dr. James Ragusa of Kennedy Space Center’s Science and Applications Office. The study was an offshoot of work on future space projects (with Gene McCoy of KSC’s Shuttle Payload Integration Office) before Dr. Ragusa left to work on his Ph.D. The topic was one about which little had been written, and was timely in that the structure should be included in plans for such a mission. Spacelab, with a 7-man crew, needed no complex organizational structure; a space colony with a projected population of thousands would require a government rather than an organizational structure. A space base housing 50 to 100 persons would bring together people of varying backgrounds for extended periods of time—the station being designed with a 10-yr operating life—and large-group behavior would be a factor in considering the best type of organization. Ragusa investigated the organizational structures used on submarines and destroyers, interviewing the submarine captains and taking cruises on the nuclear sub Nathanael Greene and the research sub Benjamin Franklin. Among those interviewed for the study were Dr. Wernher von Braun; Arthur Clarke, author of 2001 and father of the communications satellite; several astronauts; and Gene Roddenberry, creator of the TV series “Star Trek.” Ragusa found that the organization on Roddenberry’s U.S.S. Enterprise was modeled after that used on 18th century English ships, which in turn was based on that used on Phoenician ships 2500 years ago, in which the ship was considered an extension of the country itself and abided by the laws and traditions of the homeland; the captain was king, and his word was law. The structure best fitting the needs of a space base was the “total matrix model” with four levels of hierarchy, best for efficient and orderly management of the crew because of its adaptability. Of 8 models, the “Star Trek” structure ranked fifth because of its lack of flexibility and efficiency. (Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 5)
Having completed a yr of service to India’s Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE), Ats 6 began a 4-mo journey back to an orbital location over the Western Hemisphere to take part in experiments using direct broadcasting for education and health care. During its journey, it would be used by NASA in a project with the U.S. Agency for Inti. Development (AID) to demonstrate the potential of direct broadcasting to officials in more than 24 developing countries. The first set of demonstrations—known as AIDSAT, for AID space-age technology—would begin between 1 and 26 Aug. for 11 developing countries and one international conference; the program would consist of 3 films created especially for the purpose, one on communications technology for national development, one on use of satellites for natural resources monitoring, and one on use of satellites for disaster prediction and relief. After these films the host country would transmit a 30-min program originated in the terminal in each nation’s capital; then a 2-way discussion would be shown in which U.S. officials conversant with space technology and U.S. assistance would talk with representatives of the host country. President Ford would present an initial greeting, and astronaut Owen K. Garriott would be moderator of the first 5 programs. Of the 12 programs planned, those to Thailand, Pakistan, and Bangladesh were broadcast first, and subsequent ones were scheduled 9 Aug. to the United Arab Emirates, 10 Aug. to Oman, 16 Aug. to Jordan, 17 Aug. to Kenya, and 18 Aug. to Yemen. On 23 Aug. the program would address the Conference on Applied Science and Technology in the Arab World at Rabat, Morocco; programs to Libya, Sudan, and Morocco would be broadcast during the remainder of August. A second group of demonstrations would begin in late Sept., and 15 more countries in Africa, Central and South America, and the Caribbean had been invited to participate. (NASA Release 76-140)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, who commanded both the Gemini 7 and Apollo 8 missions and who currently was president and chief executive officer of Eastern Air Lines, was elected chairman of the board for EAL replacing Floyd D. Hall, who had resigned to become permanent chairman of the executive committee of the International Air Transport Association (IATA). (Av Wk, 29 Nov 76, 20)
Former astronaut William A. Anders, serving as chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, was appointed U.S. ambassador to Norway by President Ford. Anders, 42, had served at NRC since Dec. 1974 and had told the President he wished to remain in the post for only a yr. Selected as an astronaut by NASA in 1963, Anders was one of the 3 crewmen of Apollo 8 to orbit the moon at Christmastime 1968. Anders left the corps of astronauts in 1969 to become executive secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, a White House post abolished by President Nixon 4 yr later; he then was appointed head of the Atomic Energy Commission (whose functions were reorganized in 1974 into the Energy Research and Development Administration and NRC). He had turned down an offer of reappointment at NRC for a 5-yr term. {WSJ, 9 Mar 76, 3; W Post, 8 Mar 76, A-20)
Col. Stuart A. Roosa, 42, an astronaut since 1966, announced in Houston that he would retire from the Air Force and from NASA on 1 Feb., one day after the 5th anniversary of the launch of his only space flight, Apollo 14. Roosa had piloted the command module while Capt. Alan B. Shepard and Cdr. Edgar D. Mitchell had made the third moon landing, and had previously been on the Apollo 9 backup crew. Roosa told associates he was exploring “companies involved in new procedures.” (NYT, 30 Jan 76, 34; W Star, 30 Jan 76, A-2)
NASA announced it would use starlight that left the surface of a nearby star 200 yr ago to signal the lighting of a giant 200-candle Bicentennial birthday cake at the new Superdome stadium in New Orleans just before midnight on 3 July. Photons of light that left Gamma Bootes just before midnight 3 July 1776—when the signers of the Declaration of Independence were officially witnessing the birth of the U.S.—would arrive on earth to activate a 1000-cycle tone at the Goddard Space Flight Center. The tone, transmitted to New Orleans on commercial telephone lines, would signal the lighting of the cake. GSFC’s orbiting astronomical observatory Copernicus, passing over Hawaii in its 740-km orbit, would receive the photons on its star detector and transmit a digital signal to the NASA ground station in Hawaii; this signal, retransmitted to the West Coast and via microwave to GSFC, would activate a relay connecting the tone to New Orleans, where it would be heard on the stadium’s public address system for 1 min before the candles would be lighted. Astronaut Story Musgrave would participate in the Superdome activities. (NASA Release 76-121)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
Moon rocks—prime celebrities 5 yr ago—had become has-beens, wrote reporter James P. Sterba in the New York Times. Astronauts had brought back from the six moon missions about 382 kg of lunar material; Dr. Michael G. Duke, curator of moon rocks at Johnson Space Center, claimed to know the disposition of every gram. Fragments returned from Apollo 11 went to 137 heads of state and 51 U.S. governors; chunks returned by Apollo 17 in Dec. 1972 had been dispensed to nations and states. Scientists in 15 nations, 26 states, and the Virgin Is. had been studying samples under NASA-sponsored research grants, and their findings would fill a shelf 1.5 m wide. “We know more about the composition of the moon than we do about the earth,” Dr. Duke said, although less than 20% of the lunar samples had been circulated for research and exhibits. Lately the calls for samples to exhibit had dwindled, and the number of scientists studying them had been halved. Security had remained tight because of the efforts of rock collectors to obtain samples; however, the moon rocks had lost ground in public interest compared to the Mars rocks being turned over by Vikings 1 and 2, Sterba wrote. (ATT, 11 Oct 76, 27)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
Travelers aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter in the 1980s would use a unique space suit and rescue system, developed at Johnson Space Center. The Shuttle suit, a departure from the customized astronaut suits, would consist of a two-piece upper and lower torso cover in small, medium, and large sizes to accommodate all astronaut candidates or crews, including females. Only the pilot and mission specialist would be outfitted with the space suit; the commander and payload specialists would be provided with a personal rescue system nicknamed the “cosmic soccerball,” consisting of a container nearly a meter in diameter constructed of three layers—urethane, Kevlar, and an outside thermal protective layer, with a small viewing post of tough Lexan—containing its own simplified life-support and communications systems. During a rescue operation in space, a space-suited astronaut could transfer the rescue balls in one of three ways: using the handle to carry the enclosure like a suitcase from one vehicle to another; hooking a device like a clothesline between two spaceships and passing the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship to the other; or using the remote-manipulator arm in the orbiter’s cargo bay to pluck the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship and put it aboard the rescue ship. Materials to be used in the rescue ball and the Shuttle suit would provide longer shelf life, according to technicians who ran pressure and abrasion tests on them; use of the fabric to make joints in the space suits (instead of the Apollo and Skylab suit use of neoprene rubber molded into convolutes containing cables) would provide better mobility and reduce cost and weight of each suit. The new suit also featured a module construction that closed with a body seal at the waist, considered more reliable than the pressure-seal zippers used in the previous suits. The new suits also were designed with an integral portable life-support system as part of the rigid upper torso, instead of the bulky 34-kg package that previously had to be unpacked and connected to the suit. (NASA Release 76-56; JSC Roundup, 26 Mar 76, 1)
About 3000 people attended a ceremony dedicating the Space Hall of Fame at Alamogordo, N.M., honoring men and women involved in space exploration. Original inductees, numbering 35, included U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong and Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. Nine of the 35 were from the Soviet Union; eight each from the U.S. and West Germany; three from Austria, two from France, and one each from Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Romania, and Switzerland. Dr. Frederick Durant of the Smithsonian Institution announced the names of the pioneers, nominated by the Inti. Academy of Astronautics in Paris with final selection by a committee appointed by the governor of N.M. for the Hall of Fame. Lubas Perek, head of the UN’s outer space affairs division, told the audience that the choice of persons to be honored “will surely reflect the grand international character of outer space research.” (W Star, 6 Oct 76, 2; NYT, 10 Oct 76, 26; Inti Space Hall of Fame, media release; Alamogordo Daily News, 3 Oct 76, dedication edition)
William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut who became the first chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in 197 4, was sworn in as U.S. ambassador to Norway [see 9 Mar.]. (NRC Release 76-93)
A U.S.-European Space Shuttle project starting in 1980 would recruit 30 more astronauts—including women and participants from the USSR—for the planned 200 flights in the project, U.S spokesmen said at a Paris news conference held at the end of a 3-day meeting between NASA and European Space Agency officials. John F. Yardley, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told newsmen that NASA was already training more than 30 astronauts for this program. Each flight, carrying 3 U.S. astronauts and up to 4 Europeans on space-science missions lasting between a week and a month, would cost between $18 million and $21 million; European scientists had expressed concern that the flights would cost so much that less money would be left for scientific experiments than they had hoped. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, when asked if the Soviets might be involved in the project, said, “We have made it clear in informal discussions that this would be available to them.” Those using the Shuttle would be expected to foot the bill, officials emphasized. {NYT, 15 May 76, 2; W Post, 15 May 76, A-15; W Star, 16 May 76, A-3)
Endorsed by the state of Colo, as a bicentennial project, a mobile space museum prepared by the High Flight Foundation—a nonprofit religious organization founded in 1972 by Apollo 15 astronaut Col. James R. Irwin—would tour the U.S. to give residents of 30 cities a chance to see a large exhibit on national accomplishments in space. The exhibit would include tools and photographs, miscellaneous objects and films. During the tour, various state governors participating in bicentennial celebrations would receive from the astronauts state flags that had been flown to the moon. With Col. Irwin on the board of the High Flight Foundation were astronauts Col. William R. Pogue (Skylab 3) and Col. Alfred M. Worden (Apollo 15). (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 8)
The long-secret site of USSR space launches—previously identified by U.S space experts as Tyuratam, for the name of the local railway station—was identified in the newspaper Kazakhstanskaya Pravda as “Leninsk,” in a dispatch on construction of electric power-transmission lines. The dispatch, stating that the Leninsk area had been connected to the Central Asian power grid, was believed to be the first in which the name appeared in a Soviet publication. U.S. astronauts who visited the space complex last year during Apollo-Soyuz mission preparations had reported that a city of about 50 O0O population was associated with the launch complex, and was known as Leninsk. Publication of the name—which had not appeared on Soviet maps or reference books—was considered either an oversight by the censor or a decision to make the name public. (ATT, 15 Feb 76, 12)
Astronaut Paul J. Weitz, Captain, USN, would retire from military service
The Federal Aviation Administration would stick to its deadline for modifications to McDonnell Douglas DC-10 jumbo jets to withstand sudden depressurization, the Washington Post reported, as FAA Administrator John L. McLucas withdrew from subordinates the authority to extend a 1 Dec. 1977 deadline set at the recommendation of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board. The modification, which applied also to Lockheed L-101 Is and Boeing 747s, was ordered after the 1974 crash near Paris of a DC-10 whose cargo door blew off in flight, resulting in the death of 346 persons on board. Depressurization of the plane crushed control cables running beneath the cabin floor. An official at FAA had granted a 1-yr extension of the deadline in Oct. 1976—without Me Lucas’s knowledge—but all U.S. airlines flying DC-10s had agreed to comply with the original deadline. Compliance dates for the L-1011 and 747 were 31 March 1978 and 30 June 1978, respectively. (WPost, 30 Nov 76, A-9) During November: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that, during the 69th annual general conference of the Federation Aero-nautique Internationale in Oct. in Iran, the 1975 FAI gold space medal was awarded jointly to Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the Apollo crew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and to cosmonaut Alexey Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz 19 crew. Stafford and his crew, Donald K. Slayton and Vance Brand, also received the De La Vaulx medal for establishing during the joint mission the world absolute records for duration, distance, and altitude in group flight, as well as the V.M. Komarov Diploma for outstanding performance in space exploration during the previous year. Their Russian counterparts also received the De La Vaulx medal and the Komarov award. Astronauts Slayton and Brand also each received the Yuri Gagarin gold medal, created by the FAI in memory of the first man in space, for their role in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes. Stafford also accepted on behalf of the U.S. ASTP team the Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics, for the planning and execution of the first international rendezvous and docking mission in space. (NAA newsletter, Nov 76)
Correlations between an astronaut’s susceptibility to motion sickness on the ground and his susceptibility in space were the subject of studies by JSC scientists, based on data from U.S. and Soviet manned space flights and on data from tests aboard a zero-gravity training aircraft. Motion sickness had been difficult to study because of the variety of separate sensory inputs to the brain. The three major components of human balance and posture were generally accepted to be visual input, defining the local vertical component; vestibular input from the semicircular canals and otoliths in the inner ear, sensing angular and linear acceleration and the presence or absence of gravity; and muscle sensors, monitoring posture. These interrelated inputs normally function to keep the body balanced; in an earth-normal gravity, balance would be reflexive, and persons would not be conscious of the body-movement patterns that kept them upright. In a moving vehicle, the inputs to the brain might produce contradictory information resulting in a feeling of discomfort; “motion sickness” is not an adaptive response and does not improve the situation, as coughing would do to relieve a throat blockage. Persons without sight can experience motion sickness, but persons without their vestibular functions intact apparently do not. Although little was known about the interactions among the three sensory systems, motion sickness seemed to be more related to vestibular input. During Skylab missions, in the relatively large areas of living space, much vestibular relearning apparently occurred in the first 2 wk of spaceflight, after which all crewmen became very resistant to motion sickness. No correlation was apparent between an astronaut’s susceptibility to motion sickness on the ground and his susceptibiity in space. The studies postulated that the otolith (chalky concretion in the inner ear) was the receptor affording the most direct information on gravity, and therefore was the source of many of the inputs causing disequilibrium or motion sickness. (JSC Release 76-67)
A component of the backpack worn by Neil A. Armstrong on the moon’s surface had been used by the former astronaut—now professor of aerospace engineering at the Univ. of Cincinnati—in bioengineering experiments testing better blood pumps for heart-lung machines and artificial hearts or kidneys. The Apollo double-diaphragm pump that circulated cooling water through plastic tubes in the astronaut’s space suit proved in the UC tests to be 10 or more times less damaging to red blood cells than pumps previously used. Blood, a delicate substance easily daniaged by prolonged mechanical pumping, had lost critical amounts of hemoglobin in procedures such as open-heart surgery when pumps had taken over the heart’s function for several hours. Armstrong, working on a team at the university’s Institute of Engineering and Medicine, recalled the Apollo pump’s efficiency from a power and weight standpoint and borrowed one from NASA for experiments with animals. The pump, designed to run on minimum power, created little turbulence in the flow of fluid and had no moving parts to damage the cells. It would be further modified for medical use. (NYT, 28 Mar 76, 64)
A device used in training Apollo astronauts was adapted to assist persons incapable of supporting their entire weight with their legs. Developed at Langley Research Center, the flying lunar-excursion experimental platform would exert a constant weight-relieving force during any vertical movement by the patient; the supporting force would be selected for a particular patient, and could be changed as the patient’s condition improved. Besides its application as a device for exercise during rehabilitation, the apparatus showed potential for use in warehouses and storage facilities where heavy equipment was handled. The project was directed by LaRC’s Technology Utilization Office. (Langley Researcher, 5 Mar 76, 7)
President Ford proclaimed 20 July as “Space Exploration Day” to coincide with the date 7 yr ago when U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man to set foot on the moon. NASA’s Viking 1 lander was expected to touch down on the surface of Mars about 8 am 20 July,, reported nationally on network television; transmission of the first picture from the lander should be completed before 9 am. In his proclamation, the President said, “We begin our third century with ... the most ambitious of all deep space explorations . . . Wherever we reach, we will have come in peace for all mankind.” In an accompanying statement to NASA employees, Administrator James C. Fletcher said “the President has in effect commended all of you who work (for) the national space agency.” (Text; NASA Release 76-133; Fletcher anno, 20 July 76) First panoramic view of Mars surface from Viking 1, 20 July 1976: upper half of picture is Left half of view, lower photo joins it on the right. Upper view shows housing for Viking sampler arm; lower view shows (at right) high-gain antenna for direct communication with earth. (NASA 7§-H~557)
Veteran astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Apollo commander of the U.S.-Russian Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975, received the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1975, the Natl. Geographic Society announced. Gen. David C. Jones, USAF Chief of Staff, presented the award, honoring the late Air Force Chief of Staff and given annually to the member of the Air Force, military or civilian, who contributed most significantly in the preceding yr to U.S. progress in aerospace. Maj. Gen. Stafford’s citation noted “outstanding contributions ... by his participation in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . . . [He] was instrumental in establishing the necessary rapport and spirit of cooperation vital to the success of the mission. Under his leadership, the Apollo crew laid the basic groundwork for future international technological achievements in space and proved that the United States is the acknowledged leader in space exploration.” Attending the ceremony with Stafford’s Air Force colleagues and officers of the Natl. Geographic Society were former astronaut Michael Collins, now director of the National Air and Space Museum, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, formerly Secretary of the Air Force and Deputy Administrator of NASA, now Administrator of the Energy Research and Development Administration. (NGS release, 30 Sept 76) During September: Ames Research Center’s Astrogram published an interview with the center’s first female aircraft mechanic: a co-op student, Maria-Elena Sanchez, enrolled in a airframe and power mechanics course at the College of San Mateo. She was one of four females in the program, whose total enrollment was about 200. As a mechanic at ARC, Ms. Sanchez was performing general maintenance and upkeep on Lear jets and the Cessna 402; for her work at Ames, she was receiving both monetary compensation and college credit. The college program required a student to attend for about 30 mo a school approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, then pass a written, oral, and practical test to receive a license in Airframe and Power Plant Mechanics. Ms. Sanchez, who held a commercial pilot’s license and had been flying since 1971, said she hoped to complete the program and obtain the A&P license within a yr. (ARC Astrogram, 9 Sept 76, 1)
Clocks around the world would be set back one second this New Year’s Eve, because the earth’s spin was that much longer in 1976 than it was last year. The backward move would be the sixth in the last 5 yr because of a slowing in the earth’s spin, the Washington Post explained; the changes were made twice in 1972 and once in each of the last 4 yr, each time on New Year’s Eve. The standard U.S. timepiece (at the Natl. Bureau of Standards Laboratory at Boulder, Colo.) would be reset at midnight GMT (7 pm in Washington, D.C.), and similar atomic clocks would be reset at the same moment in more than 80 countries including the Soviet Union and the Peoples Republic of China. The earth’s spin had been slowing for at least 250 yr, when it was first noticed, except for a 10-yr period before 1900 when the rotation speeded up by 25 sec. In 1878, Simon Newcomb, then chief astronomer at the Naval Observatory, first systematically observed a fluctuation in the rate of rotation, which still is verified by 80 observatories around the world who send their findings to the Inti. Time Bureau in Paris, established in 1972 (the year the clocks lost 2 sec). Scientists attributed the slowdown to the moon’s pull on the tides, braking the motion of the earth’s mantle. (W Post, 31 Dec 76, A2) During December: The Air Force Systems Command announced that former astronaut Maj. Gen. Michael Collins had been appointed mobilization assistant to the AFSC commander. The position was the top Air Force Reserve post in AFSC. Collins, who was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as a reserve major general 10 Mar. 1976, would continue to serve as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 76, 10)
Physicians at Johnson Space Center were gathering data on female physiological performance and tolerance limits as a basis for establishing criteria in recruiting NASA’s first women astronauts. Women employees of the center were asked to volunteer for testing on a treadmill and in a lower body negative-pressure device, to see whether women responded differently from men of comparable age to treadmill exercise and to stresses on the circulatory system induced by decreased pressures on the lower body. On the treadmill test, researchers would monitor the subject’s heart rate and blood pressure as they varied the speed and tilt of the moving treadmill. The pressure device, encasing the subject from the waist down, would have the pressure reduced while researchers monitored the reaction of the cardiovascular system to the change in pressure. NASA had issued a call for at least 30 Space Shuttle astronauts (15 pilot candidates, 15 mission specialist candidates) in July 197 6, with a closing date of 30 June 1977. Selection would be completed by December 1977. (JSC Release 76-65)
Timing the rebound of laser pulses aimed at reflectors left on the moon by Apollo astronauts had served to reinforce Einstein’s theory of relativity, according to a study in Physical Review Letters reported by the New York Times. The equivalence principle—that objects of different weight fell at essentially the same speed—was tested in the 16th century by Galileo, who showed that all bodies responded similarly to gravity regardless of size or composition. Einstein’s theory was based on a related assumption, that the mass responsible for an object’s inertia was equivalent to the mass responsible for the gravity that it generated. However, if the gravitational pull of the earth were influenced by the sun’s gravity, the relationship between a body’s inertia and its gravity would not always be uniform, and the report described experiments to test a theoretical departure from equivalence. An eclipse of the sun in 1919 had been used to test Einstein’s theory, and showed that light from distant stars was bent—as expected—as it passed through powerful gravity near the sun. Other experiments—bouncing radar beams off Venus and Mercury to see if the beams were bent or lengthened by the sun’s gravity, or monitoring round-trip signals to Mariner 9 as it sailed behind the sun or radio emissions from quasars in that direction—had narrowed any deviations from Einstein’s formulation to a small margin. The experiments reported recently were independent analyses of 1389 measurements of round-trip travel times of laser pulses aimed at moon reflectors, to detect changes in earth-moon distance to within 127 mm. If earth gravitational energy were influenced by the sun’s gravity, the effect would alter the earth’s gravity more than that of the moon, and the moon’s motion about the earth would deviate by as much as a meter from conventional predictions. The experiments showed no such effect. (NYT, 16 Mar 76, 17)
Dr. Michael Duke, curator of lunar samples at NASA’s Johnson Space Center, returned from Moscow with two half-gram samples of moon soil brought to earth in Aug. 1976 by the USSR’s Luna 24 spacecraft. The samples were part of a 2-meter-long core of lunar material obtained by a hollow drill from the surface of Mare Crisium, a region of the moon from which the U.S. had not had any samples. This was the third time U.S. scientists had obtained a Soviet sample in exchange for material collected by Apollo astronauts from other places on the moon. Other members of the U.S. scientific delegation to Moscow this week were Dr. Charles Simonds, Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., and Prof. Gerald J. Wasserburg of the Calif. Institute of Technology. The small size of the sample would not detract from its usefulness, according to Dr. Bevan French, chief of NASA’s program of research on extraterrestrial materials; methods routinely used for extracting information from samples of meteorite or deep-sea basalt could produce hundreds of chemical analyses from a single tiny crystal or determine the age of a fragment smaller than an aspirin tablet. (JSC Release 76-75)
The 50th anniversary of Dr. Robert Goddard’s successful launch of the world’s first liquid-fueled rocket at his aunt’s farm near Auburn, Mass., was observed in a re-enactment at the launching site—now marked by a granite monument—and in 15th anniversary ceremonies at the Goddard Space Flight Center, which also launched a commemorative rocket. Dr. Goddard had written on space navigation while still in high school; his early theoretical writings prompted the New York Times to print an article on its editorial page in 1920 saying that Dr. Goddard was ignorant of elementary physics if he thought a rocket would work in the vacuum of space. The Times ran a correction on 17 July 1969, the morning after the Apollo astronauts were launched toward the first lunar landing. The original rocket launched by Dr. Goddard in 1926 was about 3 m high, traveled a little more than 12 m upward, and attained a speed of 56 m in 2.5 sec. powered by a combination of gasoline and liquid oxygen. By contrast, the Saturn V rocket with its Apollo payload stood over 110 m tall and could cover 25 km in 2.5 sec powered by a mixture of kerosene and liquid oxygen, a fuel remarkably similar to that used by Dr. Goddard. Although, as GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark pointed out at the Center re-enactment, “Not a line appeared in a single paper about the Auburn flight ... In fact, the attention he did get in the early 1920s was adverse . . .,” Dr. Goddard continued his work in New Mexico in the 1930s and flew his rockets to heights over 3 km and at speeds up to supersonic. Of Dr. Goddard’s concepts, Wernher von Braun said: “Goddard did most of the basic research and development that made possible rockets such as the Saturn V.” Dr. Goddard had died in 1945, but his widow had attended the dedication of the Center when it opened in 1961; she had planned to attend the re-enactment in Auburn, but a heavy snowstorm swept New England 16 Mar. and seriously curtailed attendance at the event. Astronaut Eugene Cernan, principal speaker at the Mass, ceremonies, had reached Boston’s Logan Airport only an hour before it was closed down by the storm, and was taken by car to the scene as the scheduled helicopter could not fly. (ATT, 16 Mar 76, 16; W Post, 17 Mar 76, C-2; GSFC News, Mar 76, 1; Worcester Telegram, 17 Mar 76, 1; report of commemorative committee, Auburn Rotary Club, 19 Mar 76)
The USSR would probably put men on the moon within 10 yr to do more ambitious exploration than that done by U.S. astronauts, according to a report on Soviet space programs 1971-1975 by the Science Policy Research Division of the Library of Congress’s Congressional Research Division. Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, II, chief of the Science Policy Research Division, stated in the report that the USSR did not abandon lunar plans when Apollo 11 got to the moon in July 1969, but that the Soviet program had been plagued with “hardware and systems . . . quite inadequate by our standards.” In a summary of Dr. Sheldon’s report, the Washington Star noted his statement that the “race for the moon” was closer than many believed at the time; “the Soviets probably wanted to send the first manned flight around the moon by November 1967, when a test failed.” Although a Soviet Apollo would probably not appear for the next 3 yr, Dr. Sheldon said, “within the decade there will probably be a Soviet landing on the moon that will be a generation beyond the Apollo flights . . . .” Describing the extensive Soviet military uses of space in addition to scientific and economic purposes, the report noted “the seriousness and steadiness with which the Russians are adding to their space facilities and their space operations, building versatility and experience in depth.” The report did not mention the absence of this element in the U.S., the Star noted. The report would be published later in 1976 by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, for which it was prepared. (WStar, 2 June 76, A-3)
Launch complex 14 at KSC—used for John Glenn’s orbital flight in Feb. 1962 and other manned launches untd 1966—was blown up with plastic explosives by an Army demolition team after the Air Force decided the rusty and obsolete towers constituted a hazardous area and should be demolished. The scrap metal would be sold to the highest bidder. News reports noted that a stainless steel memorial would remain to mark the place where the seven original astronauts took their first steps into space. (WStar, 2 Dec 76, A-3; CBS News transcript, Cronkite-Dean, 1 Dec 76; NBC Nightly News, Brinkley, 1 Dec 76)
Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, last man to leave footprints on the moon’s surface when he commanded Apollo 17 in 1972, would leave government service 1 July. Cernan, a Navy captain, would complete 20 yr in the Navy in June and would retire from both the Navy and the astronaut corps. Selected as a NASA astronaut in 1963, Cernan had had 3 space missions (including 2 (lights to the moon) and was the second American to walk in space, when he was pilot of Gemini 9 in June 1966. As lunar-module pilot of Apollo 10 in May 1969, he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had flown the module within about 15 km of the moon’s surface in a full-scale rehearsal of all but the final moments of the first lunar-landing mission 2 mo later. In Dec. 1972, Cernan and Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt landed at Taurus-Littrow during the last scheduled manned lunar mission. In 1973, Cernan became special assistant to the Apollo program manager, working on the joint U.S.-USSR Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; in Sept. 1975, he became chief of training operations in the astronaut office. (NASA Release 76-47; JSC Release 76-20; W Star, 16 Mar 76, A-2)
NASA was negligent in the 1972 death of Kirby Dupree, supervisor of a support unit for astronauts, a federal judge ruled in awarding $575 000 to the widow and a 4-yr-old daughter. When a battery box exploded in an astronaut training facility at JSC, Dupree and James E. Scott were assisting with water experiments used to simulate space flights. Scott won $100 000 for injuries suffered in the accident. Both Dupree and Scott were employees of a contractor at the facility. (ATT, 25 Nov 76, 20)
The Apollo lunar scientific experiments package (ALSEP) set up on the moon in Feb. 1971 by astronauts Alan B. Shepard and Edgar D. Mitchell during the third manned exploration of the moon ceased transmission, probably because of failure of electronic components, engineers at Johnson Space Center said. The Apollo 14 instrument, one of five stations on the moon, had provided scientists with lunar seismic data in combination with stations set up during the Apollo 12, 15, 16, and 17 missions. Originally designed with a 1-yr lifetime, the ALSEP 14 was first of the stations to fail completely, although it had lost its ability to receive commands a year previously. The remaining stations continued to provide data on the moon’s seismic activity, heat flow, interactions with earth’s magnetic field, and the solar-wind and cosmic particles that continuously bombard the lunar surface. Findings based on ALSEP data included measurement of moonquakes, mostly at about 4 on the Richter scale; indications of a lunar core at or near the melting point; a thick lithosphere that probably prevented mountain-building on the moon; and a tenuous atmosphere deriving from solar-wind particles. The seismic instruments on the ALSEPs were the most sensitive in existence, and the remaining stations were estimated to last for another 3 yr. (JSC Roundup, 13 Feb 76, 1)
Dr. Harrison H. (Jack) Schmitt, astronaut on Apollo 17, was the victorious Republican candidate for the U.S. Senate from New Mexico, defeating Democrat Joseph M. Montoya, who was seeking a third term. Now a consulting geologist, the 41-yr-old Schmitt had a 3-to-2 lead in the returns. CBS commentator Walter Cronkite noted in a news broadcast at 10:25 p.m. EST on 2 Nov. that astronauts constituted only 2 ten-millionths of the U.S. population, yet there would now be two U.S. senators who were astronauts—Schmitt and John Glenn (D-Ohio)—which was “representation out of all proportion.” (W Post, 3 Nov 76, A-17; broadcast, 2 Nov 76)
The USSR launched a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 4, from an undisclosed site “in the medium latitudes” of European Russia to an altitude of 1512 km. Carrying “more than 10 complex and diverse scientific instruments” developed and built by specialists from Bulgaria, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR, the rocket was designed to sample a vertical cross section of the neutral upper atmosphere and ionospheric plasma in a 15-min time period. In a Pravda interview, Academician B. N. Petrov noted that composition of the atmosphere and ionosphere changed with height, the lighter gases being at the top. None of the previous Vertikal rockets (launched in 1970, 1971, and 1975) had reached altitudes of more than about 500 km, the oxygen section of the ionosphere. Vertikal 4 had reached the hydrogen region, or protonosphere, and had measured properties of the plasma affecting radio-wave absorption and investigated effects of shortwave solar radiation on the earth’s atmosphere. Results of the investigation would extend knowledge of weather and climate, Petrov said. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Oct 76; Pravda in Russian, 17 Oct 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 29 Oct 76) At what the NY Times described as “a restricted press conference before liftoff,” the rookie cosmonauts said their mission was to concentrate on practical scientific uses of the Soviet space stations, especially extraterrestrial manufacture of metals, glass, and pharmaceuticals. Rozhdestvensky said that every ruble invested in space exploration had “already been returned tenfold to the national budget in one way or another.’,’ Tass announced at noon Moscow time on 16 Oct. (5 am EDT) that the docking of Soyuz 23 with Salyut 5 had been cancelled “because of the off-design regime of [the] approach control system,” and the crew had been ordered to return to earth. The NY Times noted that this was “the first occasion on which the Russians have made public their problems before the completion of a space flight.” Usually no announcement had been forthcoming until the crew had returned to earth. At 8:46 pm Moscow time (1:46 pm EDT)—almost exactly 48 hr after liftoff—the descent module landed 195 km southwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan “on the surface of Lake Tengiz” in a heavy snowfall. The search and rescue teams, working under difficult nighttime conditions, recovered the descent module and the cosmonauts from the first splashdown in the 15-yr history of Soviet manned space flight. Announcement of the adverse conditions of the landing was not made until 12 hr afterwards, a delay suggesting some difficulty in locating the capsule. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, director of cosmonaut training, said that helicopter and amphibious craft had aided the recovery. Residents of the nearby town of Arkalyk welcomed the returned cosmonauts at the airport and made them honorary citizens. The crew returned to the Baykonur cosmodrome by plane on the morning of 17 Oct. The splashdown of Soyuz 23 resulted from chance rather than planning, said the newspaper Izvestia on 18 Oct., describing fears at recovery-team headquarters that the landing craft might have gone into swamps near the lake, after a report that the craft had tilted on impact, putting the porthole below the water’s surface. The pilot of a plane had reported the capsule’s position and a helicopter had towed the capsule to shore amid fog, snow, and broken ice. The official comments were regarded as “an effort to avoid blaming the astronauts for the mission’s failure,” said the NY Times. The Soyuz 23 difficulty marked the fourth failure of a Soyuz mission to rendezvous; radar trouble had forced the crews of Soyuz 3, Soyuz 8, and Soyuz 15 to return to earth without docking. The Wash. Post noted that about one in three Soyuz flights had failed to carry out its mission: Soyuz 1 and Soyuz 11 resulted in the deaths of one and three cosmonauts respectively, and two cosmonauts on an unnumbered mission in April 1975 had been forced to abort their flight before reaching earth orbit. (NYT, 15 Oct 76, A 13; 16 Oct 76, 6; 17 Oct 76, 29; 18 Oct 76, 32; 19 Oct 76, 17; W Post, 15 Oct 76, A-21; 17 Oct 76, A-17; 18 Oct 76, A-16; C Trib, 15 Oct 76, 1-5; 17 Oct 76, 1-3; 18 Oct 76, 1-8; WStar, 17 Oct 76, A-14; FBIS, Tass in English, 14-17 Oct 76)
Recently published criticism by columnist John Keats of “a modest NASA effort to provide meals for elderly people” not only “managed to misunderstand just about every aspect of what we are doing” but also “put down the elderly and [raised] my ire in the process,” astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin wrote in a letter to the New York Times. Kerwin pointed out that the NASA program was^a response to the Texas Governor’s Committee on Aging, which had asked the agency for help in developing good-tasting easy-to-prepare and easy-to-deliver meals for people not reached by programs such as Meals on Wheels or group meals sponsored by Congress in various city centers. Kerwin said NASA’s engineers “know a little about packaging and shelf life,” and “we care because we have relatives who are old, and because we’ll be old ourselves soon—if we’re lucky.” The technology being used to do a job for the old was good, Kerwin concluded, “but it’s the caring of which I am most proud.” (IVYT, 1 June 76, 34)
The three U.S. astronauts who participated in last summer’s Apollo-Soyuz project—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance Brand, and Donald K. Slayton—left Saudi Arabia after a 2-day visit in Riyadh and headed for Abu Dhabi, capital of the United Arab Emirates, on a goodwill tour of the Middle East. {NY News, 12 Feb 76, 96)
A “mysterious force” on the moon had made one of the remote-controlled stations set up by Apollo astronauts behave peculiarly, Royce Rensberger reported in the N. Y. Times. After operating without interruption since its placement on the lunar surface in Feb. 1971, the station went dead, returned to life spontaneously a few weeks later, then went dead again. Engineers at JSC were waiting to see if the unknown influence would switch the station on again. Called ALSEPs, for Apollo lunar scientific experiment packages, the five stations deployed on the moon at intervals since Nov. 1969 had been sending a steady stream of scientific data on moonquakes, heat flowing from the moon’s interior, and the nature of particles in the solar wind; the atomic power supplies, designed for a 1-yr lifetime, had proved more durable. The faulty station, left by the Apollo 14 mission, stopped receiving ground commands in March 1975 when its receiver failed; on 18 Jan. 1976, its transmitter stopped; on Feb. 19, the entire station came back to life—both receiver and transmitter working—and one experiment that had never operated during lunar daytime began working flawlessly night and day. Then, exactly a month later, the entire station shut down again. One theory was that the starts and stops might relate to extreme temperature changes on the moon, varying from 121 °C at lunar noonday to — 184°C at lunar midnight. However, as day and night had not originally affected the station’s operation, scientists could not explain why temperature change did not produce failure from the start. (NYT, 9 Apr 76, 4)
A recently completed manipulator-development facility at Johnson Space Center’s Bldg. 9a laboratory would assist NASA engineers and technicians in studying Shuttle payload deployment and retrieval in space, JSC announced. The manipulating system, with a reach of 15.2 meters, was the largest known remotely controlled manipulator system. Sizes of payloads to be carried in the Space Shuttle would range from very small to a maximum length of 18.2 m and diameter of 4.5 m; objective of the facility would be to improve techniques of moving bulky payloads in and out of the orbiter’s bay in a weightless environment. The manipulator arm would be operated from inside the orbiter cabin by an astronaut using a pair of hand controllers and viewing the process through a window, aided by a closed-circuit TV system. The laboratory building also housed working models of orbiter components including a full-scale forward cabin section with cargo bay, manipulator station, and a large air-bearing table approximately 25 by 30m on which simulated payloads could be steered on a cushion of air by the remote arm. The air-be a ring table would also test the ability of astronauts to move over the smooth interior of the orbiter, using suction-cup shoes instead of cleats locking into grids. An engineer wearing suction-cup shoes and strapped into a cage-like apparatus on the air-bearing table could be familiarized with “walking like a fly” in the day-to-day work environment of the Shuttle. (JSC Release 76-66)
NASA issued a call for Space Shuttle astronaut candidates— 15 pilots and 15 mission specialists—to be selected by Dec. 1977. Applications would be accepted through June 1977, and candidates would report to Johnson Space Center in July 1978 for 2 yr of training. Appointment as an astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. Minority and women candidates were encouraged to apply. NASA spokesman Bob Gordon said the agency expected no problems if a woman were selected; the Space Shuttle was “designed to accommodate women astronauts... the waste management system is the only problem really and that has been designed for both males and females.” Since the astronaut program began in 1959, 73 pilots and scientists had been selected; 31 persons were available as Space Shuttle crew, 28 astronauts assigned to JSC and 3 holding government positions in Washington, D.C. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would maintain vehicle systems; mission-specialist astronauts would coordinate orbiter operations in flight planning, use of consumables, and management of the payload. (NASA Release 76-122; JSC Release 76-44; DOD Release 310-76; NYT, 8 July 76, 12)
NASA announced that Skylab 4 commander Gerald P. Carr would leave JSC June 25 to join a Houston firm, Bovay Engineers, Inc. Carr, one of 19 astronauts selected in Apr. 1966, had shared a spaceflight-duration record of 2017hr (84 days) with Dr. Edward G. Gibson and William R. Pogue, and had retired from the U.S. Marine Corps in Sept. 1975 to become a NASA civilian employee. His departure left 27 astronauts on the active list at JSC. (NASA Release 77-129)
NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA Release 77-44)
JSC reported that another 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report for individual interviews and physical examinations; the group included 17 pilot and 3 mission specialist applicants. Eight of the applicants were from the USAF; 6, Navy; 2, Marines; 4, civilians. Of the more than 8000 applicants, about 200 would go to JSC for screening, the final group due in mid-Nov. and selections in Dec. (JSC Release 77-54; NASA Release 77-205)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
JSC announced that another set of 20 Shuttle astronaut candidates would report to the center Oct. 17 for physical examinations and individual interviews. All of this group would be mission specialist applicants, 8 of them women. Applicants screened at JSC so far had totaled 140, 77 of them pilots and 63 mission specialists; the 17 women were all mission specialist applicants. (JSC Release 77-59; NASA Release 77-218) •
NASA announced it had scheduled the first free flight of the Shuttle orbiter for 8am PDT Aug. 12 at Dryden Flight Research Center. Briefing the press Aug. 11 would be Deke Slayton, ALT program manager at Johnson Space Center, and John Young, chief of the JSC astronaut office; Chet Lee, Hq director of Space Transportation Systems operations, speaking on payloads, pricing policies, and users; and Aaron Cohen, manager of the orbiter project at JSC, on orbiter systems. (NASA Release 77-158; DFRC Release 26-77)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
Johnson Space Center announced that a sixth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report this week for individual interviews and physical examinations. This group, all mission specialist applicants, included one woman. (JSC Release 77-56; NASA Release 77-215) •
Kennedy Space Center reported it had loaned its hyperbaric chamber to the Univ. of Fla. College of Medicine at Gainesville, for use in research. KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or recompression) chamber in its operations and checkout building to treat astronauts affected by decompression sickness (the “bends”) during manned altitude-chamber tests of the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms, carbon monoxide poisoning, or gas gangrene might require administration of hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber) for periods up to 24hr. The end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975 had ended NASA’s immediate need for the altitude or the hyperbaric chambers, but KSC had kept them for possible use in Space Shuttle training. (KSC Release 101-77)
NASA reported that its announcement on selection of Shuttle astronauts, set for December, would not be forthcoming until January. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, agency administrator, had met Dec. 12 with officials of the selection program but, because of current NASA budget activity, had not reviewed the data presented. On Dec. 16 Dr. Frosch had notified JSC director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, who had supervised the selection program, that the review would proceed after the end of the year. (NASA Release 77-254)
NASA announced that the first 20 of about 200 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to JSC Aug. 2 for a week of individual interviews and physical exams. Ten of the group were from the USAF, 7 U.S. Navy, 2 Marines, and 1 civilian. Although all the initial group had been pilot applicants, NASA expected the number interviewed at JSC would divide evenly between pilot and mission specialist applicants. NASA would complete processing by mid-November and hoped to select as many as 20 astronaut candidates in each of the two categories in December. Candidates would report to JSC in 1978 for 2yr of training and evaluation; final selection as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. (JSC Release 77-42)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) would present the gold space medal, given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum, at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records. Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of 2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed circuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine aircraft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.) Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting 107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich, for being the only person to win the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its environment. The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77) During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Aircraft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
NASA announced that a fourth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to JSC Sept. 19 for a week of physical examinations and individual interviews. All of this group were pilot applicants, one a civilian. Of the others, 12 were USAF; 4, U.S Navy; 3, U.S Marine Corps. A final group would report to JSC in mid-Nov. (NASA Release 77-192)
JSC reported the 8th group of Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to the center Oct. 25 for physical examinations and interviews. The 20 mission specialist applicants in this group were all military except for one civilian; they represented the USAF (13), the Army (3), the Navy (2), and the Marines (1). The group included one woman, USAF Capt. Jane L. Holley. Of the 160 applicants screened at JSC, 77 wanted to be pilots and 83 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-66; NASA Release 77-225)
JSC announced that the second group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Aug. 15 for individual interviews and physical examinations. Like the first group, all those in the second group had applied for pilot positions. The second group included 11 USAF applicants, 7 Navy, 1 Marine, and 1 civilian. (NASA Release 77-171; JSC Release 77-44)
NASA announced it had scheduled the second free flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about Sept. 13 at DFRC with astronauts Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. The free-flight test series called for 3 more flights before the orbiter would go to MSFC for vibration tests early in 1978. (NASA Release 77-186)
NASA announced that a third group of 20 astronaut applicants, all in the mission specialist category, would report to JSC Aug. 29 for a week of individual interviews and physical examinations. Eight of this group were women; all 20 had Ph.D. or medical degrees, or both, and one had a degree in veterinary medicine. (NASA Release 77-176)
NASA announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for the 30 to 40 openings as Space Shuttle astronauts after a yr-long recruiting effort. Candidates selected would report in 1978 for a 2yr training period at Johnson Space Center. Of the 8037 applicants, 6735 were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot; 1142 of the applicants were women. NASA would announce selections in Dec. 1977. (NASA Release 77-145; JSC Release 77-39)
James B. Irwin, eighth astronaut to walk on the moon, remained in satisfactory condition after triple bypass surgery at the Texas Heart Institute. “He is still in intensive care but is doing very well,” said a spokesman at St. Lukes Episcopal Hospital in Houston. The operation consisted of replacing three vein segments with veins removed from Irwin’s legs. Irwin, 46, lunar-module pilot on the Apollo 15 mission July 26, 1971, had resigned from the astronaut corps in May 1972. (NYT, Jan 8/77, 17)
NASA announced that Dr. David R. Scott, director of Dryden Flight Research Center, would leave the agency Oct. 30 to form with others a firm in Los Angeles specializing in technology transfer. Deputy Director Isaac T. Gillam would be acting director until a replacement was selected. Before becoming director of DFRC in 1975, Dr. Scott had been deputy director since 1973. He had left the astronaut corps in 1972, having flown on Gemini 8, Apollo 9, and as spacecraft commander of Apollo 15 (fourth manned lunar landing, during which he was first to visit the moon’s Hadley rille and Apennine mountains). He had also been technical assistant to the Apollo program manager at JSC and special assistant in the Apollo spacecraft program office. (NASA anno Oct 12/77; NASA Release 77-217; DFRC Release 34-77)
The moon landing effort was possible only because the U.S. had laid the basic theoretical groundwork in the 1940s and 1950s, the WPost reported, quoting Richard C. Atkinson, new head of the Natl. Science Foundation. The man who “probably controls more basic research spending than anyone else in the world” said that Americans should not hope science would come up with an overnight solution to the energy crisis that would preserve their current lifestyle—“Science just doesn’t operate with those turnaround times,” he said. The fact that many people expected such solutions indicated “a basic incomprehension of what science is all about,” an ironic byproduct of the mind-boggling scientific achievement in the past 20yr. “After Sputnik . . . there was a big rush to catch up here . . . They put in a lot of high-powered curricula . . . Now we have a small core of students really well educated in science and a huge group that just [drops out] . . . Those people never have any exposure again. Even college graduates now are really poorly informed on science matters.” Liberal education, Atkinson said, should include solid grounding in basic sciences so that citizens could understand issues like the fate of nuclear reactors and the gene-manufacturing possibilities of recombinant DNA. “I worry,” he said, “that the nation may turn to applied research so strongly that it neglects basic research, and basic research remains our fundamental commitment.” {W Post, June 19/77, C-4) Earlier unmanned tests of the piggyback orbiter in Feb. and March had gone smoothly; since then, engineers had installed control systems, guidance instruments, and power units whose repeated malfunctions had delayed the manned tests originally scheduled to begin May 26. The June 18 test had been delayed for 24hr by problems with the entry hatch and by the failure of guidance-system computers. The astronauts reported trouble with a cabin-pressure valve and with radio communications, and said they had experienced more airframe surface noise than expected. NASA had scheduled a second “manned inert” test for June 28, with the first free flight set for late July or early Aug. (WStar, June 19/77, A-6; C Trib, June 19/77, 1-3; NYT, June 19/77, 19; W Post, June 19/77, A-18; June 20/77, A-6)
NASA announced a yr-long schedule of test runs and captive-flight tests on the first-built Space Shuttle orbiter, Enterprise, that would take place at the Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Called approach and landing tests (ALT), the series of flights with a modified Boeing 747 serving as a ferry aircraft and airborne launch platform would begin with several taxiing tests with the orbiter atop the carrier; following would be six inert-captive flights in which the jumbo jet would carry the unmanned orbiter to a 7620m (25 000ft) altitude. Unmanned flights would verify performance of the two vehicles in mated flight. Then would come a series of captive-active flights with the orbiter’s systems powered up and the Enterprise manned by 2 astronauts. The first orbiter off the assembly line arrived at DFRC Jan. 31 from Rockwell Intl.’s Palmdale plant; upon completion of ALT, the carrier would take the prototype to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground-vibration tests. After these tests, NASA said, the Enterprise would return to Palmdale to be prepared for orbital flight in the early 1980s. The orbiter now under construction (OV-102) would be the first used in actual orbital-flight tests, now scheduled to begin in mid-1979; six test flights would demonstrate the orbiter’s capabilities in earth orbit before the start of operational flights, scheduled to begin in 1980. (NASA Release 77-16)
JSC announced that the 10th group of Shuttle astronaut applications would report to the center Nov. 14 for physical examinations and interviews. This group consisted of 24 mission specialist applicants and one pilot applicant; 17 were civilians, 1 a woman, and 8 were from the military—3 each from the USAF and Navy, 1 each from the Marines and Coast Guard. This group would bring the total to 80 pilot applicants and 128 mission specialist (21 women) applicants screened at JSC. In Dec., NASA hoped to name as many as 20 in each category for 2 yrs’ further training before final selection as astronauts. (JSC Release 77-75; NASA Release 77-236)
NASA announced tentative selection of 18 scientists to participate in the Space Telescope project. The 10-ton spacecraft scheduled for Shuttle launch in 1983 to orbit at 500km (310mi) altitude would make observations deeper into space, and with more detail, than heretofore possible, covering about 350 times the volume of space now visible from earth-based telescopes. It had been designed for remote operation from the ground, including maintenance or retrieval by a space-suited astronaut for return to earth to be overhauled and relaunched. The telescope could accommodate 5 different instruments at its focal plane: both the faint-object camera (ESA) and the wide-field camera could cover ultraviolet and blue spectra, the latter the red and near-infrared regions as well; the two spectrographs would offer a range of resolution impossible with a single instrument; and the photometer could calibrate the other instrument and image the galactic background. (NASA Release 77-239)
W Post staff writer Thomas O’Toole quoted administration sources as saying President Carter had chosen Dr. Frank Press, head of the department of earth and planetary sciences at the Mass. Inst, of Technology, to be White House science adviser. Press, considered one of the world’s leading seismologists, had been one of a team of geophysicists who first described Antarctica as a continent rather than as an island of ice floating on earth’s crust. He had also helped design and build the seismometers left on the moon by six crews of Apollo astronauts. A member of the Natl. Science Board, Press had been consultant to 7 federal agencies including DOD, the State Dept., and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Offered the job of science adviser to the president, Press apparently had not accepted it at once, and said by telephone from MIT that “nothing is settled.” (IVPost, Feb 11/77, A-2)
MSFC reported that the number of visitors to the center in 1976 had increased 11 °7o over the previous yr to a total of 95 529, representing each of the 50 United States and several foreign countries. The guided bus tours of the center, cosponsored by MSFC and the Alabama Space and Rocket Center, last year added new items and increased activities at some of the former Saturn test sites. The tour stop presenting the story of the Space Shuttle and its payload had added a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle main engine. Tourists could also enter a full-scale mockup of Skylab to see how the astronauts lived in orbit; and the east and west test areas being converted for Shuttle testing were now available for viewing. The Redstone test stand already on the tour route had been refurbished and was added to the Natl. Register of Historic Places. (MSFC Release 77-3)
NASA Hq announced appointment of R.D. Ginter as assistant administrator for energy programs, effective Jan. 2. Ginter had been acting in that position since Sept. 1975, following the departure of astronaut (now U.S. Senator) Harrison H. Schmitt (R-NM). Ginter had joined NASA in 1960 after 8yr as a missile project officer with the U.S. Navy and served in a variety of positions, including chief of the Scout launch vehicle program, director of the Technology Applications Division, and director of the Energy Systems Division. He received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1966 for his work as program manager for the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle. (NASA Release 77-9)
NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERNO of Bremen, W. Germany, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload). Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif. Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)
The Chicago Tribune reported that astronaut Walt Cunningham had written “the first kiss-and-tell treatise about the space program,” a book called The All-American Boys, intended as a “candid, close-up, even critical look” at NASA, the space program, and his fellow “partynauts,” none of whom had dared to be as critical as Cunningham in his first “but probably not last” book. The review said the book was “about people—imperfect mortal men—and what happens when they suddenly find themselves cast as superheroes in a world that literally knows no bounds.” (C Trib, Nov 10/77, 1-17)
The Washington Post reported that NASA would try to save the Skylab space station “which is moving closer to earth and may fall in bits and pieces over the next few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch a “remote-controlled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new orbit, where it would be available for future astronaut visits. The 118ft Skylab launched in 1973 had been circling the globe every 1,5hr at a 200mi altitude. It had been home for three 3-man crews for as long as 12wk at a time; its last 84-day manned mission in 1974 was still the world’s endurance record for time in space. (W Post, Oct 30/77, A-10)
JSC reported the first 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants were due for screening. Center Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that the quality of the applicants would make it “difficult to narrow the field . . . paring that number will be a real challenge.” (NASA Release 77-161) * NASA announced it had appointed Isaac T. Gillam, IV, deputy director of DFRC, succeeding Gerald D. Griffin, recently appointed deputy director of Kennedy Space Center in Fla. Gillam, who had directed Shuttle operations at Dryden in the current approach and landing tests, had joined NASA in 1963 after serving in the USAF as a pilot, missile launch Jcrew commander, and ROTC instructor. After receiving a B.A. from Howard Univ., he had done graduate work at Tenn. State Univ. and had been assistant professor of air science there. NASA had appointed him assistant manager of the Delta program in 1966 and program manager in 1968. In 1973, he became program manager for small launch vehicles, and had gone to DFRC in 1976. He had received NASA’s distinguished service medal for his work with launch vehicles. (DFRC Release 27-77; NASA Release 77-164; NASA anno Aug 4/77)
Fifteen yr almost to the day after the U.S. placed its first man in earth orbit, NASA would begin flight tests of the Enterprise-first Space Shuttle orbiter off the assembly line—to be carried piggyback on a Boeing 747 on Feb. 11, 1977, for its first trip through earth’s atmosphere. The flight of Marine Lt. Col. John H. Glenn on Feb. 20,1962, lasted less than 5hr; since that flight, the U.S. had accumulated 22 504 man-hours in space by using 43 astronauts on 31 separate manned missions that included 9 trips around the moon, 6 moon landings, and 3mo earth-orbital missions on Skylab. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft Friendship 7 weighed only 1315kg, with barely enough room for the pilot and a few instruments, and had parachuted into the Atlantic after its one-time use. The orbiter would weigh 67 500kg empty, could carry up to 7 crew members, and was designed to land on a runway and be prepared for another flight within weeks. In contrast to Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, Spacelab missions carried by the Shuttle might last from 7 to 30 days. First of 6 orbital tests of the Shuttle was set for 1979, and operational flight for 1980. (NASA Release 77-21; NASA pre-ALT rept Feb 11/77)
The NY Times reported that Capt. Edgar D. Mitchell, astronaut on the Apollo 14 mission, had taken 55 special stamp covers on his flight and had just sold the first for $4200. The San Francisco firm that auctioned the stamp earlier in Oct. said the buyer was a major stamp dealer in Italy. In 1972 NASA had reprimanded the Apollo 15 astronauts for smuggling 400 first-day covers to the moon and selling 100; the 300 covers not sold were turned over to the U.S. for “safe storage in the archives.” The Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 silver medals on the 1971 moon flight, keeping 150 for “private use,” but had not been reprimanded because none of the medals had been sold. The Calif, dealer said Mitchell, now a civilian living in Fla., had brought in the covers for appraised and was advised to find the market value by selling one. NASA said it knew Mitchell had taken the covers in his “personal preference kit”; when it asked about them, he replied “It’s,none of your business,” and a few days later had announced his retirement. Official NASA comment on the sale: “Unfortunate.” (NYT, Oct 23/77, 45)
Johnson Space Center announced that the ninth group of Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Nov. 7 for physicals and interviews. The group, 21 mission specialist applicants and 2 pilot applicants, included 12 civilians; 2 were women, bringing the number of female applicants interviewed to 20. Of the military applicants, 5 were Navy; 4, USAF; and 1 each from the Army and Marines. NASA had screened 183 applicants so far, 79 seeking to be pilots and 104 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-70; NASA Release 77-232) •
NASA announced it would conduct the third “manned inert” flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about July 26 at Dry den Flight Research Center. At the controls of the orbiter atop its Boeing 747 carrier would be astronauts Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton, making their second piggyback run in this test series. They had made the first captive flight June 18; the second, on June 28, had Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. In the first flight, lasting 56min, Haise and Fullerton had checked out the orbiter flight controls at low altitude and low speed. For the third test, the 747 would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7895 meters (25 905ft) where it would “push over” in a practice separation; the orbiter and 747 crews would go through all the motions except actual separation. The flight would be a dress rehearsal for the first free flight of the orbiter, scheduled on or about Aug. 12. (NASA Release 77-146; JSC Release 77-41)
The initial phase of Shuttle approach and landing tests (ALT) that began Feb. 18 at DFRC might end ahead of schedule, DFRC announced, if the 4th and 5th flight of the combined 747-and-orbiter vehicles continued to meet program objectives. Donald K. Slayton, ALT program manager, said that if performance measured up to previous successful flights, the 6th test (now scheduled for Mar. 4) would be dropped. Program officials had praised the performance of the 747 and its piggyback passenger, Slayton said; flight data had verified preflight wind-tunnel test results and simulations conducted by Boeing. Early completion of inert tests with an unmanned orbiter would put the orbiter in its hangar a week ahead of schedule to prepare for its next flight, in the captive-active phase. Five flights scheduled in this phase would carry astronaut crews to perform systems checks and go through crew procedures as the 747 went through maneuvers up to, but just short of, actual release of the orbiter. Tests later in the summer would release the orbiter for an unpowered landing on DFRC’s dry lakebed. (NASA Release 77-36; DFRC Release 8-77)
The United States planned to orbit in 1983 a 9080kg 645cm telescope that would observe images almost to the edge of space and the beginning of time, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. “Without the blurring of the atmosphere,” said Dr. John Bahcall of Princeton Univ.’s Institute for Advanced Study, “we would be able to see things that are 10 times smaller than we have seen, or 10 times farther away. It would be like reading the writing on a quarter that we could only tell was round before.” If approved by Congress, the $435 million Space Telescope would be carried from earth by astronauts manning the Space Shuttle. The telescope would investigate quasars radiating thousands of times the energy generated by ordinary stars of the same size, and would observe the birth of stars, map nearby planets and galaxies, and compute distances to the nearest stars. In addition to optics half the size of Mount Palomar’s, the Space Telescope would carry lenses and instruments to scan ultraviolet and infrared spectra not accessible to earthbound telescopes because of atmospheric blockage. The telescope would relay its views to earth using geostationary satellites over the U.S. NASA would send Shuttle astronauts to the telescope every 5yr to replace wornout or damaged parts. (W Post, Jan 21/77, C-24)
Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR, late in Dec. to begin training for flight positions on Soyuz/Salyut missions. Flight candidates from Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania were to arrive for training at the center during 1977. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9) February I: NASA announced it had received 1147 applications for its Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least 15 pilot and 15 mission specialist candidates. Deadline for applications would be June 30, 1977. Those selected would report July 1, 1978, to Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; appointment as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of the course. NASA had mailed 11 822 applications to persons outside the agency, and another 350 to employees at NASA centers. All the applications received so far had been from civilians; the astronaut selection board would receive applications from members of the military services just before the deadline. Most of the applications were for the mission specialist category: 922 for that group, 225 for pilot, and 118 for both. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would be responsible for vehicle systems. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in areas of consumables usage, experiment operations, and crew activities. Crews would number up to seven: commander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists (who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors of the payload being flown). Payload specialists would operate specific payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to recruit qualified minorities and women as Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 77-18)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its first free flight at Edwards Air Force Base in Calif, with a “flawless landing” on a runway in the Mojave desert 53min 51sec after taking off at 8am local time (11am EDT) and 5min 22sec after release from its 747 carrier. Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Charles Gordon Fullerton were the Enterprise pilots; veteran test pilots Thomas C. McMurtry and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew the Boeing 747. Spectators, estimated to number about 70 000, had begun arriving the previous night (Thursday, Aug. 11) to cheer the landing just after 9am local time with the desert temperature nearing 100°F. The orbiter had separated from its carrier 3min late because the heat of the air had slowed the climb. The 747 had “strained its engines” to carry the 73ton Shuttle as high as possible; it had climbed to 27 000ft (8100m) before it started downward, in order to gain speed. The 122ft-long orbiter, released at 22 100ft (6738m) altitude, had soared one way, the 747 another, to ensure separation. Pilots of the T-38 chase planes following the flight had assured the crews of the 747 and the orbiter that they were clear of each other. “Thanks for the lift,” Haise told the 747 crew as the craft separated. Haise had rehearsed the free flight the previous day in a small twin-engine jet modified to behave like the Shuttle. Actual separation, which could not be rehearsed in advance, was the only way to prove that the Shuttle would lift cleanly over the tall vertical tail fin of the 747. Separation had occurred without difficulty, however, and both pilots reported themselves delighted with the orbiter, which had handled in unORIGINAL PAGE- 53 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 QF POOR QUALITY Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise separates from its Boeing 747 carrier in first free flight, August 12, 1977. (NASA 77-H-552) powered flight as easily as design engineers had predicted. It was “a lot like flying a Concorde,” according to Haise, and Fullerton described it as a "very crisp, very stable airplane.” On the orbiter’s way down, Haise had pulled up in three inflight “flare” maneuvers to test its landing characteristics. One of the identical redundant computers on the orbiter had failed at separation, cutting off flight-control accelerometers, without affecting the flight. The Enterprise landed like a glider, without engines, relying on its battery of computers and “the most advanced control system ever installed in a spacecraft.” It had approached the ground at an 11° angle, more than 3 times as steep as a commercial jetliner’s approach, and at a speed of 338kph (210mph) compared to a typical 747 landing speed of 170mph. The orbiter had touched down a mile in front of the aiming point, because Haise underestimated its glide capability; it had rolled another 2mi before stoppping. For this first free flight, the orbiter wore a tail cone over its three aft rockets; on the fourth flight, scheduled for Oct., NASA would remove the cone, causing the orbiter to land more steeply (as it would upon returning from space). In regular use, the Shuttle as a weight-saving measure would have no power after firing its rockets to deorbit, no airbreathing engines for maneuvering in the atmosphere; it would be slowed by air friction only and would glide down at 200mph or more to a landing. For the actual spaceflight early in 1979, the Shuttle would ride into orbit pushed by solid-fuel rocket motors on a giant external tank and by the liquid-fuel rockets on its tail. Purpose of the free flight exercises was to verify the orbiter’s subsonic airworthiness, the operation of the integrated system, and the pilot-guided vs. automatic approach and landing capabilities. The ability to land at an airport instead of parachuting into the ocean gave the Shuttle the “versatility and economy required to make space operations routine in the next decade,” according to the W. Star. (NASA Release 77-160; NASA Actv., Aug/77, 2; NYT, Aug 13/77, 1; WPost, Aug 13/77, Al; WStar, Aug 13/77, A-3; B Sun, Aug 12/77, 7; C Trib, Aug 13/77, 1-1; Time, Aug 22/77, 64)
NASA announced that simulation of a 1980s Spacelab mission using the Galileo II (a Convair 990 jet transport converted to a sophisticated flying laboratory) would begin May 16 with the first of nine daily 6hr flights from ARC carrying four payload specialists and a mission specialist. Known as ASSESS (airborne science/Spacelab equipment-system simulation), the flights would rehearse NASA and ESA personnel in the roles they would perform in actual Spacelab missions, giving the managers practice in coordinating payload management between experiment operators on Spacelab and investigators on the ground [cf. Apr. 19]. The actual missions would be the first chance for scientific personnel without astronaut training to obtain in orbit data on earth resources, infrared astronomy, medicine, and atmospheric pollution. The Spacelab program that began in 1972 had included 6 simulations to gather data on Shuttle-Spacelab operations; the first set of flights, called ASSESS 1, had consisted of 5 simulations on Galileo over 6 days in June 1975. The new series, ASSESS 2, would fly a different route each of the 9 days, ranging over the Pacific and to the northern and southern borders of the United States, as far east as the Dakotas, and would end May 26. The Galileo II would fly to Paris May 30 for exhibition at the Paris Air Show, then fly to Cologne in West Germany where the ESA experiments would be removed. Mission specialist on ASSESS 2 would be astronaut Karl Henize of JSC with astronaut Robert Parker, also of JSC, as backup. NASA payload specialists on ASSESS 2 would be David S. Billiu and Robert T. Menzies of JPL, with Leon Weaver of MSFC as backup to both; ESA payload specialist would be Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, with Juergen Fein of West Germany as backup. The other payload specialist position would be shared by Michael Taylor of England (on 6 flights) and Klaus Kramp of West Germany (on 3 flights). The simulation would confine the crew to the aircraft and an adjacent mobile van containing living quarters similar to those available on the Shuttle. (NASA Release 77-94; ESA anno May 10/77)
H. Julian Allen, originator of the concept of bluntness as an aerodynamic technique for reducing heating of spacecraft reentering earth’s atmosphere, died of a heart attack at Stanford Univ. hospital at the age of 66. A major figure in modern aerospace technology, Allen’s work had made possible the safe return to earth of U.S. astronauts and had revolutionized the design of ballistic missiles. After earning bachelor’s and engineering degrees from Stanford, Allen in 1936 had joined the Natl. Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) at its Langley laboratory in Hampton, Va., and had returned to Calif, in 1941 when the Ames installation came into being. He had worked there ever since, serving as ARC director from 1965 to 1969. His scientific contributions included a general theory of subsonic airfoils which led to use of low-drag airfoils in World War II on aircraft such as the Mustang fighter. He led in developing high-speed wind tunnels at ARC, now recognized as primary national resources for advancing aircraft design and national defense. He had received national and international honors, including NASA’s distinguished service medal and medal for exceptional scientific achievement. He was a fellow of many societies, including the Royal Aeronautical Society of London. (ARC Release 77-06)
About 300 people had assembled at Cape Canaveral, the W. Post reported, to celebrate the anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11, the mission that first landed humans on the moon. On July 16, 1969, a Saturn V rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center had carried 3 astronauts, none of whom attended the observance. (fV Post, July 17/77, A-18)
MSFC reported that astronaut Paul Weitz had arrived on center to check out a procedure developed for jettisoning a jammed-open outer door of the Shuttle scientific airlock while on a space mission. Weitz would wear a pressurized space suit for the task, to be carried out in MSFC’s neutral buoyancy simulator. The 75ft-diameter tank filled with water 40ft deep would duplicate movement of people or hardware almost as if weightless in space. Engineers and technicians could design instruments and procedures to handle almost any foreseeable problems before actual spaceflight, and unforeseen problems (such as solar array failure on Skylab) could be solved during a space mission. Center workers had been devising a way to remove the outer door of the airlock in case it could not be closed at the end of a mission, using a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle cargo bay in the simulator. Underwater TV cameras would record the astronaut’s movements on control room monitors, and both video and voice communications would be recorded for later study. Scuba divers in the simulator would help as needed. (MSFC Release 77-158, 77-166)
NASA reported that JSC had produced a compact medical kit containing most of the instrumentation of a well-equipped physician’s office, using techniques and tools developed to monitor astronauts’ vital signs during spaceflight. The NASA “black bag,” weighing less than 14kg and fitting into a case 18cm by 56cm by 36cm, would contain electronic equipment, drugs, bandages, and instruments needed to diagnose and treat many kinds of illnesses or accidents; electronic tools included an electrocardiograph and electroencephalograph, plus either a strip-chart recorder or a cassette tape recorder, with a coupler built in to transmit data over a standard telephone line. The package would improve the treatment possible on emergency or house calls and provide more complete data before hospital admission. (NASA Actv, Nov 77, 24) •
MSFC announced plans for a teleoperator retrieval system (a retrievable reusable low-thrust stage for maneuvering payloads in low earth orbit) to fly on the Space Shuttle in the early 1980s, its first use probably a Skylab-orbit adjustment to permit revisiting or control its reentry over an open ocean area. Riding into orbit on the Shuttle, the TRS would be deployed and remotely operated by an astronaut aided by a television image from a camera mounted on the TRS. It could also maneuver to higher orbit and return, using its own guidance and computer systems, to be remotely controlled again for retrieval into the Shuttle when it came within range of the TV signal. MSFC would manage development of the TRS, and Martin Marietta would be responsible for vehicle integration. (MSFC Release 77-201)
MSFC announced that on Jan. 28 NASA had invited industry to submit proposals for supplying design, development, and manufacture of Space Telescope support systems module and optical telescope assembly. The telescope should permit observation of about 350 times the volume of space now acessible to ground-based telescopes. MSFC said it expected award of contracts by Oct. or Nov. 1977 if Congress authorized the mission and appropriated the necessary funds. The 2.4m telescope, included in NASA’s FY 1978 budget recently submitted to Congress, would weigh about 10 tons. The Space Shuttle would carry it as a payload in 1983, launching it to orbit at about 500km altitude at an inclination of 28.8° to the equator. Once there, it could serve for a decade as an in-space observatory operated remotely from the ground, but would be designed for maintenance and servicing by a space-suited astronaut or for retrieval and return by Shuttle for overhaul and subsequent relaunch. NASA would announce to the scientific community in Feb. an opportunity to submit proposals for scientific instruments to be carried on the Space Telescope for its initial launch. (MSFC Release 77-16; NASA Release 77-19)
Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
NASA’s Skylab workshop launched in May 1973 might descend to 150 nautical miles (173 statute miles, 278km) altitude and begin reentry into earth’s atmosphere as early as late summer of 1979, JSC Roundup reported, citing orbit data from the North American Air Defense Command’s satellite trackers, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and the Swiss federal observatory. NASA would try two ways of postponing Skylab reentry: first, to reactivate the workshop’s thruster attitude-control system in the spring of 1978 and put it into a very slow tumble, decreasing atmospheric drag and perhaps adding several months to its orbital lifetime; second, to use a teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) launched on an early Space Shuttle mission (about Oct. 1979) and flown by remote control to dock with Skylab. Once docked, the TRS propulsion system could either raise Skylab’s orbit or control its reentry. Although Skylab would break up and burn during descent, some debris would probably survive reentry, and probably would land in an ocean, because 80% of the Skylab orbit had been over water (between 50°N and 50°S). Skylab, largest payload in earth orbit at 85 tons, and about 96ft in length, had been manned during 3 missions by 3 different astronaut crews. When the last crew had left Skylab, NASA estimated the workshop would remain in orbit until 1983; however, its altitude had dropped more rapidly than expected because of increased atmospheric drag caused by sunspot activity. (JSC Roundup, Feb 17/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, Feb 10/78, 2; Marshall Star, Feb 8/78, 4; W Post, Feb 2/78, A-2; C Trib, Feb 6/78, Sec. 1; Nature, Feb 9/78, 499)
The 16th Aerospace Sciences Meeting at MSFC of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics with nearly 700 registrants concluded with posthumous presentation of the space systems award to Dr. Werner von Braun, first MSFC director. Former astronaut Maj. Gen. Thomas Stafford had accepted the Haley spaceflight award on behalf of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew. (Marshall Star, Jan 18/78, 1)
MSFC announced that the American Inst, of Astronautics and Aeronautics (AIAA) had installed Dr. William Lucas, MSFC director, as a fellow at the 14th AIAA annual meeting Feb. 8. AIAA had selected Dr. Lucas “in recognition of your many outstanding contributions and acknowledged leadership in the professional aerospace community,” according to a letter from AIAA president R. H. Miller. Others named AIAA fellows were former astronauts Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and David Scott, Dr. Donald Hearth of Langley Research Center, and Harvard Lomax of ARC. Elected an honorary fellow was former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. {Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
The Congressional Record, at the request of Congressman Olin D. Teague (D-Tex), reported the remarks of Dr. Robert A. Frosch, administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, who introduced the President at the KSC ceremony, presenting for the first time the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to six astronauts. Dr. Frosch said in part: “NASA people have been privileged, not only to continue and to advance the 20th century transportation revolution in aeronautics, but to participate in laying the foundations of the future human adventure in and use of space. . . . The true marks and memories of a civilization are found not only in its physical creations, and how it cares for itself and its people, but in the progress it has contributed toward liberation of the mind from the constraining horizons of the past. One major force has been the growth of scientific knowledge through the exercise of human reason. “The spirit of man aspires to the stars. Every generation has looked out at the universe in search of faith, of hope, of beauty, of adventure, and of the power of knowledge. In our generation, a very few have taken the first brave steps out there to begin the great human adventure of using and understanding the universe beyond the earth. To honor those recent accomplishments, and to lead our way into America’s next decades of space, it is my privilege to introduce the President of the United States.” (CR, Oct 4/78, E 5400)
Soyuz 29 cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivan-chenkov had set a space endurance record in Salyut 6 Sept. 20 after more than 96da aloft, the Washington Post reported; the USSR had not indicated how much longer their flight would last. At 9:17am Moscow time (2:17am EDT), the two had surpassed the previous record of 96da lOhr, set by Soyuz 26 cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Yuri Romanenko Feb. 11 aboard the same spacecraft. The two missions had been similar, consisting of scientific experiments and maintenance activities. Grechko and Romanenko had broken the 84day lhr 16min endurance record set in 1978 by Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue. (W Post, Sept 21/78, A-16; W Star, Sept 20/78, A-13; FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 20/78; AvWk, Sept 25/78, 13)
Langley Research Center announced that Dr. Leonard Hayflick, senior cell research biologist at Children’s Hospital Medical Center of Northern Calif., would speak on “The Biology of Human Aging” Sept. 18 as part of LaRC’s colloquium series. According to Dr. Hayflick, the ability of the human body to maintain itself had been demonstrated from its large-scale immune and endocrine systems down to the cellular level; its highly adaptable self-maintenance ability had appeared in biological responses of astronauts to sustained zero-g environments. Why did this self-maintenance ability give way to the aging process and eventually death? Could the biological clock be altered, and would it be desirable to do so? Dr. Hayflick would discuss aging both from a demographic and a biological point of view. After explaining cell-culture technology and its implications, Dr. Hayflick would summarize some modern theories on the aging process. (LaRC Release 78-45)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would present a portrait of Virgil (Gus) Grissom on loan from NASA to the Grissom Library, Newport News, Va. The library, opened in 1961, had been named in honor of Grissom in Aug. 1961 after his historic flight as pilot of the Mercury-Redstone 4 (Liberty Bell 7) suborbital mission. Grissom, who had lived in nearby Stoneybrook Estates from 1959 to 1962, had kept in touch with the library by working with the children’s summer reading program. He had been killed in Jan. 1967 with Edward White II and Roger Chaffee in an Apollo spacecraft fire during tests at KSC. Grissom and Slayton, who were among the original seven astronauts selected by NASA in 1959, had trained and worked at LaRC during the Mercury program. (LaRC Release 78-52)
NASA announced that 35 new astronaut candidates would report to JSC July 10 to begin 2yr of training and evaluation, including life-support and ejection-seat training for the T-38 aircraft, aircraft physiological training, and T-38 aircraft systems and operations. In Aug., the candidates would take the standard USAF water-survival course at Homestead AFB in Fla., and would attend lectures on spaceflight history, technical-assignment methods and procedures in the astronaut office, manned-spacecraft engineering, Space Shuttle program, aerodynamics, flight operations, and the many disciplines associated with preparing and operating vehicles in space. Astronauts, engineers, and JSC management and support contractors would be instructors and lecturers. (NASA Release 78-98; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1; Marshall Star, July 19/78, 2)
The National Academy of Engineering elected 100 engineers to membership in the academy, including astronaut Neil Armstrong, the NYT reported. Election honored persons contributing to engineering theory and practice or pioneering in new or developing fields of technology. (NYT, April 2/78, 35; Bridge, Spring 78, 2)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would be guest speaker Oct. 5 at a NASA-LaRC colloquium and a public lecture to commemorate NASA’s 20th anniversary. Slayton, one of the original seven astronauts selected in 1959 for Project Mercury and the only one still active in the space program, was orbital flight test manager for JSC’s Space Shuttle Project Office. He had been chief astronaut and director of flight crew operations before going into space in July 1975 with the ApolloSoyuz Test Project. Title of Slayton’s colloquium lecture would be “The Space Shuttle”; his public lecture, “Manned Space Flight: Past Triumphs, Future Challenges.” (LaRC Release 78-47; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 2)
NASA reported that President Jimmy Carter had named six astronauts to receive the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, first such medal ever awarded by the UlS. The six were Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; Charles Conrad, Jr.; John Glenn; Virgil Grissom (posthumous); and Alan Shepard, Jr. The President would present the medals Oct. 1 during a visit to KSC on the 20th anniversary of NASA’s establishment. Congress had authorized in 1969 the award “to any astronaut who in the performance of his duties has distinguished himself by exceptionally meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind.” Citations were as follows: —	Neil Armstrong, for actions during Gemini 8 in Mar. 1966 to overcome problems and land his spacecraft safely, and for “steady cool professionalism, repeatedly overcoming hazards” on the Apollo 11 mission in July 1969, when he became the first person to walk on the moon. —Frank Borman, who had commanded Gemini 7 in Dec. 1965 and Apollo 8 in Dec. 1968, both of which “significantly hastened and facilitated achievement of the manned lunar landing objective.” On Apollo 8 he had commanded the first manned spacecraft to escape the earth’s gravity. —	Charles Conrad, Jr., who from Aug. 1965 to June 1973 had participated in four spaceflights of increasing duration, complexity, and achievement. His contribution had culminated in the first manned Skylab mission in May and June 1973, when he commanded the crew that performed “lengthy, dangerous, and strenuous activities that were necessary to repair damage inflicted on the orbital workshop during launch and thereby save the two-billion-dollar program.” —	John Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth in the third manned mission of Project Mercury in Feb. 1962, when his professional handling of extreme difficulties with the spacecraft “demonstrated the value of the human pilot in space. ... He returned to a nation and a world that seized on him as a major hero. This difficult role he handled with the same polite dignity that he brought to all his assignments.” —Virgil Grissom (posthumous), second American in space who from July 1961 to Jan. 1967 had participated in Mercury and Gemini spaceflights and had lost his life during preparation for the first Apollo flight. Experience gained from the first manned Gemini flight in March 1965, which he commanded, led to “procedures necessary for the support of subsequent long-duration and rendezvous missions.”
If research now in advanced stages went well, Space Shuttle orbiter crews would enjoy tasty and nutritious meals served in an attractive manner, NASA announced. Menus would be well balanced (3000 calories a day) with hot entrees, “reasonably cold” fruit beverages or dessert, and plenty of condiments. A typical daily menu on the Space Shuttle might be: breakfast—orange drink, peaches, scrambled eggs, sausage, sweet roll, cocoa; lunch—cream of mushroom soup, ham and cheese sandwich, stewed tomatoes, banana, cookies, and tea; dinner-shrimp cocktail with sauce, beefsteak, broccoli au gratin, strawberries, pudding, cookie, and cocoa. Many of the foods (breakfast bars, for example) would come off supermarket shelves. All meals would be prepared with variety in mind, so that a crew would have a different menu for sue successive days; on the seventh day the cycle would begin again. Dining would be from a food tray at a table in the galley, or the tray could be held in the lap or affixed to the wall. Ordinary eating utensils would be used. Foods planned for Shuttle crews included (thermostabilized) thermal/heat-processed foods canned or packaged in laminated foil pouches, such as cheese spread, tuna, beef with barbecue sauce; (intermediate moisture) foods preserved by controlling the available moisture, such as dried apricots, peaches, breakfast bars; (rehydratable) dehydrated foods reconstituted with water, such as scrambled eggs, beef patty, chicken and noodles, all beverages; (irradiated) foods exposed to ionizing radiation to effect preservation, such as bread, rolls, and beefsteak; (freeze-dried) foods with all water removed to be rehydrated, or eaten as is with saliva acting as the moistening agent, such as strawberries, shrimp, bananas; (natural form) foods such as nuts and cookies. All this was far from the space meals of an earlier era, when Mercury and Gemini astronauts had to squeeze various kinds of food into their mouths from tubes, or when floating crumbs had to be recaptured before they got into the instruments. Some of the same people who had pioneered space food preparation were still working at JSC putting together the Space Shuttle food systems. From the beginning of the national space effort, the topic of food had captured the attention of both observers and participants. On short spaceflights, food was not too important; it became a more serious consideration, then a vital one, as crews began to range farther and stay longer. First menus had included only the tubes of paste-like food served at room temperature, lukewarm dehydrated cubes, or a few freeze-dried items. By the time of the long-duration Apollo flights, the types of and systems of preparing space food had become more sophisticated, and new means of heating and cooling had brought improved palatability. A breakthough came during Apollo 8 when the crew was surprised with a home-cooked Christmas dinner: pieces of turkey with most of the trimmings, eaten with a spoon rather than squeezed from a container. The turkey and gravy was a thermostabilized product packaged in a laminated foil pouch, leading to the development of a “spoon-bowl” plastic pack for rehydratable foods into which water was injected through a valve. Contents were spooned out through a zippered opening. Main differences between Space Shuttle food and that served on earlier flights would be greater variety and larger amounts, more efficient handling of food, and more comfortable natural dining arrangements. (NASA Release 78-176)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
Administrator Robert Frosch said NASA would analyze any chemical samples of UFOs received from credible sources but would not initiate any research programs, Goddard News reported. Frosch outlined NASA’s position in a letter to the White House, in response to an inquiry from the director of science and technology policy. NASA was most often asked about the purported UFO sightings by astronauts and President Carter; NASA had satisfied itself that the astronauts had seen nothing abnormal in the space environment, and the bright object President Carter reported seeing in the sky when he was governor of Ga. had been classified as “unidentifiable” by the Natl. Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena. Some students of astronomy had suggested that what Carter saw was the planet Venus, at times much brighter than a first-magnitude star. Although the USAF had routinely investigated reports of all UFO sightings until 1969, when it terminated its “Project Blue Book,” it no^ limited its interest to sightings important to defense surveillance. The Air Force had concluded that never in almost 2 decades of investigating UFOs had it found “evidence of technological developments . . . beyond the range of present-day scientific knowledge.” (Goddard News, Mar 78, 3)
NASA announced Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. biotechnologists and engineers would use frogs on the Space Shuttle as research subjects to study inner-ear balance as the cause of space sickness that had afflicted some astronauts. Under a 6mo contract with Ames Research Center, Lockheed researchers would first study the behavior in space of the frog’s otolith nerve bundle, which closely resembled man’s. Microelectronic sensors inserted in the frogs would periodically feed data into recorders on the ground and in space. Preflight ground-based tests using a centrifuge would furnish baseline data to compare with information obtained in weightlessness. (JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 4; NASA Act, May 78, 10)
The JSC Roundup reported on a 2-day conference, “Meeting Our Energy Needs Today and Tomorrow,” with Dr. Peter Glaser, commonly thought of as the initiator of the solar-power satellite concept, as featured speaker. Glaser, designer of three instruments deployed on the lunar surface by the Apollo astronauts, had proposed a solar-power-satellite concept in 1968 before the days of concern with an energy shortage. He said the scientific community had slowly become aware that solar energy “shines brighter than ever as the major energy source.” Glaser summarized the advantages of collecting the solar energy constantly available in space, as opposed to disadvantages of any terrestrial energy source: absence of gravity and weather; avoidance of thermal pollution and waste; and the ability to direct a beam of collected energy to any location on earth, sunny or not, having usable land or not, close to the user or not. Solar-energy development would depend on development of the Space Shuttle, he noted, and was an idea becoming economically attractive and socially acceptable. Microwave and laser beams could transmit this energy to earth; directing a microwave beam accurately had been demonstrated. As for safety, Glaser pointed out that one cannot concentrate microwaves into a weapon system, whereas lasers could be lethal, so that all nations would have to agree that the laser method would never be used as a weapon. Glaser described the phased-array transmitting antenna already constructed on a 5-story-high project in the Aleutian Islands. He estimated 84% solar-power satellite efficiency in producing 30kw of power, as compared to current power plants with an efficiency range of about 40%. (JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 4)
Johnson Space Center reported that 11 of 35 current astronaut candidates had undergone parasail training Aug. 28 at Vance AFB, Enid, Okla., learning how to land by parachute in the event of an emergency ejection from the T-38 aircraft over land. Other astronaut candidates had taken the course before entering the NASA program. The six female astronaut candidates along with five male counterparts had taken the 1-day training exercise. {JSC Roundup, Sept 1/78, 1)
NASA announced that 11 of its 16 launches scheduled for 1979 would be reimbursables (launched by NASA for other agencies or corporations). Paying customers included DOD, NOAA, the United Kingdom, Western Union Corp., ComSatCorp, and RCA. As in 1978, most of the 1979 launches would emphasize use of space for the direct benefit of people: communications, environmental, and meteorological information. Activities in 1979 would include the first launch and orbital flight of the Space Shuttle; Jupiter and Saturn encounters by two Voyager spacecraft; and the Pioneer 11 flyby of the rings of Saturn. NASA would launch the Space Shuttle from KSC into its first orbital flight Sept. 28 with astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen as crew. They would land 53hr later at DFRC. The 1979 schedule would begin with two launches Jan. 25: DOD’s spacecraft charging at high altitudes. (SCATHA) from Cape Canaveral, and a stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE-A) from Wallops Flight Center. In April NASA would launch NOAA-A for NOAA and Navy-20 for DOD from Vandenberg AFB. It would launch in May FltSatCom-B from Cape Canaveral, and UK-6 for the United Kingdom from WFC; Westar-C in July and Intelsat V-A in Aug., both from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp; in Sept., its third high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-C from Cape Canaveral, and its Magsat-A from Vandenberg; in Oct., the solar maximum mission (SMM-A) from Vandenberg. NASA would launch Intelsat V-B from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp in Nov.; in Dec., NOAA-B for NOAA from Vandenberg, and RCA-C for RCA from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-196)
The Congressional Record reported that President Carter had nominated former astronaut Maj. Gen. Thomas Stafford to be Air Force deputy chief of staff for research and development. Stafford, who had spent more than 500hr in space, was serving as commander of Edwards AFB Flight Test Center. The nomination, which carried a promotion to the rank of Lt. Gen., was subject to Senate confirmation. {CR, Feb 28/78, S 2580; NYT, Feb 26/78, (27), 14) During February: Gossamer Condor, the manpowered aircraft that won the $85 000 Kramer prize in 1977, was on display at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., the National Aeronautic Association reported. The 96-ft wingspan had been cut into 4 pieces for shipping across country with the fuselage and stabilizer. Gossamer Condor had the largest wingspan and was the lightest of any plane in the museum, the wing-covering accounting for only 4.51b of the craft’s total 701b. An intricate web of piano wire held the structure together. Flight speed, reaching lOmph, had required the manpower equivalent of one-1 third of a horsepower. Designer Paul MacCready had substantiated his belief in the potential of ultralight craft. (NAA newsletter, Feb 78, 4)
LaRC reported the White House had issued a statement July 20, 1978, commemorating the ninth anniversary of man’s first walk on the moon. The statement read in part: “Nine years ago today, the world paused to watch two brave men tread the surface of the moon. It was a moment without precedent in human experience, a moment when terrestrial life reached out to touch another world. It is a source of pride for us that those men were Americans. Today, the lunar surface is criss-crossed in a half dozen places with the footprints of American astronauts and implanted with a variety of American scientific instruments. “The Space Shuttle, our next major manned space project, will begin regular, routine economical operation in the early 1980s. ... In the deeper reaches of space, we will continue to seek to expand our knowledge of the solar system and the universe of which we are a part. “As time and technology take us ever more deeply into the space age, it will continue to be our policy to conduct operations in space as required for our national well being and to support the right of all nations to do likewise. In so doing, we remain committed to the underlying principle of the exploration and use of space for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of all mankind.” (Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2; Spaceport News, July 21/78, 1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 4; DFRC X-Press, July 28/78, 4)
LaRC reported NASA had appointed astronaut Donald Slayton to manage the orbital-flight test (OFT) program for Space Shuttle at JSC. One of the original 7 Mercury astronauts and a member of the U.S. crew of the Apollo-Soyuz test project, Slayton would be responsible in his new position for all mission-unique activities associated with the 6 Shuttle orbital-flight tests scheduled to begin in the spring of 1979. He would represent program manager Robert Thompson across the total program to ensure timely and appropriate resolution of all OFT mission-unique issues. (LaRC Release 78-12)
NASA announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Corp. a $32 million contract to develop a teleoperator retrieval system (TRS), a reusable TV-equipped propulsive device for use by Space Shuttle crews to deliver, stabilize, and recover satellites in orbit. Managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the contract called for delivery of flight hardware by September 1979. The TRS, a low-thrust box-like spacecraft operated from the Space Shuttle by remote control, could be carried in the orbiter cargo bay or left in space after completion of a mission for retrieval by the next Space Shuttle. First mission for the TRS would be a docking with Skylab to boost it into higher orbit or to aid a controlled reentry; a camera on the forward end of the TRS would permit an astronaut to maneuver it for rendezvous and docking, or for other purposes. The TRS would return to the Space Shuttle using its own guidance and control system. (NASA Release 78-96; Marshall Star, July 5/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, July 14/78, 2; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1)
For 4yr, the LaRC Space Systems Div. and Flight Dynamics and Control Div. had analyzed the Space Shuttle orbiter’s entry guidance and control system at the request of JSC, the Langley Researcher reported. The system had been designed to control the orbiter from deorbit until landing, regulating both the aerodynamic surfaces and a reaction control system (RCS) composed of small rocket thrusters such as those on Apollo spacecraft, so that orbiter control had turned out to be a hybrid between aircraft and spacecraft control. Onboard computers could direct the entire orbiter entry without pilot input, or a pilot could take over control if necessary. A primary tool in the LaRC analysis had been a reentry flight dynamics simulator (RFDS) that permitted evaluation of the onboard-control system in both the automatic and the manual modes. It had also aided in developing alternate control systems to be used by the pilot if the main control system could not handle a situation. The simulator cockpit, though not an exact representation of the orbiter cockpit, did contain all the instruments and controls necessary to simulate flight: cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) showed displays identical to those on board, changing guidance information automatically as the orbiter entered various flight regimes. Push buttons and toggle switches would permit the pilot to take over any of the control functions. LaRC investigators had found that the system was dangerously sensitive to possible sensed angle-of-attack errors in the automatic mode at hypersonic speed. Shuttle astronaut Col. Henry Hartsfield had been unable to maintain vehicle control in the manual mode. This and other problems had led to major system redesign that had been tested at LaRC and found to solve the sensed angle-of-attack problem. Investigators had then begun work on other system problems. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 1)
The British Interplanetary Society’s journal Spaceflight reported that NASA had developed a lunar- and planetary-sciences teaching aid, using actual samples of lunar material encased in a clear plastic disk, to educate both the earth-science student through the Aerospace Education Program and the museum visitor through the NASA exhibits program. The hand-held aid would permit looking at, or viewing through a microscope, both sides of a sample. Under an 8yr program for lunar- and planetary-science education, colleges had been able to borrow thin-section microscope slides of lunar material along with a teaching manual, and museums and fairs could display several dozen prepared lunar samples in cases. But until now, NASA had directed no program toward the secondary school earth-science student. The new school-use program which included a film on lunar science, the sample disk, workbook material, slides, and an audio cassette) would require considerable interaction between teacher and class. Student reaction to the museum program, which included a shorter sound-slide presentation and the disk, had been highly favorable. NASA expected to test museum-visitor reaction later in 1978 and to use about 2/31b of lunar materials to make 100 lunar-sample disks available for use in both programs. Apollo astronauts had brought back 843.51b of lunar material during lunar explorations in the late 1960s and early 1970s. (S/, June 6/78, 218)
NASA announced it had selected 15 Space Shuttle pilot-astronaut candidates and 20 mission-specialist candidates as its eighth group of astronauts, including 6 women, 3 blacks, and an American of Japanese descent. The first women and minority astronauts could be in orbit within 3yrs. Selection criteria for the more than 8000 applicants had been motivation, educational background, and work experience. All but one of the 15 pilot candidates and 7 of the 20 mission-specialist candidates had come from the U.S. military services. Of the 35 selectees, 10 were from the Air Force, 9 from the Navy, and 1 each from the Marine Corps and the Army. The mission specialists selected had come from medical, biological, earth sciences, physical and chemical sciences, and engineering disciplines. The number of selections had been keyed to the expected need for Shuttle crews to supplement the 17 pilot and 10 scientist astronauts now on flight status in Houston. The new astronauts would begin 2 years of training July 1 at Johnson Space Center in Houston. ' Selected to train as mission specialists were Anna Fisher, Shannon Lucid, Judith Resnick, Sally Ride, Margaret Seddon, Kathryn Sullivan, USAF Maj. Guion Bluford, USMC Capt. James Buchli, USAF Maj. John Fabian, Navy Lt. Dale Gardner, Terry Hart, Steven Hawley, Jeffrey Hoffman, Ronald McNair, USAF Capt. Richard Mullane, George Nelson, USAF Capt. Ellison Onizuka, Army Maj. Robert Stewart, Norman Thagard, James Van Hoften; as pilot astronauts, Navy Lt. Cdr. Daniel Brandenstein, Navy Lt. Cdr. Michael Coats, USAF Maj. Richard Covey, Navy lt. Cdr. John Creighton, Navy Lt. Robert Gibson, USAF Maj. Frederick Gregory, Stanley Griggs, Navy Cdr. Frederick Hauck, Navy Lt. Cdr. Jon McBride, USAF Capt. Steven Nagel, USAF Maj. Francis Scobee, USAF Capt. Brewster Shaw, Jr., USAF Capt. Loren Shriver, Navy Lt. Cdr. David Walker, and Navy Lt. Cdr. Donald Williams. (NASA press conference Jan 16/78; Marshall Star, Jan 17/78, 1; W Star, Jan 17/78, A-5; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 19)
NASA announced results of a demonstration of curriculum-sharing planned by LaRC using television through the communications technology satellite Cts at North Carolina A&T State Univ., Greensboro, N.C. This was the first time a predominantly black college had participated in such an experiment. NASA’s portable earth terminal (PET), a ground-based communications system contained in a trailer, had transmitted 2 days of telecasts originating at North Carolina A&T to Cts 22 500 mi up, which relayed the programs to Jackson State Univ. in Miss.; Bell-Northern Research Ltd., Ontario, Canada; and Stanford Univ. and Rockwell Inti, in Calif. Participants in each location could see and communicate with each other. The program, funded under NASA contract to demonstrate the use of satellites in sharing curriculum information, research techniques, and results, included a question-and-answer session with Frederick Gregory, black Shuttle astronaut recently selected by NASA. ARC had made available almost 7 hr of satellite time for the project. (LaRC Release 78-9; NASA photo L-78-1209; Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 1)
A Saturn IB rocket, twin of the one that launched Skylab and Apollo/Soyuz test project (ASTP) astronauts into space, would begin a barge journey from KSC to Tokyo Apr. 5, KSC announced. The Saturn IB, part of the largest group of U.S. space hardware ever displayed overseas, would be only one of hundreds of artifacts borrowed from NASA centers across the U.S. for a Japanese space science exposition scheduled to begin July 16, ninth anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11. The U.S. display would include full-scale Mercury-Redstone, Mercury-Atlas, and Gemini-Titan rockets; a lunar rover; Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft that had actually flown in space; a detailed mockup of the Viking lander; and an ATS-6 (applications technology satellite) communications satellite. The Association for the Space Science Exposition, an umbrella organization for the Japan Science Society and the Japanese Maritime Science Promotion Foundation, had organized the exposition at an estimated cost of $21 million and would defray all costs of dismantling, loading, round-trip shipping, reloading, and reinstalling artifacts. The National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution had coordinated the loan of the space artifacts. (KSC Release 38-78; Marshall Star, April 19/78, 2)	•
The W. Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee had cut NASA’s budget, endangering 3 of the agency’s most ambitious plans for the next 5yr: to search for life beyond earth, to keep the Skylab space station from falling back to earth, and to fly a rare joint mission with West Germany around the north and south poles of the sun. The subcommittee had cut $1.4 million from NASA’s request for $2 million to begin a program called SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), in effect killing the program. A NASA official said the funds would not be enough “to start design work on the antennas we were going to use to listen for extraterrestrial signals.” The subcommittee also denied NASA $20.5 million to use for Space Shuttle astronauts to fire the abandoned Skylab space station into a higher and safer orbit. NASA considered the most critical cut to be $5 million from the $13 million sought to start in 1983 the solar-polar orbiter mission that would have used two spacecraft, one built by the U.S. and the other by West Germany. The West Germans had warned that any U.S. delay meant that Germany would drop out of the mission. (IVPost, May 5/78, A13)
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'
The Washington Post reported that, as a result of belated discovery that Soviet radar in Europe would interfere with two NASA satellites scheduled for launch in 1980 to communicate with orbiting spacecraft, NASA would have to spend $100 million to redesign the satellites’ electronic systems. NASA had awarded Western Union a $786 million contract to build six 50001b tracking and data-relay satellites (giant orbiting transmitters and receivers, each carrying two umbrellalike antennas weighing 501b apiece and unfurling in orbit to a diameter of 16.5ft) that would have replaced 60% of NASA ground-station antennas at an estimated saving of more than $100 million a yr. The 3-mo delay necessary for redesign was important because it would affect communications with the Space Shuttle; failure by the Pentagon and the CIA to warn NASA of the size and scope of Soviet communications interference in high-orbit regions had delayed discovery of the problem. NASA testimony before two Senate committees revealed that Soviet radars from the Baltic tp the Black Sea were emitting beams that converged high over the Atlantic and Pacific in the exact places NASA wanted to put the TDRS. Built to replace obsolete and expensive ground antennas at Ascension Island; Quito, Ecuador; Santiago, Chile; Guam; and Hawaii, the TDRS would improve communications by allowing ground controllers to talk to other satellites and Space Shuttle astronauts during more than 90% of each earth orbit. The electronic interference was said to have been unintentional. NASA “did not fully understand the environment and the effects it would have on the system,” said C. Curtis Johnson, satellite project manager at Goddard Space Flight Center. “Otherwise, we would have been more careful in the specifications of the system.” NASA had considered reducing the number of satellites on order from six to four to save $100 million, estimated cost of the redesign. (WPost, July 2/78, Al)
NASA announced it had selected astronauts Dr. Owen Gar-riott and Dr. Robert Parker to be mission specialists on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the early 1980s. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in crew-activity planning, consumables usage, and Space Transportation Systems/payload interaction. The 7-day flight, a verification test of Spacelab systems and Spacelab/orbiter interfaces, would carry about 40 experiments. Garriott had flown on the second manned Skylab mission of 56da duration; Parker had been a mission scientist and spacecraft communicator during Apollo and Skylab. Ten European nations, under agreements with the European Space Agency, had developed and financed Spacelab to be carried in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter as a fully furnished laboratory adapted to the weightless environment of space and pressurized for working without space suits. Spacelab 1 would also carry two payload specialists (one European and one U.S. citizen) to operate the scientific instruments. (NASA Release 78-121; JSC Release 78-34; JSC Roundup, Aug 4/78, 1; Marshall Star. Aug 16/78, 3; DSFCX-Press, Aug 11/78, 3; Langley Researcher, Aug 11/78, 1)
NASA’s struggle to save 3 astronauts trapped in a foundering spaceship during the flight of Apollo 13 had begun the most harrowing 6 days in NASA’s history, NASA Activities reported in observing the 8th anniversary of the flight. The astronauts had heard a loud bang; when Fred Haise, Jr., scanned the instrument panel, he saw that one of the main electrical systems was deteriorating. The words Jack Swigert spoke to mission control long haunted NASA: “Houston, we’ve got a problem.” At the time of the explosion, Apollo 13 traveling at 2100mph was 205 OOOmi from earth and more than 50 OOOmi from the moon, with a dead mothership (Odyssey) that included the main propulsion engine. After moving the astronauts into the lunar module, NASA focused on getting the Apollo on course for home while conserving limited supplies of power, oxygen, and water. Not only had NASA employees worked round the clock, but also specialists and computers from North American Rockwell, the contractor; Grumman Aerospace Corp., manufacturer of the LM; TRW Systems, builder of the descent propulsion engine; and many others. NASA had decided to drop the service module and put the command module Aquarius into the correct attitude for earth-atmosphere reentry; when the latter entered earth’s gravity 216 277mi from home, it needed another course correction. The tnird descent-engine burn was successful, putting Aquarius into the proper reentry corridor. As the spacecraft drew closer to splashdown, one of the astronauts described to ground control what he was seeing: “There’s one whole side of that spacecraft missing . . . right by the high-gain antenna, the whole panel is blown out, almost from the base to the engine . . . it’s really a mess . . . man, that’s just unbelievable—looks like a lot of debris is just hanging out of the side near the S-band antenna.” The astronauts had returned safely to earth 142hr, 54min, 41sec after launch. As Jim Lovell said, “We do not realize what we have on earth until we leave it.” (NASA Actv, Apr 78, 14)
A detailed article on manned spaceflight in a recent Chinese technical journal had raised speculation that the People’s Republic of China might attempt to put a man in orbit, reported FBIS. Navigation Knowledge, published by the China Navigation Society, had printed a description of manned-flight problems such as weightlessness and satellite design, the effects of weightlessness on the body, and the growing of food in outer space. The article suggested that the PRC, having retrieved three unmanned satellites from orbit, was now ready to experiment with living in space. Much of the article concerned physical changes resulting from a space-capsule environment, and the food, clothes, and waste facilities appropriate for an astronaut, information apparently based on completed experiments. By using the direct rays of the sun, the article claimed, a space voyager could grow rice and wheat the size of a Chinese date tree and eggplant and peppers the size of watermelon. Observers believed Chinese space technology had developed considerably since the initial space launches and that the next (No. 8) launch might have an animal aboard. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb. 2/78)
Dr. Christopher Kraft, Jr., JSC director, had invited 31 former astronauts to take part in technical briefings and updates on the status of NASA programs at JSC Aug. 21-22, NASA announced. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch would address the group; John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, would review the Shuttle program. Others giving briefings would be Robert Thompson, manager of the Space Shuttle program; Aaron Cohen, manager of the Orbiter project; Glynn Lunney, manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program; Lt. Gen. Thomas Stafford, former astronaut now deputy chief of staff for research, development, and acquisition, on the USAF Shuttle program; John Young, chief of the astronaut office; and flight crews of the orbiter approach and landing tests (ALT). Those attending would take conducted tours of the crew systems area, remote manipulator system, full-scale orbiter mockup, and the orbiter aeroflight simulator/Shuttle mission simulator. Astronauts invited were Edwin Aldrin, Jr.; William Anders; Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; M. Scott Carpenter; Gerald Carr; Eugene Cernan; Michael Collins; Charles Conrad, Jr.; L. Gordon Cooper; Walter Cunningham; Charles Duke, Jr.; Donn Eisele; Anthony England; Ronald Evans; John Glenn; Richard Gordon, Jr.; James Irwin; James Lovell, Jr.; James McDivitt; Edgar Mitchell; William Pogue; Stuart Roosa; Walter Schirra, Jr.; Harrison Schmitt; Russell Schweickart; David Scott; Alan Shepard, Jr.; Thomas Stafford; John Swigert, Jr.; and Alfred Worden. (NASA Release 78-128; JSC Release 78-37)
If the flight of Soyuz 26 cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Georgy Grechko aboard Salyut 6 space station continued to go well, they would establish a new space-duration record in the early morning of March 13, announced the Natl. Aeronautic Association, the organization maintaining official aviation and space records. The cosmonauts would surpass the previous record of 84 days set by U.S. astronauts Carr, Gibson, and Pogue aboard Skylab 4 in 1973. The Soviets had not indicated when the mission would end. On Feb. 10 the Soyuz 26 team equalled the previous USSR manned-spacecraft record of 63 days set by Soyuz 18. (NAA Release Mar 10/78)
The Congressional Record reported that former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had introduced S. 3541, the NASA Solar-Power Satellite Program Act of 1978, authorizing research, development, and demonstration of obtaining electrical power from space through solar-power satellite systems or other energy sources. Successful demonstration of the technical and economic feasibility of this concept would supply an inexhaustible future energy both for domestic purposes and for export. “Either way,” said Sen. Schmitt, “such a demonstration could have a significant impact on our nation’s balance of trade.” The bill would instruct NASA to begin a program aimed at resolving economic and technical problems surrounding the concept, including systems definitions; health, safety, environmental and socioeconomic studies; and technology assessments of various space energy sources compared with terrestrial energy sources. Favorable evaluations “would accelerate the design of a program to make this promising concept operational at the earliest possible date,” Harrison concluded. (CR, Sept 30/78, S 16715) During September: NASA announced that scientists had confirmed detection by Pioneer Venus 1, on the first leg of its 7mo voyage to Venus, of a powerful gamma-ray burst from somewhere in the universe. So-called gamma-ray bursts, unknown until 1973, had enormous energies and occurred about once a month from random points in earth’s galaxy or even beyond. Discovery of their origin—black holes, brilliant supernova, neutron stars, or some totally unexpected source—would be a difficult task for astronomers. Pioneer Venus measurements of these bursts during its 482million-km mission should enable scientists for the first time to track the origins accurately. Two other American spacecraft (Vela, a DOE satellite orbiting the earth, and Helios B, a NASA-European scientific satellite orbiting the sun) had detected the gamma-ray burst; scientists would correlate observations of all the satellites to get a rough fix on the burst. Locating the origin of the burst would give scientists an idea of the extraordinary physical events that could produce such high-energy explosions; no current hypotheses could account for them. (NASA Actv, Sept/78, 19)
NASA announced it had made several personnel changes. Richard Smith, deputy director at MSFC, had been appointed deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Hq for a one-yr tour of duty beginning August 15. Smith had transferred to NASA in 1960 from the rocket research and development team at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal, when the development operations division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency had become the nucleus of MSFC. He had managed the Saturn program, and in January 1974 had become director of science and engineering, and later deputy director, of the center. Smith had received NASA’s exceptional service medal for contributions to the Apollo and Skylab programs as well as the medal for distinguished service. (NASA Release 78-112; NASA anno July 19/78) NASA had named Harry Sonnemann deputy chief engineer at Hq, responsible to the chief engineer for managing program assurance, safety and environmental health, and the systems engineering divisions. Sonnemann had come to NASA in October 1977 from the office of the assistant secretary of the Navy, where he was special assistant for electronics and special assistant for antisubmarine warfare and ocean control from 1968 to 1977. He had also worked on the development of large seismic arrays as assistant director for field engineering in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency’s nuclear test detection office from 1964 to 1968. (NASA anno July 20/78) Scientist-astronaut Dr. Joseph Allen had returned to active flight status at JSC’s astronaut office. From August 1, 1975, until his return to JSC, Allen had been director of the office of legislative affairs at NASA Hq; and he would continue those duties in addition to his astronaut duties until a replacement was named. He had returned to JSC as senior scientist-astronaut and was eligible for selection as a Space Shuttle crewman. NASA had selected Allen as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; he had completed the initial academic training and a 53-wk course in flight training at Vance AFB, Okla. Allen had been mission scientist as a member of the astronaut-support crew for Apollo 15, and was staff consultant on science and technology to the President’s Council on International Economic Policy. (NASA Release 78-33) NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Edward Ifft chief of international programs policy at Hq. Dr. Ifft had been a U.S. Foreign Service reserve officer, whose last assignment was director of the State Department’s office of disarmament and arms control. While a graduate student, Ifft spent a yr at Moscow State Univ. under a U.S.-USSR cultural exchange program doing research on low-temperature physics. He had joined the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1967; then moved to the State Department where he had been deputy chairman of the U.S. delegation that negotiated the threshold test-ban treaty in Moscow in 1974; and had participated in negotiations with the U.S. and USSR for a comprehensive test ban. (NASA Actv, July 78)
Columbia, first Shuttle orbiter destined for launch into space, landed with its Boeing 747 carrier at 11:03 local time on & 15,000-foot runway built for this and future landings at KSC. Among the 3,000 persons awaiting the arrival were astronauts John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen, scheduled as crew on the maiden flight set for November 9. NASA officials said “a series of minor snafus” might delay the first launch until 1980. (W Star, Mar 25/79, A-3; W Post, Mar 25/79, A-6; NY Times, Mar 26/79)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
A United Airlines newsletter reported the first solar-powered flight of an aircraft: Larry Mauro’s Solar Riser, a homemade tailless biplane with about 600 solar cells in upper-wing panels, generating about 60 pounds of thrust to turn a 3-foot fiberglass propeller, enough to carry a 165-pound pilot and 125-pound craft aloft. Mauro flew his plane about a mile at a height of 40 feet during the annual experimental-aircraft convention in Oshkosh, Wise. Astronaut Neil Armstrong had watched assembly of the craft, now in a Wisconsin museum. (UA rept Dec 79)
JSC said that Columbia, first Shuttle orbiter, would undergo a first major simulated-flight all-systems test on or about December 15 at KSC. Astronauts and ground-support teams would conduct a 24-hour 5-day critical operations test including five launch-and-ascent flight profiles; on-orbit operations; and one entry simulation. John W. Young and Robert Crippen, crew members for the first flight, would take part in the test along with the backup crew, Joe Engle and Richard Truly. First actual launch was scheduled for June 30, 1980. (JSC Release 79-73; KSC Release 246-79)
NASA announced that it would accept on an annual basis applications to become Space Shuttle astronauts; the 1979 time for civilian applications would begin October 1 and end December 1. Successful applicants would report to JSC for a year’s astronaut training, after which NASA would choose pilot and mission-specialist candidates to be assigned by the Astronaut Office to jobs that would continue to train them in their scientific or technical field. NASA now had 27 selectees, including 11 scientists, available as Shuttle crew; 35 more candidates were in training to qualify for selection. The number of candidates to be selected in 1980 would depend on mission requirements. (NASA Release 79-101; JSC Release 79-50)
JSC reported on trials of a Buck Rogers-style maneuvering unit designed for moving about and working outside the Space Shuttle. Officially named Manned Maneuvering Unit (MMU), the device worn on the back of a spacesuited astronaut would allow movement in the weightlessness of space using nitrogen gas jets to control direction. Martin Marietta, the manufacturer, had submitted a prototype the previous week for three months of testing on different-sized astronauts (including female candidates) for fit and mechanical performance in use. Astronaut Dr. Bruce McCandless had successfully checked out the unit’s compatibility with the self-contained portable life-support system, wearing a spacesuit and backing into the maneuvering unit as it would be located in the orbiter cargo bay, “like backing into a phone booth with a large knapsack on your back,” KSC would get the first flight unit early in 1980. (JSC Release 79-55)
Astronauts interviewed in Las Vegas, Nev., on the eve of an Apollo 11 10th anniversary commemoration noted the lack of funding and support for the space program on the part of the U.S. government. James McDivitt, who commanded Apollo 9, said that he foresaw nothing like the Apollo program coming along. Ron Evans, command-module pilot for Apollo 17, said that spectacular space events were not in the cards for the next 20 years. Charles Duke, 10th man to walk on the Moon; Al Worden, Apollo 15 command-module pilot; and Dick Gordon, Apollo 12 command-module pilot, said the Shuttle system was not as safe as craft used in previous manned programs, as “Congress isn’t ready to give NASA the money it needs.” (Today, July 15/79, 20A; W Post, July 15/79, A-4; P Inq, July 17/79, 11)
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that the five “payload specialists” selected last July to operate experiments on the first Spacelab mission in 1981 would begin training January 9 at seven cities in the United States and two in Canada. Selection and training of non-NASA scientists to fly in space was a “famous first” for NASA; the scientists chosen by their colleagues having experiments aboard the Spacelab would be the first noncareer astronauts and would include the first Western Europeans and the first non-U.S. citizens to fly on a U.S. space mission. Three payload specialists were Europeans: Ulf Merbold of West Germany, representing Max-Planck Institute of Stuttgart; Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, representing Europe’s Space Technology Center (ESTEC); and Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, representing Groenigen University. U.S. selectees were Michael L.	Lampton of the University of California at Berkeley and Byron K. Lichtenberg of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Since October 1978, the five had been in Europe learning to operate experiments designed by European scientists. Two of the selectees would actually fly on Spacelab 1, and the other three would operate the experiment equipment on earth. Spacelab 1 would carry 40 instruments, about equally divided between NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) experiments in terms of weight, volume, and power requirements; fields of investigation would include solar physics, space plasma physics, stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, earth observation, materials processing, and technology areas, such as thermodynamics and lubrication. After leaving MSFC, the trainees would visit Redondo Beach (Calif.), the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Philadelphia, Boston, and Montreal (Quebec) and Toronto (Ontario) in Canada; return to JSC in Houston; visit Palo Alto, Calif; and be back at MSFC in Huntsville on March 22. (MSFC Releases 79-1, 79-4)
NASA announced that JSC was studying two ways to repair Space Shuttle tiles in orbit, both requiring crew members to go outside the Shuttle. JSC director Christopher Kraft called it “prudent” to be ready for in-orbit repairs, in case the tiles did not come up to specifications in actual fight: the thousands of heat-resistant blocks covering the underparts and sides of the orbiter might be damaged at launch and need patching before reentry. The first idea, using an extendable boom carrying television cameras and a platform, would relay images of a damaged area into the cockpit and sustain a spacesuited astronaut making external repairs. The other concept would use a jet backpack to maneuver an astronaut around the orbiter to inspect it and make repairs wherever necessary. JSC had three studies under way by General Electric, Martin Marietta, and McDonnell Douglas on repair materials and tools suitable for outer space. (NASA Release 79-120; JSC Release 79-58)
NASA reported it would speed up development of the MMU to be built by Martin Marietta for astronaut use in inspecting and repairing Space Shuttle insulating tiles while in orbit. The MMU, an improved version of a gas-jet backpack tested inside the orbiting Skylab in 1973-1974, should be fully developed by next August for the second Shuttle flight in October 1980. NASA would not consider further an alternate method of tile inspection (an extendable platform on a boom with a television camera). (NASA Release 79-125)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel W. Hinners, associate administrator for space science, had accepted appointment as director of the National Air and Space Museum, effective in April. He had joined NASA in 1972 as chief scientist and deputy director of Apollo lunar exploration in the Headquarters Office of Manned Space Flight and had held his present job since June 1974. (NASA Release 79-32) The scheduled takeoff for Florida might be delayed because of bad weather, NASA spokesmen warned, to lessen chances of an accident during the crosscountry flight; adverse conditions had developed along the route. The 15-minute test flight Friday of the orbiter-747 combination resulted in extensive damage to the protective-tile surface of the orbiter, said former astronaut Deke Slayton, NASA’s manager for orbiter flight tests. As the 747 took off down the runway at Edwards, parts of the dummy tiles, some as long as 2.5 feet began to fall off the spaceship. When the flight ended, Columbia had lost not only some of the plastic-foam dummy tiles attached by tape to the areas around the windows, fuselage sides, wings, and midtail, but also some of the 26,000 actual protective tiles bonded to the spaceship at the plant. “When the dummies began to fall off, the tape which was attached to them started to swirl around and damage some of the real tiles,” said Slayton, who flew one of two chase planes to keep an eye on the orbiter-747 test flight. NASA had decided to send Columbia to KSC without about 8,000 tiles that could be installed there; dummies had been used to cover areas where in-flight problems might arise, but after seeing the test results, engineers decided that not all the dummies were needed. Slayton said that the orbiter-747 assembly was now scheduled to depart for Florida on Monday, March 12. The 3,000-mile ferry flight had originally been set for Friday, March 9, but a problem arose in mounting the orbiter on the 747, caused by misalignment of the orbiter to the three struts atop the 747, and the test flight was delayed until Friday afternoon, after which the tile problem occurred. Although NASA engineers said March 10 that the combination could still fly cross-country March 12, a later report said that 34 dummy tiles were lost and 39 damaged; 7 real tiles were destroyed or lost and 100 damaged. Replacement of missing tiles would delay the trip at least to Saturday, March 17; NASA planned to complete the fix without removing the orbiter from its carrier aircraft. (NY Times, Mar 9/79, A-20; W Post, Mar 9/79, A-3; Mar 12/79, A-7; W Star, Mar 10/79, A-5; Mar 11/79, A-6; Mar 12/79, A-4; Today,, Mar 9/79, 1A, 16A; Mar 10/79, 1A, 8A; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Mar 13/79)
NASA reported that 35 candidates for Space Shuttle astronaut had completed classroom instruction and moved into engineering assignments at JSC. The courses had begun in July 1978, and the successful candidates would become astronauts in July 1980. NASA had brought in personnel from other NASA centers and from universities to conduct courses on subjects such as space physics, ascent and reentry aerodynamics, spaceflight physiology, and tracking techniques; veteran astronauts had lectured on the budget process, people, and requirements in the space program and on being a CAPCOM (capsule communicator). Videotapes of the classes would be available to all employees at JSC. The first crews selected for Shuttle flights had begun lessons in the mission simulator, and the astronaut candidates would be observers. Lessons would include tests of every sort of emergency the crews might encounter during a mission, supervised by instructors who had spent six months learning how to harass the astronauts in their simulator exercises. The lesson plan, scheduled to take nine months “not counting. . .problems,” would prepare the crews for nearly any emergency, NASA said. (NASA Release 79-34; JSC Release 79-20)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 32 from the Baykonur site at 2:54 p.m. local time, carrying a two-man crew to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 space station for the first time since November 1978, when the Soyuz 29 astronauts returned after a record 139 days in space. Soyuz 32 was manned by Lt. Col. Vladimir Lyakhov, 37, acting as commander on his first flight, and civilian flight engineer Valery Ryumin, 39, who was aboard Soyuz 25 when it failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and had to return to Earth 2 days later. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, head of the USSR’s space training program, said Salyut 6 had been “an effective platform for work in space,” having been occupied for 8 of the 16 months since its launch in September 1977. It had seen five successful manned dockings (three by international crews including cosmonauts from Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Poland as part of the Intercosmos program), as well as dockings by a number of unmanned supply vessels delivering food and fuel. (NY Times, Feb 26/79, A-14; W Post, Feb 26/79) During February: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported that the Federation Aeronautique International (FAI) had admitted the People’s Republic of China as an active member effective January 1. (NAA News, Jan-Feb 79)
In the last of a series on “Life Aboard the Space Shuttle,” KSC’s Spaceport News described the unisex space suits provided for the pilot and the ranking mission specialist on each flight. No longer tailor-made for an astronaut, the Shuttle space suit would come in small, medium, and large sizes to be worn by men or women. It consisted of an upper and a lower section snapping together with sealing rings, with a life-support system in the upper half. In an emergency, each of the other crew members would use a “personal rescue enclosure,” a 34-inch-diameter ball fitted with life-support and communications gear for one person. Nonsuited crew would climb into the enclosures, and the suited astronauts would transfer them from a disabled vessel to a rescue ship by carrying them, by attaching them to the remote-manipulator arm used for deploying payloads, or by using a pulley line between the two spacecraft. (Spaceport News, Aug 29/80, 4) During August: NASA distributed its Program Plan, Fiscal Years 1981 through 1985, containing “initial guidance for NASA’s activities over the short-term and, to some extent, the long-term future.” The introduction noted the current drive to curb inflation and resulting cuts in the federal budget—‘including NASA’s”—but called for a perception of the work the agency was technologically ready to undertake “and should undertake in the interest of the Nation.” Citing problems raised by “absence of major new initiatives,” the introduction called for “sound, logical, technological progression toward achievement” of U.S. goals in aeronautics and space. Major goals to be met by the plan’s 46 “major initiatives” were: —to fill the transportation and orbital operations needs of science and applications space missions and most transportation needs of national security space missions; —to apply space technology in remote sensing, communications, materials processing, and technology transfer that “hold promise for immediate or potential benefits to humanity”; —to continue developing aeronautical technology; —to improve “by a factor of 10 to 100” NASA’s ability to acquire, transmit, and process data; —to advance knowledge of how energy is transported from the Sun and through the interplanetary medium and how that energy effects Earth; —to ensure good health and performance of humans in space and to study the effects of gravity on living systems; —to understand the origin and distribution of life in the universe and the relationship between life and its habitat. Major initiatives in the field of aeronautics numbered 6; in space science, 8; in space and terrestrial applications, 20; and in space transportation systems, 12, for a total of 46. Half the initiatives listed in a similar program plan (for FY80-FY84) had been postponed: Of the 23 missions, 11 were previously scheduled for 1981; 7 for 1982; 4 for 1983; and 1 for 1984. Of the 11 previously scheduled for 1981, 9 were now postponed to 1982; and 1 each, to 1983 and 1984. Of the 7 missions previously scheduled for 1982, 5 were postponed to 1983; 1, to 1984; and 1, to a time “to be determined.” Of the 4 missions previously scheduled for 1983, 1 was scheduled for 1984; and 3, for 1985. The sole mission previously scheduled for 1984 had been postponed to 1985. International programs in which NASA would tie concerned during the next fiscal years would include cooperative activities (Space Shuttle and Spacelab; space applications such as remote sensing, geodynamics, materials processing, and communications; space science such as astrophysics, planetary research, solar-terrestrial relationships, and solar energy; exchanges of experiments with the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union); reimbursable launches; and foreign competition in remote sensing, communications, spacecraft launching, and aircraft development. The volume included probable schedules for NASA missions and tables of funding and development needed to carry out the program. Space transportation funding, for instance, showed increases in FY81 and FY82, then leveled off. Funding for applications showed rapid increase; that for aeronautics, space technology, and space science would also increase but at a slower rate. The 235-page program plan contained detailed lists of activities in each program area, with graphs and tables showing schedules and funding for that area. The book concluded with an index and a list of the abbreviations and acronyms used in NASAs programs. (Text, NASA Hq Mgmt Sppt Ofc, distributed Aug 80)
Control of motion sickness might be learned as one learns to balance or to ride a bicycle, according to ARC’s Dr. Patricia Cov/ings. Half of all astronauts exposed to the weightless environment of space had symptoms of motion sickness; young athletes were often the persons most sensitive to motion. Cowings and her team had taught about 50 volunteers to suppress illness when subjected to a chair spinning ever faster; another 60 subjects were studied without the training. Of the trained subjects, 85% improved their ability to withstand effects of motion, 65% being able to suppress their symptoms completely. The other 20% took significant increase in rpms before becoming ill. In the control group of 60 subjects who received no training, no one showed any significant improvement with time. The trained subjects monitored their own respiration and heartbeat during the tests, biological feedback long used by researchers and known to produce positive results. After the subjects were trained to detect the onset of sickness, 65 % were able to suppress the symptoms by using the feedback. Biofeedback was preferred to conventional treatment, which is use of drugs, because it had no side effects, such as sleepiness. The success of the theory led Cowings to propose a life-science experiment tentatively accepted for a Spacelab flight on which two trained crew persons would wear a harness feeding eight channels of a small data recorder collecting information on heart rate and other factors and providing the subjects with a feedback display. A subject feeling ill would consciously use the feedback training for a maximum 30 minutes. When subjects succumbed to motion sickness, they would mark the point where they became ill so the researchers could learn which responses led to the sickness. So far Cowings had found no sex differences in susceptibility to motion sickness; also, of a group aged 18 to 45, older subjects appeared less likely to suffer. (NASA Release 80-57; ARC Release 80-32)
The New York Times reported that Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins would resign effective January 28 as undersecretary of the Smithsonian Institute, an office held since 1976, to become vice president for field operations of Vought, Inc., in Washington, D.C. Collins had joined the Smithsonian in 1971 as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (NY Times, Jan 15/80, C-16)
The White House issued a statement on President Carter’s presenting the Goddard Trophy of the National Space Club to NASA’s Voyager team, for the “outstanding achievement in advanced spaceflight programs contributing to American leadership in space.” NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch would accept the trophy on behalf of the Voyager team for its successful planetary mission to Jupiter. The award was established in 1958 to honor Dr. Robert Goddard (1882-1945), considered the father of modern rocketry; receipts in previous years included Wernher von Braun, John Glenn, the Apollo 11 crew, the Skylab astronauts, and the Viking project team. (WH Anno, Mar 24/80)
July 7NASA said that it had agreed with ESA to let two European scientists enter the mission-specialist training program for Shuttle astronauts at JSC [see May 30]. The Europeans, Claude Nicollier of Switzerland and Wqbbo Ockels of the Netherlands, were both ESA employees and, as Spacelab 1 payload-specialist candidates, had undergone a screening and selection process like that of U.S. candidates. NASA agreed to train them in view of Spacelab delay and in recognition of ESA’s contribution to the STS in funding Spacelab development; ESA would reimburse NASA for the cost of training the two. (NASA Release 89-106; ESA Info 19) July S.WFC observed the 35th anniversary of the launch on July 4, 1945, of its first research rocket, a 17-foot Tiamat. Since it became a rocket range, Wallops Island had seen the launch of about 12,000 research vehicles of from 1 to 7 stages, sent as high as 19,000 miles above the Atlantic at speeds over 38,000	mph, and the launch of 19 satellites. From Wallops, rhesus monkeys Sam and Miss Sam rode into space on a Little Joe booster in 1959-60 to test the Mercury spacecraft before Alan Shepard took it into space; first test of the Echo balloon also occurred here. Early research at Wallops collected aerodynamic data at transonic and low supersonic speeds as part of the push to break the sound barrier; today, the launches gathered data on space, aeronautics, and characteristics of aerospace flight and tested ideas and devices for future spaceflight. NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), put its Pilotless Aircraft Research Station on Wallops Island under the direction of LaRC; its mission was aeronautical research to supplement wind-tunnel and laboratory work at LaRC. When NASA came into being in 1958 and took over LaRC and other field centers and research facilities, it put the Wallops station directly under NASA Headquarters and renamed it Wallops Flight Center in 1974. (WFC Release 80-8)
NASA reported that Dr. Cyril Fonnamperuma, director of the University of Maryland laboratory of chemical evolution, and his researchers had recently discovered amino acids (basic building blocks of life) in Antarctic meteorites presented by NASA. The Antarctic program began three years ago as a cooperative venture of NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) to collect meteorites under extremely clean conditions like those under which Apollo astronauts obtained lunar samples, so free of contamination that they could offer evidence of any organic history before they impacted Earth. The agency had given the team Antarctic meteorite and lunar surface samples, as well as data obtained by deep-space probes on atmospheres of other planets. The laboratory examined the lunar and meteor samples for evidence of organic material and tried to create molecules similar to those present in Earth and the planetary atmospheres before life began. Using gas-chromatograph techniques to identify right-and left-handed molecules of amino acids (the direction in which a beam of polarized light sent through a solution of the material would turn), the team had obtained strong evidence of both right- and left-handed amino acids in the Antarctic meteorites. Since all Earth life forms contain only left-handed molecules, the preorganic matter in the meteorites had to be formed somewhere else. The meteorites used by the team were about 4.5 billion years old; the oldest Earth material identified so far was 3.7 billion years old, and some of it contained evidence of organic matter. “The processes we postulated as taking place on the earth before life began seem to have taken place somewhere else also,” Fonnamperuma said. “What this implies is that all those events which led to life may be common in the universe, so what we said happened on the earth may be happening somewhere else.” (NASA Release 80-21)
NASA reported that it and NSF had found a promising new meteorite source in the Antarctic, two fields known as Recking Peak and Elephant moraines, three or four times as large as the Allen Hills area covered by meteorite hunters during the past four years—also “more promising. . .and more dangerous,” said curator John Annexstad, one of the discoverers. The finds had been handled like the lunar samples brought to Earth by Apollo astronauts; the unusual preservation aspects of the ice shelf kept the meteorites as they had been when entering Earth atmosphere hundreds of thousands of years ago, providing evidence of organic history predating their arrival on Earth. The search for meteorites on the ice shelf had begun with the Japanese, who found large amounts in the Yamato mountains of Queen Maud Land. Dr. William Cassady, University of Pittsburgh, theorized a transport system explaining the Antarctic icefield concentrations, and several seasons of hunting tended to confirm the theory. The total of Antarctic meteorites found topped 1,600, many of them rare or unique types. (NASA Release 80-28)
NASA noted the 20th anniversary of the first research of the X-15 rocket plane that opened up the realm of hypersonic flight and contributed significantly to the U.S. space program. The X-15 made 199 flights in a joint NASA-U.S. Air Force-Navy research program between 1960 and 1968, during which it set the standing records for altitude and speed of winged aircraft: altitude of 1,796 kilometers (354,200 feet, more than 67 miles), and on another flight 7,274 kilometers per hour (4,520 miles per hour), or 6.7 times the speed of sound. X-15 pilots included Scott Crossfield, the first; astronaut Joe Engle; and Neil Armstrong, first man on the Moon. In 1954, at the beginning of the X-15 program, hypersonic flight had many unknowns: effects of weightlessness, high heat rates, steep reentry angles, attitude control in space—questions that only actual flight could answer. The program would also explore capabilities and limitations of a human pilot in an aerospace vehicle; analysis of the first 44 flights showed that 13 would have failed without a human pilot. Positive result of the program was the finding that human capabilities of sensing, judging, coping with the unexpected, and using a variety of acquired skills remained undiminished in all key problems of aerospace flight. A significant X-15 contribution to the space program was to demonstrate that simulators could be used for crew training: no X-15s had two seats, so the pilots had to train in simulators. Success of this method led to all-out use of simulators for the space program. Total cost of the program, including construction of three X-15 aircraft, was about $300 million. (NASA Release 80-37; NASA Actv, May 80, 8)
JSC reported that the third group of 20 astronaut applicants from the 3,122 received in the fall of 1979 would report March 24 for interviews and physical exams. This group included 9 pilot and 11 mission-specialist applicants; 5 of them were women. (JSC Release 80-017)
NASA reported on its 17-year-old art program of inviting well-known artists to document major agency activities. Among participants were traditionalists like Peter Hurd and James Wyeth and modernists like Robert Rauschenburg and Lamar Dodd. NASA had stationed artists at the closest possible observation points during Moon launches and on recovery ships when astronauts returned from space and let them pilot simulators; of travel to make-believe moons. In 1977 NASA commissioned Robert T. McCall to document the rollout of Enterprise at DFRC (McCall was muralist for the National Air and Space Museum). In 1978 Franklin McMahon and Tom O’Hara painted the first flight of the orbiter. Arthur Shilstone and Clayton Pond covered vibration tests at MSFC; Shilstone and Nicholas Solovieff recorded Shuttle progress, including rollout in May 1979 at KSC. NASA would send a team to paint the launch and landing of Columbia. The New York Society of Illustrators had given Shilstone a certificate of merit for his painting “The Crawler: Rollout of the Enterprise” which had been in an international exhibition, including Japan and China, and would appear in the society’s 1980 art annual. (NASA Actv, Aug 80, 18)
KSC reported that Shuttle orbiter Columbia, mated with other elements on a mobile launcher in the VAB, was ready for its first major test as a unified system. On November 24, Columbia moved 300 yards from the VAB to the orbiter-processing facility where solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank had been assembled on the mobile platform. A Shuttle-interface test running more than two weeks would check electrical and mechanical connections between elements and on-board flight systems. Interface tests originally scheduled earlier this week were delayed by problems including failure of a device providing umbilical link with the orbiter. This was the first flow of flight hardware through KSC processing facilities: the orbiter Enterprise, not built for spaceflight, served as “pathfinder” through the facilities in 1979 but lacked many of the systems installed in Columbia. Individual Columbia systems had passed checkouts in late 1979 and early 1980, but the,upcoming test would check the entire Shuttle system as a unit with the prime and backup crews taking part in simulations of ascent to orbit, abort, and descent to landing. William H. Shick, chief of prelaunch test operations, noted that this would be the first time the astronauts had occupied the cabin with the vehicle in a vertical position; they would “get a feel of what they can and can’t reach,” he added, to assess crew comfort while awaiting launch. (KSC Release 206-80)
KSC reported that the Shuttle interlace tests were coming to an end. This first major checkout of the integrated flight system was to close with a series of four simulations using prime and back-up crews of the first launch to validate computer programs that would serve cn-board flight systems during the first STS mission in 1981; the last two simulations were scheduled for December 18. Tile work and processing of gap fillers was continuing, with only a small amount of gap-filler work to be completed after the Shuttle moved to Pad A of Launch Complex 39. At the pad, filling of the liquid-oxygen storage tank was to be complete December 17, as would insertion and removal of dummy payloads to test the service structure. Tests of UTC Liberty retrieving solid-fuel rocket casings from the ocean would continue through December 19, and sister ship UTC Freedom would begin sea trials later. (KSC Release 268-80) The Washington Star carried a UPI report that astronauts Richard Truly and Joe Engle had put Columbia through its third rehearsal of the week December 18 “as slick as silk,” improving chances of launch March 14. (W Star, Dec 19/80, A-5)
Newspapers reported NASA’s selection of 19 astronaut candidates for Space Shuttle training, the second group of pilots and scientists specifically picked for that purpose. Those chosen in the 1978 group of 35, including the first women and blacks among civilian astronauts, received astronaut wings at JSC in August 1979. In the new group was Dr. William F. Fisher, husband of Dr. Anna Fisher, who was selected two years ago; the Seabrook, Tex., physicians were the first married couple chosen by the United States. The 8 new pilot candidates (one black) and 11 mission specialists (two women and one Hispanic) would, if successful, join the 62 astronauts now on duty with NASA. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly 30 or 40 missions a year with up to seven astronauts on a mission. Pilot selections were Lt. Col. John E. Blaha, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Charles F.	Bolden, Jr., U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Col. Roy D. Bridges, Jr., U.S. Air Force; Maj. Guy S. Gardner, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Ronald J. Grabe, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Brian D. O’Connor, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. Richard N. Richards, U.S. Navy; and Lt. Cdr. Michael J. Smith, U.S. Navy. Mission-specialist selections besides Dr. William Fisher were Dr. James P. Baglan, anesthesiologist; Dr. Franklin R. Chang, physicist; Dr. Mary L. Cleave, research engineer; Bonnie J. Dunbar, JSC flight controller; Capt. David C. Hilmers, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. David C. Leestma, U.S. Navy; John M. Lounge, JSC flight controller; Capt. Jerry L. Ross, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Sherwood C. Spring, U.S. Army; and Maj. Robert C. Springer, U.S. Marine Corps. (NY Times, May 30/80, A-ll; W Post, May 30/80, A-8; NASA Release 80-78; JSC Release 80-038)
NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
The Washington Post quoted a White House source as saying that “We’re running out of patience on the Space Shuttle.. .There’s a feeling here that we can’t tolerate any more delays in the Shuttle program.” Noting the six postponements that had done “serious harm to the space agency’s credibility,” the Washington Post said that “in fairness.. .the delays caused by engine and tile troubles are not all its fault.” When Pratt & Whitney lost the engine contract to Rocketdyne, it sued NASA, delaying engine tests for a year; lack of money also caused delay. JSC Director Christopher Kraft pointed out that money cutbacks in 1978 meant that “we delayed building the tiles, and that naturally delayed our test procedures, which naturally delayed us from getting at the answers we now have.” The custom-built tiles, each shaped to fit a specific place on the fuselage, took 25 hours apiece to install. After many were attached, NASA found that half had lost their strength in the bonding process; technicians had to remove and coat the tiles before replacing them. When NASA shipped the Shuttle orbiter piggyback on its Boeing carrier from Palmdale, Calif., to Cape Canaveral in 1979, only 10% of its 30,922 tiles were in place, and some of those fell off during the trip. NASA enlisted a force of 1,200 workers to install the tiles, working two 10-hour shifts six days a week at the Cape. When the coating problem developed, the crews were attaching 750 tiles a week but removing 100. About 5,000 cavities on the frame remained to be filled, and NASA forecast August as the finishing date for the task. The other technological challenge was the Shuttle’s engine cluster, three liquid-hydrogen engines, each 10 times as powerful as the largest jet engine and burning 1,000 degrees hotter than any engine before it. These were the first liquid-fuel rockets designed for reuse; said Shuttle program manager Robert Thompson: “We had to expect that in heating it and stressing it with repeated use we were going to run into problems.” During tests, engines had caught fire and even blown up; 6 of the last 12 tests of the three engines firing together had to be stopped because of overheating. By summer’s end the tests would have cost $1 billion more than the $500 million NASA estimated. NASA’s costs by the time the first Shuttle flew would be $264 million for solid-fuel rocket engines; $381 million for tiles; $442 million for the external fuel tank; $1.5 billion for development of the main liquid-rocket engine, amounting to an overrun of almost $1.6 billion. Money was a lesser concern, however, than the slips in schedule. The Shuttle was the first civilian vehicle designed to carry surveillance satellites for the DOD; those due to fly in 1983 were the biggest and most sophisticated ever built, weighing up to 25 tons each, too big to be carried by any other rocket including DOD’s Titan. Former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.), ranking Republican on the Senate subcommittee on space, said that DOD would have to alter its craft to fit on the Titan if they could not fly on the Shuttle in 1983. (W Post, June 3/80, A-2)
A partnership of the American Institute of Architects, Pacific Gas & Electric, and NASA’s ARC announced selection of the architect for a space-age advanced technology house to be built at ARC and opened to the public late in 1982 [see February 12]. The house, about 2,500 square feet, with additional facilities to accommodate visitors, would incorporate experimental’techniques, new materials, and systems originating in the U.S. space program. Advanced technology that let astronauts live in the hostile environment of space under a controlled life-support system would be used in the house, as would self-contained water and sewage systems, recycling all its water and disposing of wastes by incineration; heat from the incineration would serve as an energy source. Energy-saving and water-saving design features would make the house 80% self-sufficient. (AIA/PG&E/ARC anno, Sept 17/80)
ARC reported that eight men aged 35 to 50 would participate in a study of weightlessness to help NASA learn why spaceflight dehydrates humans. Dr. Joan Vernikos-Danielis of ARC’s biomedical research division would use a head-down method in prolonged bed rest for the study; the rush of blood to the head in the first exposure to zero gravity might trigger the body mechanism that eliminated fluids and salts. The Soviets for some time had been using bed rest with head down 6° from the horizontal to simulate weightlessness. Usable measurements were not obtainable during actual spaceflight because of the heavy demands on astronauts in the first stages of a mission. (ARC Release 80-68; NASA Release 80-131)
JSC reported that parts of the remote-manipulator system (the robot crane that would handle inflight transfer of Space Shuttle cargo) were being tested in its Shuttle avionics integration laboratory. The system would be used on the Shuttle beginning with the second flight to place or retrieve satellites in space, to assemble structures or components, or if necessary to rescue crews by transferring them to another vehicle. The manipulator was a 50-foot arm with movable joints at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist; associated motors, gears,and sensors; and an end-effector serving as an ingenious hand. The test parts were a display and control panel, rotational and translational hand controllers, and an interface unit for manipulator control belonging to the electrical subsystem. The arm and its movement would be simulated by computers in the lab. In the tests, engineers and technicians from NASA and the contractor Space Aerospace, astronauts, and representatives of the Canadian Research Council would try to duplicate events to be encountered while operating the space crane in orbit. Astronauts Drs. Sally Ride, Judy Resnick, Norm Thagard, and Story Musgrave would controls arm movement by using the hand controllers in a mockup of the orbiter’s aft station. System operators would watch a computer-generated television scene duplicating the view the crew would have out of the cockpit aft window. The difficulty would come in operating the arm with the dynamics induced by arm movement: in the weightlessness of space, once a mass (the arm and its load) were moved, it would keep going until stopped by an equal and opposite force. When a command moved the arm, the control system had to be ready to command a counteracting move. Also, the orbiter would move in response to the arm, and vice versa. Interaction between arm and orbiter controls must be explored before flight; the simulations in this investigation were among the most sophisticated ever attempted at JSC. (JSC Release 80-034)
ESA reported that European and U.S. astronauts scheduled to fly with the first Spacelab on the ninth Shuttle flight would attend a training session May 27-30 on using an infrared-grill spectrometer to check the composition of the stratosphere to monitor the effect of human activity on its evolution. Besides a commander and copilot of the Shuttle, the Spacelab crew would include two payload specialists (one each from ESA. and the United States) and two mission specialists in charge of the interface between the Shuttle and Spacelab. Two of the five payload specialists attending the training session would be selected six months before flight: physicist Ulf Merbold of West Germany; astronomer Claude Nicollier of Switzerland; physicist Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands; physicist Michael Lampton, University of California at Berkeley; and biomedical engineer Byron Lichtenberg, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NASA mission specialists attending the training session would be atmospheric physicist Owen Garriott and astronomer Robert Parker. (ESA Info 13)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported the death of John A. (Shorty) Powers, 57, who joined NASA as a U.S. Air Force lieutenant colonel to help manage the original seven Mercury astronauts and became known as “the voice of Mercury control.” Powers, who retired from NASA in 1964, was found dead of natural causes January 1 at his home in Phoenix, Ariz. (AvWk, Jan 7/80, 21)
Forthright criticism of Carter-administration space policy came from Rocco A. Petrone, former director of MSFC, and Dr. Thomas A. Paine, who was NASA administrator during the early manned lunar landing years, the Huntsville Times reported. The two testified July 23 before the House Committee on Science and Technology’s subcommittee on space science and applications. Committee chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and ranking minority member Larry Winn (R-Kans.) both expressed support of the NASA veterans; Winn remarked that it was :“like old timers’ day up here.” Under Carter, Paine said, the U.S. had “lost both our senses of direction and our resolution.. .Ringing rhetoric proclaiming U.S. leadership in space is no substitute for plans and programs. In my view it is self-delusive to give lip service to leadership while avoiding initiative and commitment.” Petrone said the usual pause for evaluation after a large program like the lunar mission “is now becoming dangerously close to a condition of stall and possible loss of minimum momentum needed” for complex space programs. He expressed concern over “technological timidity in a nation that has been built over the years on technological strength.” (Htsvl Tms, July 24/80, 6) July 25:A rescue training exercise at KSC was about to begin: a mock-up of the Space Shuttle was set down in a pond, and the rescue team was ready to practice its procedures in case the Shuttle overshot the runway upon its return to launch site and landed in the drink. Then, Fat Albert rose from the pond and lumbered up to Sun himself about 10 feet from the mock-up. The test was halted until wildlife officers arrived on the scene. Fat Albert, a local alligator, used to share lunches with KSC employees until (so it is said) he ate an employee’s tennis shoe right off his foot. The wildlife officers who lassoed and carried away the alligator weighed him (1,00 pounds) and measured him (13 feet, 9 inches). With Fat Albert gone, the maneuver continued: the rescue team dropped from a helicopter into the pond and rescued two dummy astronauts from the mock-up. (JSC Roundup, July 25/80, 1) July 28.-NASA reported on a solar-flare “first” resulting from coordination of data from the Solar Max spacecraft and from a network of sophisticated ground observatories participating in the International Solar Maximum Year. On the basis of worldwide predictions, instruments on the Solar Max and at observatories in 18 nations had focused on an active region of the Sun June 24. On June 28-29, that region produced two major flares, captured by all seven spacecraft instruments (first all-instrument simultaneous measurement of the same flare since the spacecraft was launched in February). The observation was also the first in which scientists traced material ejected from a flare into the solar atmosphere. (NASA Release 80-120)
JSC reported that its television engineers were working on modifications of a U.S. Air Force camera for live television broadcast by crew members on spacewalks outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA would buy three systems for flight, training, and qualifications at a cost (including integration, testing, and mission planning) of about $750,000. The camera (which would include a battery pack, FM transmitter, antenna, and a receiver inside the orbiter, with other support hardware), located on an astronaut’s visor assembly, as miners’ lights are mounted on their foreheads, would see what the astronaut saw and send black-and-white pictures to a television monitor watched by crew members on the spacecraft. A wide-angle lens would give a 19.7-mm focal length with a 32° horizontal field-of-view; lens range would be present to focus from about 15 inches to the distance needed. The inside crew members could see hardware or spacewalk activity in real time, helping make joint decisions on repair. (JSC Release 80-052)
Bolted nose up to crawler-transporter, Shuttle orbiter Columbia arrived at its KSC launch pad for final tests before launch into space in 1981. The transporter made the 3.5-mile trip over a rocky road at 1 mph or less, completing the operation about 8:00 p.m. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, told a “shivering crowd” that turned out to watch the journey that “we are now at the threshold of a new capability to investigate the universe.” Richard G. Smith, KSC director, and George Page, Shuttle launch director, said that test firings, simulated countdowns, and other work at the pad would probably delay liftoff to the end of March or early April. Navy Cdr. John W. Young, who had gone into space four times and would command the first flight, told reporters that delays in the program resulted from the concern for safety: more than a year went into attaching, replacing, and strengthening thermal tiles designed to protect the Shuttle astronauts from the heat of reentry. (B Sun, Dec 30/80, 4)
Press reports on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s launch noted the loss of some insulating tiles from engine-pod coverings visible, television viewers from an aft-facing cockpit window when astronaut Robert Crippen opened the payload-bay doors to dissipate heat into space as a way of cooling the orbiter. The areas lacking tiles, nine on the right-hand engine pod and four to six on the left-hand pod, had undergone the greatest stress during blastoff and ascent. Astronaut John Young relayed the view to Earth so flight directors could estimate the damage. The two astronauts evinced so little concern about the missing tiles that, during a six-minute telecast late on Monday, neither mentioned the subject. As flight directors wanted to know whether the underside of the fuselage was intact, Deputy Operations Director Eugene F. Kranz announced that supersecret U.S. Air Force cameras in Hawaii and Florida would photograph the orbiter in an attempt to discover further areas of damage. His statement hinted at the highly classified capability of DOD cameras: photographing areas lacking tiles of a moving craft 170 miles up would be like reading license plates in a Moscow parking lot from orbit, the Washington Post commented. The fuselage’s underside housed Shuttle electronics and hydraulics systems that would navigate the craft on its return; move the elevons, keeping it on course during the last 1,000 miles; and lower the landing gear. Should loss of tiles expose the surface to reentry heat that could burn through the fuselage and the underlying systems, the orbiter without its landing gear lowered would have to crash-land at more than 200 mph. If photography showed underside tiles missing, Kranz said the crew would handle the reentry “to avoid a possible catastrophe,” not specifying the alternatives. Officials said that the areas known to be missing tiles were not critical to reentry; all visible edges of tail and wings appeared intact, suggesting that tiles v/crc lost during the stress of launch only on the engine pods. (W Post, Apr 13/81, A-l, A-20, WSJ, Apr 13/81 3; NYTimes, Apr 13/81, 1; W Star, Apr 13/81, A-l)
NASA appointed Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, deputy chief of staff for systems at Air Force Systems Command headquarters, Andrews Air Force Base, as associate administrator for the Office of Space Transportation Systems. Abrahamson, former test pilot and manager of the development program for U.S. Air Force’s F-16 fighter, would succeed John F. Yardley, who left NASA in May to become president of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corporation. In 1979, Abrahamson was one of five on a special panel selected by NASA to assess STS management; he began his job at Andrews in July 1980. He had been an astronaut in the Air Forces’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program from August 1967 until the program was canceled in June 1969. He then served on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council in the Executive Office of the President. A command pilot with more than 3,000 flying hours in jet and conventional fighter aircraft, he was promoted to major general May 1, 1978. (NASA Release 81-159; NASA anno Oct 2/81; NY Times, Oct 3/81, 15)
LaRC said that it was studying a possible “assembly line in space” that would allow astronauts to build large platforms or antennas in Earth orbit from the shuttle. A mobile work station would position a pair of pressure-suited astronauts so that they could move horizontally and vertically within a prescribed area to set up structures too large or complex to fold up and transport inside the shuttle. The work station would be located inside the or-biter’s cargo bay or would be a free-flyer operating near the shuttle. LaRC was testing a large-scale model to detect possible problems in space and identify ways to improve astronaut productivity: foot restraints to leave hands free, for instance, and electrically operated work platforms. (LaRC Release 81-50; NASA Release 81-104; MSFC Release 81-93)
ARC reported the effects of weightlessness on physiological processes shown in 14 U.S. experiments carried on unmanned Soviet satellite Cosmos 1129 in 1979. This was the only U.S. opportunity for biological research in space since 1975. The Vostok spacecraft sent into elliptical orbit and recovered within the Soviet Union 18 Vi days later was like those of two previous Cosmos missions in which the United States had participated in 1975 and 1977. Use of Cosmos vehicles was inexpensive for the United States because the Soviet Union paid for spacecraft, launch, and support activities; 40 scientists from 18 U.S. universities and research organizations shared in the mission. The U.S. experimenters found changes in enzymes and in animal bone strength, growth rate, and mineral content, like the changes experienced by astronauts and cosmonauts; the results would help explain some of the problems of weightlessness. The Soviet Union provided 37 white rats and 60 fertile quail eggs, shared by the experimenters; U.S. scientists provided carrot-tissue cultures and plantlets and carrot slices inoculated with tumor-forming bacteria. One of two control groups of white rats kept in Moscow lived in ordinary cages and ate the flight diet; the other, called “synchronous control,” was housed in an identical spacecraft on the ground and subjected to vibration and gravity forces like those of launch and reentry, experiencing whatever changes in environment the orbiting Cosmos transmitted to earth. The only difference between the synchronous control group and the mammals in flight was the weightlessness. After the Cosmos flight, the animals were recovered immediately, before they could readapt to Earth gravity, and a recovery team set up a mobile lab at the landing site to autopsy about a fifth of the rats. The rest were flown to Moscow, where some were autopsied after 6 days of readaptation to gravity, and the rest after 29 days. The Cosmos rats showed a 20% deficiency in bone mineral content compared to the synchronous-control subjects. In the rats readapting to normal gravity, some changes reversed within a few days; others took longer to return to normal. Under normal conditions, the total amount of bone in an adult human or animal remains constant, with bone continually resorbed and replaced by newly formed bone. In spaceflight, production of new bone seems to slow down, but resorption continues, resulting in net loss of bone and a decrease in strength. The greatest change is in weight-bearing bones, but even those not bearing weight (as jaw bones) show changes in mineral content and the cells forming new bone. The experiments included the first attempt to breed animals in spacemating the rats and examining how embryos developed in a weightless state. This experiment did not succeed, however, and no litters were produced; the control group, to the surprise of Soviet and U.S. scientists, showed the same results. The scientists were still seeking a reason for the failure. The quail eggs provided no information on embryo development because the incubator failed on the 13th day of flight. The plants showed no ill effects; carrot embryos and plant tumors grew in space just as on the ground, suggesting that spaceflight had no effect on carrot tissue. (ARC Release 81-21)
ESA announced that Drs. Claude Nicollier and Wubbo Ockels, two ESA payload specialists in astronaut training at JSC since July 1980, had completed training and were now officially European mission specialists. Ockels would rejoin the crew readying the first Spacelab mission in Europe, at MSFC and at JSC; Nicollier would stay at JSC to continue training as mission specialist for future missions carrying European payloads. The third ESA representative, Dr. Ulf Merbold, had been working with the European experiments selected for first Spacelab flight and would remain as European payload specialist. The two U.S. candidates for the Spacelab crew, Drs. Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg, had been in a hiatus from training because of delays in the launch date. One each of the U.S. and ESA candidates would be chosen to fly; the others would provide ground support. (MSFC Release 81-119; FSA Info 20) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Mg.INTIMDQNALLE ffcANtav
DFRC reported on a dress rehearsal of Shuttle first-mission landing and postlanding activities on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. The crew that would act as recovery convoy used an orbiter mock-up, fitted with interfaces for ground connections, to practice postlanding safety and servicing procedures: simulated activities included testing for the presence of toxic or explosive vapors and gases and cooling the orbiter by circulating freon through its pipes and cool air through its ducts. To simulate the landing, a NASA .T-38 jet descended along the planned flight path from 40,000 feet up, while test manager Deke Slayton kept in touch with the recovery convoy and with the flight director, Don Puddy, at JSC. Meanwhile, astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen at JSC completed a full-scale flight rehearsal, going through the 54.5-hour mission in a computer-operated simulator. Flight directors monitored the mock mission as if it were the real thing. (DFRC Release 81-8; W Star, Feb 27/81, A-9) During February: Nature magazine reported that the Franco-Soviet mission to Halley’s comet in 1986 entailed “a substantial cutback” for a planned joint mission to Venus in 1984. Assignment of two of the original four Venus probes to Halley was a reminder that Soviet space-program resources, though vast, “are not infinite.” Pravda had published several articles aimed at putting the Soviet effort in a favorable light; the Communist party congress would be asked next week to approve another 5-year plan including space exploration. However, the Soviet Union had never revealed the costs of the program. Nature said hints of increasing financial constraints had appeared recently: no further Intercosmos flights were in view after those with Mongolia and Romania, and Bulgaria had been offered two unmanned probes instead of a manned flight to replace the failed trip of its cosmonaut to the orbiting Salyut 6. (Nature, Feb 26/81, 741)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
Columbia, flagship of U.S. Space Shuttles, “proved that at long last it is ready to carry astronauts into orbit,” said the Washington Star, describing “a successful and spectacular firing of its three powerful engines.” At the end of the practice countdown, 8:45 a.m. EST, the three engines at the base of the delta-wing spaceship “flashed to life, spewing torrents of almost invisible flame, steam, and smoke over the launch pad” and sending a thunderclap of sound across KSC. “All engines are up and running,” the control center announced. The world’s most sophisticated rocket machine had generated 1.1 million pounds of thrust for 20 seconds, while the 122-foot-tall orbiter with fuel tank and boosters remained fixed to the pad by eight 3-foot steel bolts. In actual launch, explosive charges would sever the bolts, releasing the orbiter, and the solid-fuel boosters would help lift it to orbit. During the final countdown, 526,000 gallons of fuel were pumped into the external fuel tank. Technical, weather, and procedural difficulties had postponed the firing, a first test of all shuttle systems combined, three times this week. Minor problems had delayed today’s test another hour. The Washington Post said that a labor walkout at KSC immediately after the 8:45 a.m. firing might threaten the April 7 date set for the actual launch of Columbia. About 800 aerospace workers, members of the International Association of Machinists employed by Boeing in spaceport support work, had struck in a pay dispute. Richard Smith, KSC director, said that the strike might jeopardize remaining operations; however, he noted that the union had a legal right to strike because its contract with Boeing had expired some time ago. Columbia crew members John Young and Robert Crippen, who had waited out 2Vi years of delays, viewed the test firing from the air; Young in a Shuttle training jet at 4,000-foot altitude, and Crippen in an identical craft about 1,900 feet higher. (W Star, Feb 20/81, A-l; W Post, Feb 21/81, A-7)
The Shuttle orbiter Columbia came to a “flawless” landing on a dry lake bed in the Mojave desert at Edwards Air Force Base, California, at 1:21 p.m. EST before a crowd that included NASA employees, 20,000 VIPs, and about 250,000 spectators who had camped out all night to watch Columbia’s return. Millions of people around the world also watched the return on television. The astronauts got a wakeup call from mission control about 4 a.m. on their 30th orbit, with a special message for Robert Crippen: “You’ve waited 12 years for this. If you don’t wake up, you’ll miss the whole thing.” Before eating breakfast, the crew took time to check flight systems, guidance and navigation instruments, and the 44 reaction-control thrusters used during reentry. On 36th orbit, the crew received “final go” for deorbit firing. Columbia’s payload-bay doors were closed four hours before the scheduled landing time, and the astronauts put on their pressurized space suits in case of emergency. Over the Indian Ocean at 12:22 p.m., an hour before landing and while out of contact with any tracking stations, Commander John Young turned Columbia tail-first and fired two on-board maneuvering rockets to brake the spacecraft; then, turned it nose-first again, tilting it slightly to permit full exposure of underside insulation. Reentry into the atmosphere at more than 17,000	mph took place at 12:48 p.m., 400,000 feet over the Pacific at Wake Island. The few tiles missing from tail areas after liftoff did not affect reentry at heats up to 2750°F. The 80-ton 122-foot long vehicle landed at 215 mph, twice the usual jet speed. As Columbia’s wheels touched down, flight-control chief Don Puddy at Houston told his jubilant team to “Prepare for exhilaration,” allowing them about 15 seconds of celebration before resuming their jobs. For the first time, a splashdown or landing did not immediately end a manned spaceflight. “Welcome home, Columbia,” Houston greeted the craft landing on the center line of the California runway. “Do you want us to take it up to the hangar, Joe?” Young radioed, and mission control responded “We’re going to dust it off first.” A NASA official said that Columbia would probably begin its return flight to Cape Canaveral in seven or eight days, riding piggyback on its Boeing 747 carrier. An “optimistic” estimate was that the orbiter would fly again under its own power in less than six months, on a four-day flight from which it might be able to “turn around” and be ready to fly again in four months. (NYTimes, Apr 15/81, 1, 21; W Post, Apr 15/81, A-l; W Star, Apr 15/81, A-l; WSJ, Apr 15/81, 2)
NASA said that astronaut Alan L. Bean, fourth man to set foot on the Moon, would resign effective June 26 to devote full time to his career as a painter. Bean, selected in the third group of astronauts in the fall of 1963, flew on the second moon-landing mission, Apollo 12, in November 1969, exploring the Ocean of Storms with Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., as Richard F. Gordon circled in the command module. He captained the second Skylab mission in July-September 1973 and was backup spacecraft commander for the 1975 U.S.-USSR Apolio-Soyuz mission. He noted that in his 18 years as astronaut he had seen sights no artist had ever viewed firsthand, and he hoped to record his experiences through his art. Bean’s time in space—1,671 hours 45 minutes—made him first among active U.S. astronauts and fourth of all in total spaceflight time. He was currently head of astronaut-candidate operations and training. His resignation would leave in the corps only one of the 12 U.S. astronauts who had walked on the Moon: John Young, chief of the astronaut office and commander of shuttle Columbia’s first flight last April. (NASA Release 81-87)
John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Columbia’s maiden flight, told of their experience at at 75-minute JSC press conference carried on closed-circuit television to NASA Headquarters and other centers. They said that the orbiter was an incomparable flying machine, surprisingly easy to control, and that the mission was “what NASA calls nominal, although I think you’re going to have to call it phenomenal,” Young reported. Neither crewman expressed concern over the loss of tiles from the aft end of the vehicle, detected shortly after launch. Young said that he was impressed by the fact that the metal under the tiles did not heat up during reentry as much as expected: he said “a lot” of the thermal tiles on the topside could probably be eliminated in future missions, lowering spacecraft weight and increasing the limit on payload weight, now set at 65,000 pounds. Young said that he went immediately upon landing to look at the underside of the orbiter, which had encountered the most heat. “People had been telling us it was impossible that some of these tiles wouldn’t fall off. Well, none of them fell off, and those tiles went through some of the roughest ascent and reentry you can imagine.” “Nothing failed. Statistically, I didn’t think that was possible,” Crippen added. “We’ve been working 3 years to learn how to handle catastrophes, and all we did the whole time was sit back and enjoy it.” The cruise was not perfect, the astronauts agreed: the craft was cold to the point of discomfort some of the time, and the toilet shut down near the end of the flight. The crew kept getting tangled in communications lines, and Columbia “landed long” instead of at its prescribed touchdown spot. Young said the chill could be avoided by putting interior temperature sensors nearer to the crew than to heat-emitting electronic gear. Cordless microphones would solve the problem of tangled cords, and engineers were already working on the toilet program. Young said that he had landed Columbia farther down the 7-mile long runway than he was asked in order to test the Shuttle’s wings and tail for lift; he said that the lift he got at landing was “remarkable.” “We hardly used our brakes. I tell you that was quite a performance, taking 99 tons out of orbit and getting it back down all in one piece.” A reporter asked Crippen if his pulse rate of 130 at liftoff, compared to Young’s 90, meant that he was more excited. “You betchum I was excited,” he replied. “What you don’t understand is, I was excited too,” Young added. “I just can’t make it go any faster.” (Young is 50, seven years older than Crippen.) The mission was so successful that Columbia might fly again as early as September 23, with a third test in December and a final test in April 1982. With that schedule, NASA might begin operational flights carrying cargo into space as early as September 1982. Young said they had been given 135 flight objectives and had completed all 135. “You really should be proud of this vehicle,” he told the JSC audience. (NASA Text, postflight brfg, Apr 23/81; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A—12; WPost, Apr 24/81, A-6; W Star, Apr 24/81, A—12; B Sun, Apr 24/81, A-6)
The Washington Post said that STS-5, the first operational Shuttle mission, would include simulation of a space repair job to practice for the salvaging of an orbiting satellite, Solar Max, in April 1984. The 5,000-pound Solar Max cost $70 million at its launch in February 1980 to study the Sun during maximum sunspot activity. Less than six months later, the devices pointing its instrumentation at the Sun broke down, and the satellite wa practically useless. Congress allowed $18 million to put the Shuttle alongside in a 308-mile-high orbit so that astronauts could ground a dozen cables, cut seals holding them to a panel, and pry the entire group from the panel. The greatest expense was for training the spacesuited crew to use tools and to handle the Solar Max as it orbited at 17,500-miles-per-hour alongside the Shuttle. {W Post, Oct 7/82, A-23)
Space Services Inc. (SSI) of America launched the first U.S. privately funded rocket from a small concrete launch pad at a cattle ranch on Matagorda Island, 45 miles northeast of Corpus Christi on the south coast of Texas, at 11:15 a.m. Washington time. Conestoga I rose to 196 miles altitude, traveling 326 miles downrange before dropping into the Gulf of Mexico. The solid-fuel rocket, with a motor purchased from NASA for $365,000, was not designed for recovery. The booster successfully. separated from the upper stage of the rocket; a shroud covering a mock payload that weighed 1,097 pounds, including 40 gallons of water, ejected at peak altitude as a visual marker. After years of planning and one explosive failure in 1981, SSI’s launch PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FilMm would offer relatively inexpensive space transportation for firms wanting to put up private satellites without government help. SSI chairman David Hannah, a Houston real-estate man, said that the launch of Conestoga I was a “giant step forward” for his two-year-old company; the plan was to send up an orbital test flight within two years and start operating on a commercial basis shortly thereafter. Former astronaut Deke Slayton, who joined SSI after retirement from NASA and was in charge of the launch team, said that everything worked perfectly. Besides buying the booster from NASA, SSI also had help from subcontractors with considerable government experience and a variety of ex-NASA personnel. It was negotiating for a permanent launch site in Hawaii but was also looking into a lease of the Atlas Centaur launch site in Florida for the sort of launches that could send heavier spacecraft, such as communications satellites, into orbit. As SSI officials toasted the successful launch with champagne, former director of KSC Lee Scherer, now an SSI consultant, remarked “You can’t do this at a government launch site.” He said that a high-level administration statement that SSI was “in the national interest” would put the firm in competition for space business. (W Post, Sept 10/82, A-l; NY Times, Sept 10/82, A-l)
NASA announced the crews for the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shuttle flights. On STS A, Thomas K. Mattingly would be commander, and Henry W. Hartsfield, pilot. Scheduled for launch early in July, the seven day STS-4 would be the last of four orbital flight tests to verify Shuttle hardware and software. Mattingly, 47, orbited the Moon 10 years ago on Apollo 16: Hartsfield, 48, was a rookie. STS-5, a five-day mission planned for mid-November to deploy commercial communications satellites, would be the first to use mission-specialist astronauts. Vance D. Brand, 50, who was command-module pilot on 1975’s Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, would be mission commander. This would be the first spaceflight for Robert F. Overmyer, 45, the pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. Joseph P. Allen and Dr. William B. Lenoir. Columbia would be the spacecraft for both STS-4 and STS-5. STS-6, planned for January 1983, would be the first flight of the orbiter Challenger, a two-day mission to deploy NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), one of an eventual two-satellite system providing comprehensive voice and data coverage between orbiting shuttles and the ground. Commander would be Paul J. Weitz, 49, who was pilot on Skylab /; copilot would be U.S. Air Force Col. Karol J. Bobko, 44, another rookie. Donald H. Peterson and Dr. Story Musgrave would fly as mission specialists. NASA would no longer assign Shuttle backup crews; its pool of experienced pilots at JSC would readily permit interchange of crewmen. (NASA Release 82-33; JSC Release 82-012; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-9)
NASA launched the fifth flight (STS-5) of Space Shuttle Columbia on time at 7:19 a.m. EST from KSC with a four-man crew, largest ever to take off from Earth at the same time. Feeling none of the motion sickness suffered by three of the first four Shuttle crews, the astronauts were so busy preparing for deployment from orbit of the first of two communications satellites that they had no time for chitchat with mission control. Astronaut Joseph Allen took off his shoes and socks to work barefooted inside the Shuttle cabin: “it’s like having four hands,” he explained. He and William Lenoir maneuvered the first of twin satellites (one U.S., the other Canadian) into space at 3:17 p.m. EST, while Vance Brand and Robert Overmyer flew the 100-ton Shuttle, positioning Columbia to avoid smearing its windows with exhaust from the satellite engine. The astronauts would use the same procedures November 12 to deploy the Canadian satellite on a similar flight path. The first commercial cargo carried by the Shuttle was a 21-foot-tall cylinder worth almost $50 million, owned by Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a firm begun as a partnership of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of Communications Satellite Corporation—ComSatCorp), and International Business Machines (IBM). Boeing, General Motors, and General Electric were among its more than 300 clients who used SBS satellites to transmit coast-to-coast computer traffic and telephone calls. Transmissions to SPS satellites were at 14GHz, twice as high as frequencies used by other U.S. communications satellites and were relayed at 12GHz to avoid interference. President Reagan held a telephone conversation with the astronauts at 10:26 a.m. November 11, repeating his request to an earlier crew to “pick me up and drop me off in California.” He added that “if more of us could see [the earth] from that angle we might realize that there must be a way to make it as united in reality here on earth as it looks from outer space.” Brand replied, “We’re in total agreement on that one.” (NASA MOR M-989-82-05 [prelaunch] Nov 5/82, [postlaunch] Dec 7/82; USA Today, Nov 12/82, 1A; W Post, Nov 12/82, A-l, D-8)
The Observatory for Geophysical Monitoring of Climatic Change at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, on March 3 said that scientists doing a routine weather scan had discovered a huge cloud orbiting the Earth and had tracked it for five weeks, but could not explain what it was. The cloud, about 10 to 12 miles high (just above the flight paths of most commercial jets), had probably circled the Earth four or five times. The best guess was that it resulted from an unnoticed volcanic eruption. On March 10 NASA said that the “mystery cloud” detected over Hawaii definitely came from a volcanic eruption. Chemical analysis of samples showed that it consisted entirely of sulfuric acid, ruling out nuclear explosion or a meteorite, either of which would have produced fragments of rocky material. The cloud had been measured from the equator to Germany, about 50-f8-N, with the heaviest concentration of particles found by a Langley Research Center (LaRC) research aircraft at 20 °N. No volcanic source for the cloud had been identified. Scientists from ARC were studying atmosphere-circulation patterns to see how gas from an equatorial source could spread over the northern half of the Earth. Sulfur gases injected into the stratosphere by volcanic eruptions tended to remain for months, as there would be no rain to remove them; changing gradually into drops of sulfuric acid, the volcanic cloud would increase over time in depth and density as more sulfur compounds arrived. Highly reflective clouds of the acid, like those on Venus, could prevent solar heat from reaching the ground, but the current cloud apparently had not produced any climate changes. A NASA research plane flying from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) to Costa Rica carried a remote-sensing laser radar that mapped the cloud content while doing previously scheduled data-gathering on local volcanoes. LaRC would continue taking radar data; also, an ARC U-2 aircraft would make follow-on flights beginning March 23. (ARC Release 82-11; LaRC Release 82-12; NASA Release 82-45; W Post, Mar 6/82, A-4; NY Times, Mar 7/82, P-24) Heavy rains all day March 17 left more than an inch of water on the “dry” lake beds at Edwards, where Columbia had landed after its first two flights. NASA said that it was cheaper to move landing equipment to White Sands than to postpone the flight until Edwards dried out: each day of delay in launching the Shuttle cost the agency $3 million. A special landing team immediately began loading support equipment on a 23-car train that would carry it the 1,000 miles from Edwards to White Sands. The equipment should be in place late on Sunday, March 21, ready for use should an emergency occur after liftoff. The upcoming flight, third of a series of four test flights before the Shuttle began carrying payloads into space later in 1982, would subject the spacecraft to temperature extremes to see how it endured long exposure to dark and light. It would also include further tests of the 50-foot robot arm designed to handle Shuttle payloads. Exposure of the Shuttle tail would test pumping of fuel and restarting rear engines under extremely high or low temperatures. Exposure of the 65-foot-long cargo bay carrying more than 21,000 pounds of instruments and experiments to the extreme heat encountered in space would show how materials carried into space over the next 10 years would survive. The open cargo bay aimed at the Sun would also seek exposure to solar flares, for which scientists were still seeking explanations. Lousma and Fullerton flew from JSC at Houston to Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., near KSC in T-38 jet trainers Saturday, March 20, and planned to spend most of Sunday in preflight briefings. KSC said that the countdown had been virtually trouble-free and ahead of schedule. Liftoff from pad A, launch complex 39, took place Monday, March 22, at 10:59 a.m.; EST after an hour’s delay caused by failure of a protection circuit in the controller, for the heated nitrogen purge of the main engines, required before introduction.of cryogenic fuel. Countdown stopped for reestablishment of heater'control. Initial orbit elements were 240-kilometer apogee and perigee, 89-minute period, and 38° inclination. Operations began in the fourth hours of flight with the opening of payload doors, removal of ejection suits, and activation of the Office of Space: Sciences experiment package (OSS-1). Later reports indicated that the crew suffered from motion sickness after the exertion of removing the space suits; incidence of motion sickness had been less on Mercury and Gemini when astronauts had less area to move in, and both Soviet and U.S. crews had taken time on longer flights to get used to weightlessness before active exertion. Scheduled for the second day was deployment of the robot arm; for the third was practiceiin grappling payload packages and extending a set of sensors over the edges of the cargo bay to measure plasma (electrically charged gases) in Earth orbit. The fourth and fifth days would see further tests of the arm, more thermal testing, and two brief ignitions of the maneuvering rockets to see how they performed after long periods of cold. The sixth day would have more thermal tests and experiments on solar radiation; the seventh day would be for shutdown and landing preparations. All activities planned for day one were accomplished; OSS-1 experimenters reported “excellent data.” Thermal attitude tail-to-sun prevailed throughout the sleep period. A survey with the remote manipulator system (RMS) camera showed several low-temperature white tiles missing or damaged on the nosecone. Also, three pieces of black tiles (about 1 1/2 tiles) had been found 700 feet south of the launch pad; others had been found on and near the beach. All had been sent to JSC for identification and analysis. On Tuesday, the first day in orbit, the “wrist” camera on the manipulator arm went dark, and flight directors postponed the critical grappling test to devise a way to do the test without it. That camera served as the crew’s eyes whenever the end of the arm took hold of an object in the cargo bay. Planned use was to raise an 82-pound package and move it around the bay; the instrument inside would measure electrical disturbances caused by the spacecraft and its motion through the electronically charged ionosphere. Instead, the crew extended the robot arm far over the cargo bay and used the “elbow” camera to transmit “the best television ever seen of the earth” from 150 miles up. The crew turned on the monodisperse latex reactor [see January 19] for 14 hours; the solution would be stirred every 30 minutes for the rest of the mission. Ground control changed the activity schedule to allow for crew rest and troubleshooting; day four activities would be done on day three and vice versa, a prelaunch-planned option. Problems were reported with the environmental control and life-support systems and with the waste-control “slinger”; NASA said it had initiated “backup procedures.” Besides suffering from motion sickness, Lousma had been kept awake by loud radio static, probably from a Soviet radar at Rostov on the Black Sea, said to be the most powerful in the world; it was called Woodpecker by radio ham operators because of its noise, heard from Spain to parts of China. STS-3 lost three main radio links to Earth Friday, March 25, through the Shuttle’s transponders that locked on and amplified ground signals and carried nearly all data on Shuttle condition and its speed and location. Two ultra-high-frequency (UHF) radio channels carried voice transmission, however, and the astronauts were using the remaining transponder, a backup UHF voice line, and the FM-radio line to relay information to Earth. Gene Kranz, deputy flight director at JSC, said that the mission would go full time unless the high-power transponder link was lost. A premature end to the mission would require a landing somewhere other than at White Sands, because of bad weather with overcast skies and high winds that blew dust across the runways and created haze thick enough to obscure the landing site. Two days away from the scheduled landing, the crew had completed all the thermal tests on Columbia: baking tail, nose, and top in unimpeded sunlight and chilling the same parts in the icy cold of space for hours. They had restarted the Shuttle engines hot and cold, opened and closed cargo-bay doors under both conditions, and repeatedly tested the mechanical arm under varying conditions with excellent results. In the last possible opportunity, less than a day before the end of the mission, the crew pointed their solar telescope directly at the Sun and got a solar flare (an event on the Sun’s surface they could not have predicted) “almost as if it were planned.” Dr. Robert Novick of Columbia University, where the X-ray polarimeter was built, said that this was the first time that an instrument in space with this sensitivity had witnessed a solar flare. On Sunday night, March 28, the crew went to sleep two hours earlier than usual in preparation for landing Monday. About 40 minutes before the time scheduled for touchdown, astronaut John Young in a Grumman Gulfstream jet tried a practice landing on the White Sands runway and found visibility completely obscured. The Columbia crewmen were about to fire rockets to begin descent. “That’s the first time I’ve seen it this bad,” Young told mission control in Houston. “I think we ought to knock this thing off.” Less than 15 minutes later, mission control ordered a day’s delay. The two astronauts unpacked to await word from mission control on where and when they would return. Landing finally occurred at 9:04 a.m. MST on Tuesday, March 30, on a dry lake bed at White Sands. Touchdown point was 1,092 feet past the runway threshold; rollout distance was 13,732 feet. The crew left the orbiter 45 minutes after landing, and postflight operations proceeded without incident. (NASA Release 82-29; NASA MOR M-989-82-03 [prelaunch] Mar 13/82, [postlaunch] May 5/82; NASA MOR E-835-03-82-01, OSS-1, [prelaunch] Mar 17/82, [postlaunch] Sept 20/82; Spacewam SPX-341; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 24, 25, 29/82; NY Times, Mar 18/82, A-18; Mar 20, 7; Mar 21, 1; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 30, A-l; WPost, Mar 19/82, A-7; Mar 21, A-l; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 25, A-2; Mar 27, A-2; Mar 29, A-l; Mar 30, A-l)
NASA went before the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to ask for a market test of a “land mobile satellite service” to complement cellular systems and other mobile arrangements now being planned or in use. NASA asked the FCC to reserve frequencies, for commercial companies offering to establish communications by satellite to rural America via portable radiotelephones that could switch calls between vehicles and local telephone networks. Present “cellular radio” systems were land-based, difficult to install in remote areas amid mountains and other barriers. The FCC had denied a similar NASA request last year but would not comment on the new request. NASA said that other nations were developing mobile satellite communications services on frequencies provided by the 1979 World Administrative Radio Conference; if the FCC failed to provide the United States with frequencies, it could jeopardize its leadership “in satellite communications and in mobile communications equipment.” The application said that mobile systems in the United States had been “available only through terrestrial facilities... limited in range” and restricted mostly to urban areas. A satellite system could include up to 288,000 rural subscribers by 1990, NASA said. W Post, Nov 30/82, C-7) November SO: Former Apollo 13 astronaut Jack Swigert, elected November 2 as congressman from Colorado’s 6th congressional district, was hospitalized in Denver after undergoing chemotherapy for bone-marrow cancer. He would remain there “another few days,” an aide said. (NY Times, Nov 30/82, A-17)
NASA investigators of the failure of $2-million space suits on STS-5 issued an interim report blaming two missing parts and a faulty sensor. During the mission on Shuttle Columbia, an oxygen device in astronaut William Lenoir’s suit failed to provide required pressure, and the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit and portable life-support system would not operate. JSC program Operations Manager Richard A. Colonna, who headed the team, said that two vital plastic parts the size of a matchstick, worth less than a nickel apiece, that several to hold a pair of screws against a metal piece in Lenoir’s suit, had been removed for a test last August and were never put back. Documentation indicated that the parts were in place, and during repeated tests, technicians failed to spot their absence. The team said that the fan failed because a tiny magnetic sensor no bigger than a pinhead apparently gave way just after Allen put on his space suit. The motor running the fan and pumping water through the suit used the sensors, instead of the magnetic brushes used in most motors, because of the danger of a spark igniting the pure oxygen circulating inside the spacesuit. Colonna said that the team would continue its investigation. He expected it to recommend further and more frequent testing and quality-control inspections by the manufacturer, Hamilton Standard, during space suit production and at JSC and KSC. (NASA Release 82-181; W Post, Dec 2/82, A-l)
“A clever bit of rewiring. . .with the skill of an automobile thief’ enabled the astronauts aboard Columbia (STS-4) [see June 27] to bypass a defective circuit and turn on the power for part of its payload called the “getaway special.” The University of Utah students sponsoring the experiment had given up hope but now planned to accomplish nearly all of their objectives. A thank-you message from the students said, “One small switch for NASA, a giant turn-on for us.” Engineers at JSC and GSFC had transmitted 10 possible corrective measures after figuring out that a cable from a control panel was faulty; on the first try, everything began to work, and the conclusion was that launch vibrations could have loosened a connection. A more serious problem arose when the clamshell doors of the payload bay refused to shut snugly after exposure to the heat and cold of space had expanded and contracted the aluminum fuselage and graphite epoxy doors. A similar problem on the preceding flight was solved by putting Columbia into a slow roll (the so-called barbecue mode), turning the surface toward and away from the Sun to equalize temperatures around the ship. Columbia had been circling the Earth for most of the last two days with its underside facing the Sun, as a means of baking out moisture trapped in the insulating tiles from a hail storm the night before liftoff. Harold Draughon, a flight director, said that data from the flight showed that all the tiles had baked dry. (NASA MOR MR-004, 3; NY Times, July 1/82, B-8)
Marine Col. Jack Lousma and Air Force Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, the astronauts scheduled to fly the third Shuttle mission, told a news conference in Houston that the flight was now set for March 22. A major objective of the mission would be to see how well the Shuttle systems withstood the extreme heat and cold of space. Sections of the ship exposed to the Sun would experience temperatures up to 250°F; sections in shadow, down to -250°F. The Shuttle would also be subjected to slightly higher dynamic pressures during launch and landing, to gain additional knowledge about its flight characteristics and limits. {W Post, Jan 22/81, A-16) During January: NASA named Dr. Burton I. Edelson, a senior vice president of Comsat General Corporation, as its associate administrator for space science and applications, effective February 14. He would succeed Andrew J. Stofan, who had been in an acting capacity and would remain as advisor until NASA appointed him to another management position. Edelson, before joining Comsat, had been an engineering officer in the U.S. Navy with assignments on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council at the White House and the Office of Naval Research. (NASA anno Jan 13/82; NASA Release 82-7)
NASA announced that Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, 58, last of the Mercury Seven astronauts selected in 1958, would leave after 23 years with the space agency. He had retired from NASA in February 1981 but had worked since that time on a temporary basis as a retired annuitant managing the Space Shuttle orbital flight tests at Johnson Space Center (JSC). He planned to work as a consultant to Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, Calif., and to Space Sciences Inc. of Houston, Tex. Slayton joined the U.S. Air Force in 1942, flying 56 combat missions in Europe and 7 over Japan as a B-25 bomber pilot; he was a test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base when selected as a Mercury astronaut. Grounded in August 1959 because of a suspected heart condition, he was later approved for flight and was part of the U.S. crew in the Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975. (NASA Release 82-23) —The New York Times said that friends and associates “wondered why matters were not handled better”: NASA never responded to a JSC request for another year’s extension of Slayton’s employment. His departure reduced the number of the astronaut corps to 79. Several were doctors or scientists without piloting skills; 6 were women. “Many,” the New York Times added, “are young enough to be Slayton’s children.” There had been 108 U.S. astronauts “but only one Original Seven.” (NY Times, Feb 2/82, A-14; Feb 28/82, 30; W Post, Feb 18/82, A-21)
NASA said that it had added two physicians, Dr. Norman Thagard and Dr. William Thornton, to the crews of STS-7 and STS-8, respectively, to study space motion sickness, because other measures had failed to indicate the causes of the sickness. Neither physician had flown in space before. Thagard would join STS-7 commander Robert L. Crippen, pilot Frederick H. Hauck, and mission specialists John M. Fabian and Dr. Sally K. Ride. Thornton, the oldest astronaut at 53, would join STS-8 commander Richard Truly, pilot Daniel Brandenstein, and mission specialists Dale Gardner and Guion Bluford, Jr. A five-person crew would not require spacecraft changes. (NASA Release 82-190; MSFC Release 82-115; W Post, Dec 22/82, A-3; NY Times, Dec 22/82, B-12)
Cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev made a space walk from the orbiting station Salyut 7 to disassemble and partially replace wornout equipment on the station’s exterior and study opportunities for doing various jobs outside it. After they donned space suits, Lebedev left the station for the “zone” of operations, while Berezovoy remained in the open manhole to film his walk for television. They dismantled and passed into the station a micrometeorite-measuring instrument and some panels with optical and various structural materials that had been outside the station since its launch April 19. They also tested the station after exposure of thermomechanical and threaded connections made of different metals that might be used in assembling future craft in orbit. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 30/82) During July: Press reports said that astronauts Margaret Rhea Seddon and Robert I. Gibson were parents of a baby boy, Paul, born July 26 in Houston. Seddon, 34, and Gibson, 35, joined the astronaut program in January 1978 and were married in May 1981. Also, Dr. Sally K. Ride, selected for the seventh Space Shuttle mission as first female U.S. astronaut, announced her marriage to colleague Steven Hawley at her hometown, Salina, Kans. Hawley, an astronomer, had not yet been selected for a mission. (WPost, July 27/82, C-3; St. L P/Dsp, Aug 15/82)
NASA’s Solar Max satellite had detected an 18-month decrease in solar-energy output that might have caused an unusually harsh winter in 1981 and 1982, said JPL. In the first direct observation of cause-and-effect between solar output and changes in Earth’s climate, a solar telescope—Solar Max’s active-cavity radiometer irradiance monitor—recorded a steady decrease from February 1980 to August 1981 of a tenth of 1% in total solar energy reaching Earth. Systematic increases or decreases as small as 0.5% over a century had produced vast changes in Earth’s climate: the “Maunder minimum” in the 17th century, when sunspot activity almost vanished, had coincided with a period known as Europe’s little ice age. A 1% decrease could lower mean global temperature by more than 1,000 (2°F), and less than 10% decrease could freeze Earth’s entire surface. Earth lifeforms existed in the bioshell, an area 10 kilometers (6.2 miles) on either side of mean sea level, with temperatures fed by solar-energy input and interaction between atmosphere, ocean, and land masses. The time needed to cool down the atmosphere and ocean would allay short-term changes in solar input. JPL’s Dr. Richard C. Willson noted that “if you turned off the sun tomorrow, you wouldn’t see its full effects on earth for three years.” Solar activity peaked about every 11 years. The current cycle peaked about the time Solar Max was launched early in 1980; the decrease might represent the general decline since then but might also indicate a longer term lowering of solar input. (Telescope at the High-Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colo., had recorded images of what seemed to be a shrinking sun that might have grown as much as a tenth of 1% smaller every 100 years for the last four centuries.) Solar Max had lost pointing capability in December 1980, and only three of its seven instruments were still returning data. It had been designed for retrieval by the Shuttle, and NASA was seeking authorization for a Solar Max repair mission. (NASA Release 82-57; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-6) During April: Dr. Noel W. Hinners, director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, would become director of GSFC June 14, succeeding A. Thomas Young. Dr. Hinners was associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters from June 1974 to April 1979, when he took over at the museum; he had also been director of lunar programs in NASA’s Office of Space Sciences. He had joined NASA in 1972 as deputy director and chief scientist of Apollo lunar exploration. (NASA anno Apr 1/82; NASA Release —Col. Joe H. Engle, commander of STS-2 in November 1981, was temporarily assigned to the STS office at NASA Headquarters in conjunction with recent organization changes. As deputy associate administrator for manned space flight under Gen. James A. Abrahamson, his special experience would help simplify the integration process for Shuttle users and ensure maximum use of its manned capabilities. He would retain astronaut status and return to JSC to train for his next flight. (NASA Release 82-71)
Marine Col. Robert F. Overmyer, named as copilot with Vance D. Brand on the STS-5 flight, told a JSC preflight press conference that the mission would carry four astronauts, the largest number to fly on any U.S. spacecraft; the other two would be physicists Joseph P. Allen and William B. Lenoir, both making their first spaceflight. Overmyer said that it would take four men to launch the two communications satellites set for deployment from STS-5 over the Pacific between Hawaii and Chile. The Shuttle’s two ejection seats would be replaced with three nonejectable cockpit seats. The fourth crewman would ride in a seat installed in the middeck of Columbia’s cabin next to the airlock leading to the cargo bay, designed for use in the first Shuttle space walk. The report said that the crew did not seem bothered to be “the first to fly the shuttle without being able to eject if the spaceliner is damaged during liftoff.” (W Post, July 21/82, A-l)
LeRC said that it had developed a device called MIAMI (micro-wave ice-accretion measurement instrument) to warn airplane pilots of dangerous ice buildup. This was the only device able to measure actual ice thickness and rate of accretion, besides giving a warning. Unlike other such instruments, MIAMI was imbedded in, instead of projecting from, the surface under study; projecting probes tended to collect ice and confuse detection of how much was actually forming on the surface. The microprocessor in the device could tell the difference between ice and other substances (oil, dirt, grease, insects) and signal only the formation of ice. (LeRC Release 82-56) LeRC also reported the completion of a five-year $39-million program of engine improvements to conserve fuel in commercial jet aircraft through identifying areas for cost-effective refurbishment and of performance loss. The specific goal was to reduce fuel use by up to 5 % for current jet engines. Much of the cost would be repaid by contractors Pratt & Whitney and General Electric; under the reimbursement feature of the program, repayments over a 10-year period would be based on sales of improved components. So far, NASA had recovered nearly $1 million from the contractors, with a potential of $19 to $20 million. (LeRC Release 82-57) Salyut 7 had been visited twice by the other crews: on June 24 two veteran cosmonauts arrived with French test pilot Jean-Loup Chretien, the first nonAmerican from the West to travel in space; on August 19, a second set of visitors arrived, including Svetlana Savitskaya, the second woman to fly in space. Cargo ship Progress 16 had docked with the combined Salyut 7-Soyuz T-7 November 2 bringing fuel, research materials, supplies for the crew, and mail. On November 18 the cosmonauts launched from Salyut 7s airlock Iskra 3, a small communications satellite created by student designers at the Moscow Aviation Institute to make experiments in amateur radio. Student receiving stations in Moscow and Kaluga would control Iskra 3 and receive and process incoming data. (NY Times, Nov 15/82, B-6; FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 2, 9, 16, 18, 22/82) November. 15-19: Press reports said that problems November 15 with new million-dollar space suits had canceled the first space walk scheduled in nearly nine years and would bring STS-5 to a conclusion November 16. The walk was canceled when the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit quit and the device maintaining oxygen pressure in William Lenoir’s backpack behaved so erratically that flight directors feared a breakdown during any space walk. Program managers said that the walk could be done on a later flight; Glynn Lunney at JSC said that the program was “still right on track.” The next three flights would carry space suits for any unexpected problems, such as cargobay doors that refused to close. The next flight was scheduled for February 1983. Inspectors after the November 16 landing said that Columbia came through the fifth flight better than previously: an inboard tire on the left side was shredded and flattened on landing by a brake jamming against it, but only 4 of the 33,000 protective tiles were damaged or came loose during reentry. A seven-man panel investigating the space-suit failure said that they hoped to have answers within a week. One possibility was that the suits were dropped while in their cases or when removed and stowed in the ship. Engineers were baffled by the failure of both suits at the same time for different reasons. The New York Times said that the suits, “most complex human garments ever made,” differed from those used in Apollo moon landings, or for Skylab in 1973 and 1974, which functioned well but were too stiff for easy handling of tools needed by Shuttle astronauts. Shuttle missions had called for production, by United Technologies’ Hamilton Standard Division, of 43 suits and 13 backpacks at a cost of about $2 million each; the suits had been tested by the company 160 times while unmanned and 70 times while manned, said a company spokesman. (W Post, Nov 16/82, A-l; Nov 18/82, A-7; NY Times, Nov 16/82, C-3)
NASA said that astronaut Jack R. Lousma would leave the agency and retire from the Marine Corps October 1. A NASA astronaut since April 1966, he was pilot on Skylab 3 in 1973 and commanded shuttle orbiter Columbia on its third test flight in March 1982. (NASA Release 83-151; WPost, Sept 30/83, A-4)
Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite. The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%. The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time. The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.” The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts. STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down. The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor. Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42) Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.” India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
A team of engineers from NASA and industry celebrated at GSFC their success, after 58 days of maneuvers, in putting the tracking and data-relay satellite into geosynchronous orbit. Using tiny one-pound thrusters with nozzles about the size of a thimble, the team boosted the 5,000-pound TDRS more than 8,600 miles further into space, a feat never before attempted. The TDRS was launched from the Shuttle Challenger during its first mission April 4; after a successful deployment from the Shuttle, some difficulty in the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket threw TDRS into a tumble from which ground control rescued it, stabilizing it far short of the altitude needed for geosynchronous orbit. A joint board representing NASA and the U.S. Air Force said later that the problem was loss of oil pressure in an engine seal, probably caused by excess engine heat. The board had viewed photographs taken by U.S. Air Force camera over New Mexico and had conducted “extensive tests.” Because of the importance of TDRS operation to space communications, NASA and the Air Force had rescheduled two shuttle missions that were to use the IUS. (NASA PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED IMTEflTi0WM.1T mm Releases 83-104, 83-114, 83-116; MSFC Releases 83-49, 83-50; W Post, July 13/83, A-l; July 28/83, A-4) —NASA announced that Charles D. Walker, an engineer at McDonnell Douglas, would be the First payload specialist representing a project designed for commercial purposes. He would fly on the 12th Shuttle mission set for March 1984, operating a materials-processing device developed by McDonnell-Douglas to separate large amounts of biological materials in space for new pharmaceutical uses. As chief engineer responsible for spaceflight tests and evaluation, Walker had worked with project support at KSC and JSC, training NASA astronauts who operated the device for electrophoresis research on earlier Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 83-105)
NASA published in the Federal Register a proposal on how it would select passengers to ride on the Space Shuttle, possibly as early as 1985. NASA emphasized in the proposal that it was not accepting applications. It had already received more than 2,000 written requests for rides since the 1960s, and it had received so many telephone calls about riding the Space Shuttle that it had to attach a recorded message to its telephone line to request that potential astronauts have patience. All requests that had been received by NASA would be disregarded, said NASA’s Sara Keegan. The proposed selection plan would use a multitiered process to choose Shuttle passengers. All requests would be screened by an outside review panel appointed separately by NASA for each flight and then reviewed by a panel of seven top space agency officials before NASA’s administrator made the final selection. Several months before liftoff of a flight, the agency would announce when it would accept applications and disclose specific requirements for the flight. Such requirements could change according to the Space Shuttle’s mission. There were, however, broad requirements for all passengers. Citizen observers/participants would have to be in good health and condition, pass a detailed background investigation, and be willing to undergo rigorous training. NASA was accepting comments from the public on its proposed selection process until mid-February. (NASA Release 83-190; Federal Register, Dec 23/83, Vol. 48 No. 248, pages 56770-71. Published in final form in Federal Register, Apr 25/84, Vol. 49 No. 81; NY Times, Dec 16/83, A-ll; WPost, Dec 23/83, A-3) During December: The large number of malfunctions that struck the Space Shuttle Columbia in its final hours of flight during STS-9 forced engineers to inaugurate the most extensive trouble-shooting operations since the Space Shuttles began flying in April 1981. They were not sure how long the undertaking would last, what they might find, or what effect their findings could have on future flight schedules. NASA officials did not rule out the possibility that the Columbia’s troubles could cause a delay in the next Space Shuttle mission scheduled for January 30, 1984. The malfunctions included two computer failures, a navigation instrument shutdown, and an explosive fire in the rear compartment. Early Space Shuttle flights had had troubles with computers and the heat-shielding tiles, but these were straight forward physical defects that were easily identified. The current problems were more perplexing and came when the Space Shuttle was assumed to be a fully tested, operational vehicle. NASA engineers and other aerospace observers had suggested that the Columbia’s problems stemmed from a phenomenon not uncommon in any new, complex technology : that is after the initial text phase, when extreme care and attention were given to every step in a project, it was human nature to relax a bit, and it was the nature of machines to misbehave occasionally in unexpected ways. International Business Machines (IBM), contractor for the computers, would examine the faulty computers; NASA engineers would closely examine data in search of clues to the cause of the two malfunctions, which did not seem to be related to any fundamental design flaw but could have been caused by loose circuitry resulting from vibrations. NASA would ship the inertial measurement unit to its manufacturer, the Singer Kearfott Company in Little Falls, N.J., for examination. (NY Times, Dec 15/83, A-l) —JPL announced that the IRAS had found a ring of planets being born around Fomalhaut, one of the most studied stars in the southern skies. Earlier in the year, the telescope had discovered a primitive solar system around the star Vega. The discovery that Vega and Fomalhaut appeared to have solar systems was the first evidence supporting the theory that Earth’s solar system was not the only such in existence. Vega and Fomalhaut might be undergoing the same kind of evolution that Earth’s solar system went through three to four billion years ago. “The discovery provides the second direct evidence that solid objects of substantial size exist around a star that is not our sun,” said Dr. Gerry Neugebhuer, IRAS program scientist at JPL. “These objects could be a solar system in a different stage of development and evolution than our own or the one that we found to be circling Vega,” he added. The IRAS detected the two extraterrestrial solar systems by measuring the temperature of the bodies circling the two stars. It found them much cooler than the stars but far too warm and far too large to be rings of interstellar dust. (JPL Release, Dec 16/83; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-3) —Lt. Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr., retired December 31 as deputy director, JPL. Following retirement from the Air Force in 1969, he joined JPL as deputy director, functioning as general manager responsible for the day-to-day management of the laboratory’s resources and the direction and coordination of its technical, administrative, and service activities. General Terhune received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in October 1982. He will be replaced as deputy director by Robert J. Parks, JPL associate director. (JPL Release, Dec 12/83)
The Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) landed at 3:47 p.m. PST at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., after 10 days in space and 167 orbits—the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The landing followed a delay necessitating 22 more orbits than planned when Columbia’s computers failed 3 hours and 49 minutes prior to the planned reentry bum. Six hours after the two computers went off line, Columbia also lost one of its three inertial measurement units that provided orbiter orientation information. The orbiter carried five IBM general purpose computers and three inertial measurement units. Today’s reentry was flown with one of each inoperative. A reentry could be flown with only a single computer and single measurement unit. Mission pilots John W. Young and Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., said at the time that they believed that the triggering of an upward firing 870-pound nose reaction control jet, which caused an unusually strong impact to the orbiter, was the likely cause of the computer failures. However, telemetry analysis showed that the thruster activity was coincidental to the computer malfunction. Instead, NASA came to the conclusion that it was a transient hardware internal problem. About 40 minutes after the problems occurred, the crew restored the second computer to operation. On December 5, President Reagan and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in Athens at the time, held a conference call with the five U.S. crew members and one German payload specialist on Columbia. The U.S. Information Agency (USIA) used five satellites and thousands of miles of land lines around the world to bounce the signals among Athens. Washington, and JSC to provide live television coverage of the call to seven European cities and the Cable News Network (CNN). Aside from the computer problems, the ninth Space Shuttle mission was almost flawless and was distinguished by some significant scientific discoveries. One discovery involved the workings of the inner ear, disproving a 77-year-old hypothesis that had won the 1914 Nobel Prize in medicine for Swedish professor, Robert Barany. Barany had said that nystagmus, a flickering of a person’s eyes when cold air is blown into one of his ears and hot air into the other, was caused by convection, the motion of fluids under uneven heating. But in space, the lack of gravity meant that convection did not occur. Nevertheless, the astronauts aboard Columbia showed the characteristic eye movements. The six-man crew completed work on all but one of the 70 scheduled experiments; only a microwave sensing device misfired. Scientists from 14 countries designed the experiments, and the experiments did not end with touchdown. The four scientists were in quarantine, where they would be required to remain motionless so that scientists could observe how their bodies acclimated to gravity. (ESA Release, Dec 9/83; WH annon, Dec 5/83; W Times, Dec 6/83, 3A; WPost, Dec 6/83, A-3, Dec 8/83, A-3, Dec 9/83, A-l; NY Times, Dec 9/83, A-l; P Inq, Dec/83, A-l; AvWk, Dec 12/83, 23)
Associated Press (AP) said that ESA launched Ariane 6 at 7:59 a.m. EDT from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites: the first ESA telecommunications craft, the British Aerospace-designed Ecs 1, and a smaller West German satellite to retransmit amateur radio broadcasts. This sixth attempt to get the three-stage Ariane off the ground was considered a “crucial boost” to Europe’s space program as a way to break th superpower monopoly on space. Ariane faced competition from the U.S. Space Shuttle and from private companies planning to buy conventional Thor, Atlas, and Titan vehicles from the U.S. government. ESA was counting on enough business for everyone, but admitted that Ariane would have had trouble getting any if this sixth launch had failed. (ESA Info 21; WPost (AP), June 17/83, A-2) Mission control stated that the group of five was “the largest human payload in the history of the space age.” The Soviet Union had maintained crews of five on its Salyut space station but had never carried that number on a single launch. First deployment of a payload was at 5:02 p.m. EDT when the crew launched from the cargo bay a seven-ton communications satellite, Anik C2, for Telesat (Canada’s governmental telecommunications organization). At 9:36 a.m. EDT the next day the crew launched a $40 million Palapa B communications satellites for the government of Indonesia. Two previous Palapas launched by the United States were providing communications to Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Palapa B, twice the size of the earlier communications satellite could increase television and telephone traffic in the area by 10% to 15% a year. The 147 million Indonesians living on islands extending more than 3,200 miles east to west had only 560,000 telephones: Palapa B could provide service for as many as a million new telephones in the next 10 years. After the second communications satellite was launched, the four rookie astronauts (Ride, Fabian, Hauck, and Thagard) appeared on the television screen assembled in the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white letters reading “TFNG: We Deliver.” TFNG stood for “thirty-five new guys,” the astronaut class, recruited in 1978, to which all four belonged. Crippen stayed out of camera range, but mission control said “That’s all right, Crip. We can tell you’re a steely-eyed veteran from here.” On June 19 mission control said that the families of the four fathers aboard Challenger had gathered “to wish you a happy Father’s Day.” The four male astronauts had a total of 10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and Fabian, 2 each. Major activities for the next three days would be the release of the mechanical arm and rehearsal for deployment and retrieval of the West German pallet. Ride and Fabian would drop the 15-foot, 5,000-pound package off the Shuttle and try to pick it up again. (This would be a first for an exercise that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June 22 the team released and retrieved the package five times, as television cameras on Shuttle and package sent spectacular shots of the procedure with a backdrop of Earth and black space. When the exercise concluded and the arm and the payload were back in the cargo bay, Crippen reminded mission control that some crews had announced “We deliver” (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when they launched two communications satellites from the shuttle last November): “Well, for flight 7, we pick up and deliver.” The USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova, first woman to make a flight in space 20 years ago, wired congratulations to Sally Ride. The telegram expressed pleasure “to know that a third representative of this planet’s women, now from the United States of America, is in outer space today.” Last year the Soviet Union sent a second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into space. Among more than 20 experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay and mid-deck was the colony of 150 carpenter ants sent into space by high-school students from Camden, N.J., to record their reactions to weightlessness. The ants were considered good space subjects, being hardy and naturally social creatures. Marginal weather at KSC raised a question whether Challenger would land near its launch point, as planned. Landing on the Florida runway was a way to reduce time in preparing Challenger for its next flight. STS-7 cbuld be extended, or landing could be shifted to Edwards Air Force Base in California; a shift to California would mean an eight-day delay in bringing Challenger back to KSC for a mid-August mission, adding pressure to the timetable for launching Spacelab between the end of September and mid-October. The next chance for a Florida runway landing would be early in 1985; the two intervening missions would be a night launch and landing and the heavyweight touchdown of the Shuttle carrying Spacelab. Also of concern was the effect of rainstorms on the Shuttle tile covering: planes carrying strips of the insulation had been flown through rainstorms with a uniform result of “significant erosion of the tile surfaces.” Mission control offered three landing times, 6:53 a.m. and 8:29 a.m. EDT at KSC and 9:56 a.m. EDT at Edwards Air Force Base. The crew appeared on television “stowing the cabin” in preparation for landing. A sign “The Doctor Is In” was held up as Thagard showed viewers the experiments he was conducting to find clues for the cause of space sickness. STS-7 had been the first shuttle mission to have no space-sick astronauts. The Challenger landed at Edwards Air Force Base June 24 at 9:57 EDT after a steady downpour began at KSC. In a congratulatory telephone call to the astronauts, President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling of the mechanical arm and said “You were there because you were the best person for the job.” Ride said that the flight was “the most fun I’ll ever have in my life.” When the astronauts attended a brief homecoming ceremony at Johnson Space Center June 24, Ride refused to accept a bouquet of flowers from a NASA official; she had said before the mission that she wanted to be treated no differently from her four male crewmates. Wives of the male astronauts each received a red rose; Ride’s husband, astronaut Dr. Steven Hawley, did not. (NASA MOR E-420-07-83-04 [prelaunch] June 9; NASA MOR M-989-83-07 [prelaunch] June 13/83; NY Times, June 20/83, A-l; June 23/83, A-l; June 25/83, 16; June 26/83, 4-8; WPost, June 17/83, A-2; June 20/83, A-l; June 21/83, A-6; June 22/83, A-3; June 23/83, A-l; June 24/83, A-3, C-4; June 25/83, A-l; June 26/83, A-2)
NASA launched at 11:00 a.m. EST the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) from KSC. Columbia carried the largest space crew ever, which consisted of John Young, commander; Brewster Shaw, pilot; Dr. Robert Parker and Dr. Owen Garriott, mission specialists; and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold, payload specialists. The crew would operate in two shifts to permit 24-hour operation of experiments. The mission was originally scheduled to get under way September 30 but was delayed to October 28 to give engineers additional time to check out a communications satellite needed to relay data to Earth from Spacelab, carried on Columbia. The flight was postponed again when an examination of the booster rockets used for the Space Shuttle mission in August revealed serious erosion of the insulation lining one of the rocket nozzles. The rocket was replaced. Columbia carried Spacelab, designed and built by ESA, which marked Europe’s first major entry into a manned space program. Other firsts associated with the flight was that it carried the heaviest payload on a Shuttle, the 33,584-pound Spacelab and pallet, and that it would include more experiments and spacecraft maneuvers than did any previous flight. Immediately after liftoff, Columbia rolled over and turned northward to put itself into an orbital path that would range from as far north as Scotland and Leningrad to as far south as Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America in order to take pictures of Europe. The orbit would also take Columbia over Moscow and many militarily sensitive areas of the Soviet Union, the first time a U.S. manned spacecraft had flown over the Soviet Union in daylight. No pictures or other sensing would be taken of the ground while Columbia passed over the Soviet Union. The $l-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long laboratory was sealed and pressurized so that the scientists/astronauts could work in shirtsleeves as they carried out more than 70 experiments on 38 sets of equipment. Operating Spacelab were Merbold and Lichtenberg, a new breed of astronaut—payload specialists—who were not career astronauts but scientists trained to operate the science instruments on the mission. Wired with sensors, the scientists were guinea pigs in a number of experiments designed to explore how the body adapted to space and how it performed in the absence of gravity. Blood samples were taken three times so that scientists could study how the ratio of red to white blood cells changed once the body was weightless. Several experiments were conducted to measure eye movements; in another experiment, Garriott was given mild electric shocks to see how the muscles in his body responded to a sudden jolt that was the bodily equivalent of a sudden movement in weightlessness (doctors believed that one of the causes of space sickness might be abrupt movements that disoriented the inner ear). In another experiment, the crew in shifts pushed two balls identical in shape and size, although of different weights, to determine how quickly humans would distinguish weight from size in weightlessness. Other Spacelab studies were concerned with the growth in space of sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes. Exotic metal mixes were melted, and crystals were grown in three Spacelab furnaces. There were experiments intended to determine the practicality of orbiting factories to produce products not possible in the gravity of Earth. During the flight, two antennas failed on the TDRS-1 that was used to relay data from Spacelab to Earth. The failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold had to share the voice link to Mission Control Center in Houston with the four astronauts in Columbia’s cockpit, and it meant that the two scientists got their instructions from the ground via a teleprinter aboard Spacelab. Columbia landed December 8 at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. (NASA MOR M-977-09-83-01 [prelaunch], Oct 83; NASA Releases 83-163, 83-176; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Nov 29/83; W Post, Nov 22/83, A-8, Nov 28/83, A-l, Nov 29/83, A-l, Nov 30/83, A-l; USA Today, Nov 29/83, 1A; W Times, Nov 22/83, C—1; B Sun, Nov 29/83, A-l)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
NASA began moving the TDRS to its permanent location over the Atlantic Ocean, from 67 W to 41W, said Charles M. Hunter, deputy TDRS project manager at GSFC. Using six tiny thrusters, the move began with a 19-minute bum at 8:57 p.m’. EDT, with a second burn for 17 minutes at 8:57 a.m. September 24. The craft would move to its permanent station at the rate of 1.2° per day, drifting until October 16, when the first of two burns to stop the drift would occur. Another burn on October 17 should put TDRS over the Atlantic just east of Brazil, Hunter said. The fuel to be used, about 8 pounds, would not affect operations over the planned 10-year life of TDRS. (NASA Release 83-145) During September: NASA announced that Richard H. Truly, commander of STS-8, was named the first commander of the Naval Space Command to be set up October 1 at Dahlgren, Va. Selected as a NASA astronaut in August 1969, Truly had been on one of the crews for Shuttle approach-and-landing test flights in 1977. His spacecraft was as pilot of STS-2 in November 1981. (NASA Release 83-133)
The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum said that it would build an adjunct facility at Dulles International Airport to house an expanding collection of aircraft, including the Shuttle Enterprise. Estimated to cost $40 million, the facility would replace the restoration site now at Silver Hill, Md., but would not be completed for another 7 to 15 years. Possibilities for Dulles included a group of four buildings to accommodate a Boeing 707, a Boeing B17 bomber, Boeing 727, a Boeing 747, and others; the design and funding were not yet settled. The collection had outgrown the Mall area, said Walter Boyne, director of the museum: “We are going to get the space shuttle and the Concorde,” which it would be physically impossible to move to the Mall area. “They are so complex, you can’t simply take a wing off and move them.” The present museum now has 10 million visitors a year, and Boyne said that people would be as interested in the Shuttle 100 years from now as they were in the Wright Brothers’ plane today. (W Post, Oct 13/83, D-1) A three-inch layer of the carbon-epoxy material was intended to protect the metal nozzles from flaming exhaust by charring, to dissipate heat; about half the layer would normally burn away during the two-minute firing of the booster. On the last mission, one nozzle’s lining came within 0.2 inches of burning away completely. Damage to a metal nozzle could send the Shuttle off course; had the flame burned through part of the engine in flight, “it could have caused a catastrophe,” said the Washington Post. A test firing October 11 at Thiokol’s Utah plant, where the rockets were built, showed that the liner had begun to “delaminate,” which would make the Shuttle aerodynamically unstable after two minutes of flight. If NASA decided to replace one of Columbia’s motors, it would have to move the entire vehicle off the pad. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, head of the Shuttle program, said that chances of staying on schedule for a Spacelab launch between October 28 and November 5 were “diminishing rapidly”; however, he would not set a launch date “with this type of uncertainty.” The next possible launch date after November 5 would be November 27: astronomy experiments to be carried on Spacelab had to orbited while the moon was dark. [Students at Camden, N.J., high schools said that the carpenter ants flown on Challenger in June had died from lack of moisture before leaving Earth.] The New York Times said that NASA might have to delay the next Shuttle mission for one to four months, possibly to next February 6, because of concern about reliability of the nozzles in the Shuttle boosters. Positions of stellar targets would again be favorable for Spacelab observations by next February. ESA and scientists from the United States and Europe were asked to suggest rescheduling that would have the least impact on their experiments. A later report said that engineers who examined one of the engines recovered from the Atlantic after the mission in August found that the three-inch coating inside the rocket nozzle had burned down to 0.2 inches. Astronaut Daniel C. Brandenstein, pilot of that flight, told CBS News that the lowest part of the engine would have burned through if the engines had fired 2.7	seconds more, which would have “spelled curtains for the crew.” A NASA official said that was conjecture, though the agency admitted that a burn-through might have occurred after 20 more seconds. NASA decided October 14 to postpone the first flight of Spacelab for “at least a month” but would announce a new launch date. Gen. Abrahamson said October 16 that the probable date would be late next February, but the decision would be made jointly by NASA and ESA. He said that NASA engineers still did not know what caused the near-failure of the engine on the eighth shuttle flight in August. Two test firings in the last 10 days had produced confusing results: one engine lining had almost burned through, the other less than halfway, as it was meant to do. NASA had changed the manufacturing process not long ago, he noted, and the change might have trapped gases in the lining instead of baking them out. With Columbia waiting for Spacelab, the next Shuttle flight would take place in January as planned. Challenger would deploy two communications satellites, and astronaut Bruce McCandless would demonstrate in space a self-propelled manned maneuvering unit that could go 500 to 600 feet from the Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 13/83, A-15; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 15/83, A-20; Oct 17/83, A-3; NY Times, Oct 13/83, A-16)
MSFC reported successful simulation of Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) spacecraft-repair procedures in its huge neutral-buoyancy tank as rehearsal for the actual task set for 1984 during the 13th shuttle mission. Solar Max, launched February 14, 1980, worked for 10 months until fuses blew on three of its four attitude-control momentum wheels. The repair mission would replace its 500-pound attitude-control subsystem and part of the coronagraph-polarimeter. Three of its seven instruments continued to work despite the malfunction. Dr. George Nelson, lead astronaut for the repair, and STS-13 pilot Francis Scobee wore space suits during the underwater simulation to experience the physical difficulty of working in the space environment. Dr. Nelson and Dr. James D. van Hoften would make the actual repairs. Dr. Ernie Hildner, coinvestigator on the polarimeter and MSFC’s solar physics branch chief, said that watching the simulation made him “more optimistic about the success of the endeavor.” (MSFC Release 83-30) Postponement of TDRS-B would keep the $1 billion Spacelab built by ESA and scheduled to fly in September on STS-9 from carrying out its full mission, as its 40 instruments were designed to work at such high speeds that they needed at least two tracking satellites to operate properly. However, ESA and NASA agreed to launch Spacelab on schedule and get a 60% to 70% return from its experiments. Even this, Aller said, would depend on NASA’s ability to move TDRS-A into a synchronous orbit. Two test firings had raised its perigee 350 miles, and Aller expressed “confidence we will have [TDRS] in geosynchronous orbit sometime in June.” Press reports said that firings May 10 and 11 raised the perigee more than 800 miles, still 7,000 miles short; it would take another three weeks of daily firings to achieve synchronous orbit. On May 27, NASA said that it removed TDRS-B from the cargo manifest for STS-8 and substituted the test article. By that time it had moved TDRS-A within 3,675 miles (5,915 kilometers) of proper perigee. {W Post, May 7/83, A-3, May 11/83, A-9; May 12/83; NASA Release 83-86; MSFC Release 83-38)
The press reported the death in North Carolina at the age of “about 26” of Ham, the chimpanzee sent on a Mercury capsule into suborbital flight January 21, 1961, to prepare for the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., first U.S. astronaut. Ham, named after the Holloman Aerospace Medical Center in New Mexico, retired from the space program in 1963 to live at the National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C., and after 1981 in the North Carolina Zoological Park. His trip in “a very primitive space capsule on an experimental suborbital run” was attended with “excitement and suspense,” even dread, because no one could predict whether he would survive the shocks of the trip or undergo emotional trauma. “Ham rose to the occasion and took it all in stride,” the report said. “Never mind that the capsule, through an error, had been shot 40 miles higher than planned or that it had landed 30 miles past the target area where a fleet awai ted it or that it had been traveling 5,000 miles an hour, 800 miles faster than planned. ... During the time radio signals were received the chimp pushed various levers and performed other behavior tasks assigned him.” (WPost, Jan 21/83, A-16; Jan 26/83, B-3; Jan 27/83, A-22)
Three new companies entering the “race to commercialize space” would launch Space America, a venture to provide remote-sensing satellite data services by 1986, the Washington Post reported. The companies were two in Washington, D.C.—American Science & Technology and AEROS Data Corporation—and Space Services Inc. (SSI) of Houston, which developed the first U.S. privately funded and operated launch vehicle. SSI would be managing partner. All three companies were less than three years old, privately owned, and “actively seeking capital,” according to Donald “Deke” Slayton, former astronaut and president of SSI. The group hoped to put into polar orbit a privately owned satellite built by Honeywell Inc. and Ball Aerospace Systems with sensors to collect data on Earth resources such as agriculture, mineral deposits, and water. (W Post, Sept 8/83, D-1)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
NASA announced that Robert L. Crippen, commander of Space Shuttle mission 41-G earlier in the month, was named deputy director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC, Houston. He would serve as deputy to George W.S. Abbey and remain an active astronaut. Crippen was pilot on STS-1, the first Space Shuttle flight, and commanded STS-7 and 41-C, the Solar Maximum satellite rescue mission. He joined NASA in September 1969 after three-year assignment with the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program. (JSC Release 84-050)
A working meeting, in Paris, of astronauts from the Soviet Union, the United States, and France concluded after participants expressed concern for mankind’s future and the need for cooperation, and they emphasized their desire to use their unique experience to promote space exploration and the use of space technology for the good of all people. Participating in the meeting were Soviet cosmonauts A. A. Leonov (Voskhod-2 and Soyuz Apollo), O.G. Makarov (Soyuz 12, Soyuz 27, Soyu T-3), and Yu.V. Romanenko (Soyuz 26, Soyuz 38); U.S. astronauts R. Schweickart (Apollo 9), E. Mitchell (Apollo 14), and D. Eisele (Apollo 7); and French astronaut J.L. Chretien. The participants agreed to set up an organization of those who had traveled in space, with the aim of studying the potential and promoting the constructive use of space to improve living conditions on Earth, formulating positive prospects for future generations, and promoting the establishment of broad contacts among people who had been in space to identify opportunities for cooperation and issues of common concern. (FBIS, Moscow TRUD in Russian, Sept 12/84; FBIS Moscow Tass in English, Sept 11/84)
The Far Eastern Economic Review was quoted as saying that the People’s Republic of China had asked the United States to allow a Chinese astronaut to be included in the Space Shuttle program. The Hong Kong-based weekly magazine also said that Beijing had asked the United States to consider providing a launcher for a Chinese manned space vehicle. It was reported that the Reagan administration was giving both requests “sympathetic” consideration (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Aug 23/84)
The Washington Post reported the death of April 4 of Oleg Antonov, 78, one of the Soviet Union’s leading aircraft designers. Antonov, whose obituary was signed by Communist Party leader Konstantin Chernenko and other dignitaries, became the head of that country’s aircraft design office in 1946. One of his first creations was the AN-2 transport and agricultural biplane, which soon became the national airline’s (Aeroflot) workhorse and still was in use. Under his leadership, the office also designed a range of Antonov aircraft, including passenger planes and the long-range AN-22 heavy-transport aircraft. (W Post, Apr 6/84, B-6) At 12:20 p.m. EST on April 7 the astronauts deployed the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), a 30-foot-long cylinder carrying 57 varieties of space-age materials. Following retrieval by other astronauts next February, scientists would examine the cargo to determine how it stoop up to the heat, cold, and cosmic rays of space. The Space Shuttle’s 50-foot-long robot arm pushed the cylinder out of Challenger’s cargo bay. The initial attempt on April 8 to retrieve the orbiting Solar Max satellite failed when astronaut George (Pinky) Nelson, propelled by a jet-powered backpack, tried unsuccessfully to attach himself to the crippled, slowly spinning observatory. He bounced away from the satellite each time, causing it to spin faster with each bounce. After running low on fuel, Nelson returned to Challenger. However, on April 9 radio commands from ground controllers at GFSC stabilized the satellite just before its batteries went dead. On April 10 Crippen inched Challenger’s robot arm up to one end of the 21-foot-tall Solar Max, and then Hart caught the slow-spinning satellite on the first try. They then moved it into flight support system, a berthing area in the back of the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay. The following day, Nelson and Van Hoften, wearing space suits, stepped out into the cargo bay and replaced a 500-pound fuse box and fixed a smaller electronics box supplying power to one of seven instruments. The work was completed in slightly less than the alloted six hours. The astronauts redeployed the observatory on April 12. The Washington Post reported that, because the repair job was done so well, the observatory would do better in its restored state than in the 10 months it had worked before breaking down almost four years previously. Challenger landed at 5:38 a.m. local time April 13 at California’s Edwards Air Force Base instead of the preferred site at KSC, due to poor weather in Florida. NASA officials pronounced the Space Shuttle to be in excellent condition. “Compared to 10 previous recoveries, the condition of the ship is much better,” Fritz Widick, operations manager for the recovery, commented at a news conference. “During the flight there were only something like 12 problems recorded in the ship, which is remarkable.” (NASA MOR M-989-41-C, Mar 19/84; WPost, Apr 8/84, A-3, Apr 6/84, A-2, Apr 9/84, A-l, Apr 10/84, A-l, Apr 11/84, A-l Apr 12/84, A-l, Apr 13/84, A-2; NY Times, Apr 15/84, 23)
The Washington Post reported that Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator, said that coded software instruction cards on both computers on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s last voyage (STS-9) were contaminated, delaying Columbia’s landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California by eight hours. The instruction cards were shaken from their printed circuits when the Shuttle pitched up and down just before reentry; however the up-and-down maneuvers would not ordinarily loosen the software cards unless there was something wrong with them. Abrahamson said that postflight analysis of the cards at IBM’s Owego, N.Y., plant, where the computers were built, showed that one card was contaminated with solder and the other had a carbon chip coated with gold that should not have been there. Abrahamson pointed out that “the most disturbing thing.. .is that both computers were contaminated. I do not like the idea that we flew 10 days in space with contaminated computer parts.” The six-man crew, commanded by astronaut John W. Young, was able to land the Shuttle and its $1 billion European Spacelab safely by relying for navigation on three standby computers. (W Post, Jan 6/84, A-8)
The NASA Army Rotor Systems Research Aircraft (RSRA), a helicopter/airplane testbed in a fixed-wing mode, returned to Ames-Moffett Flight Research Facility following the flight testing of a new helicopter rotor system in a flight environment. The purpose of the flight tests was to demonstrate the fixed-wing capability of the research helicopter/airplane hybrid and to expand its flight envelope in that configuration. The evaluation included taxi tests, acoustic tests, control power/stability tests, and rotor hub drag investigation as well as takeoff and landing technique investigation and envelope development. A total of 13 flights expanded the RSRAs fixed-wing envelope capability to 262 knots (about 300 miles per hour) and its altitude to 10,000 feet. (ARC Release 84-23) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED itN'TNTKIMAUg BLUB 509 C. Leestma; payload specialists Marc Garneau, a Canadian; and oceanographer Paul D. Scully-Power. It was the most crew members to fly on a Space Shuttle mission. During the first day of flight, crew members deployed NASA’s Earth Radiation Budget Satellite (ERBS); however, the two solar panels that supplied electricity to the 5,000-pound satellite refused to unfold. Ride corrected the ERBS problem by using the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to place the satellite’s solar panels in the sunlight to thaw the hinges. It took almost three hours to get the panels warm enough to respond to commands to unlock. The satellite was placed in orbit off the west coast of Mexico, instead of south of Bermuda. While trying to determine the source of the ERBS problem, Kathryn Sullivan deployed the Shuttle Imaging Radar-B (SIR-B), a 35-by-7-foot radar camera, which had difficulty stabilizing when only one of it two “leaves” was erected. The radar antenna would send out thousands of pulses every second, and the large number of echoes the radar antenna received allowed it to draw a photograph-like image of the part of Earth that its beams struck. During the flight, a storm of cosmic rays apparently caused by sunspots knocked out for about 13 hours NASA’s TDRS, which affected the imaging radar system. Among the parts of the world that the radar had planned to map but would probably lose were the entire Amazon River basin, the islands that made up Indonesia, and the seas off the Cape of Good Hope. The radar was also to track the progress of tropical storm Josephine, southeast of Florida in the Atlantic Ocean, which would force Challenger’s landing from Cape Canaveral to Edwards Air Force Base. An ice buildup on the exterior of the Space Shuttle’s water vents forced the crew to alter slightly the use of the ship’s water facilities. The buildup, caused by a slight malfunction of the backup cooling systems, posed only an inconvenience as the astronauts had to heat up the water vents to melt away the small accumulations of ice, raising the temperature inside the cabin to as high as 90°. Crippen corrected the craft’s air-conditioning system, and the temperature inside Challenger neared its norm of about 75 ° On October 11, Sullivan became the first American woman to walk in space when for 3 1/2 hours she performed tasks requiring a kind of patience, dexterity, stamina, and strength originally believed in the space program to be unique to men. She stepped into space at 11:44 a.m. EDT along with Leestma. With each held by a single tether, they worked in daylight and darkness to rehearse a critical fuel transfer, stow a troublesome antenna, and photograph their efforts for ground engineers. Challenger landed at 12:27 p.m. EDT at KSC in the second of four attempts to land there instead of at California’s Edwards Air Base and the first in three missions that Crippen was not waved off a Florida landing by bad weather. Dr. Shelby Tilford, NASA director of space science, said that the mission was successful despite disappointments with the imaging radar. Tilford said that all other Challenger experiments worked perfectly. The space-borne mapping camera, carried on a Space Shuttle flight for the first time, took 2,300 frames of film in mapping parts of every continent. Challenger apparently returned to Earth in good condition, except for minor damage to the two rear engine parts suffered during ascent. (NASA MOR E-420-41-G-09 [prelaunch], Sept 28/84, [postlaunch], Oct 5/84; NASA Release 84-132; NASA Fact Sheet, Sept 84; NASA Press Kit, Oct 84; W Times, Oct 9/84, 2A, Oct 10/84, 5A, Oct 12/84, 3A; WPost, Oct 5/84, A-2, Oct 9/84, A-4, Oct 11/84, A-17, Oct 12/84, A-6, Oct 13/84, A-3, Oct 14/84, A-5; NY Times, Oct 11/84, A-18)
NASA announced the crew assignments for Space Shuttle flights 51-D, scheduled for launch in February 1985, and 61-D, set for January 1986. Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., would command 51-D. Shaw was pilot of the orbiter Columbia on STS-9, the first Spacelab mission flown in November and December 1983. His crew would consist of Bryan D. O’Connor as pilot and mission specialists Mary Cleave, Sherwood C. Spring, and Jerry L. Ross. Mission 51-D would be the 21st Space Shuttle flight and the 9th for the orbiter Challenger. The principal objectives of the six-day flight would be deployment of a SYNCOM communications satellite and retrieval of the free-flying Long Duration Exposure Facility. John M. Fabian, an Air Force pilot with more than 3,500 hours of flying time, would fly as one of the pilots on 61-D. He flew as mission specialist on STS-7 in July 1983 and was scheduled for 51-A in October as a mission specialist. Flight 61-D mission specialists would be James R Bagian, M.D., and Rhea Seddon, M.D., who is also scheduled to fly on mission 41-F in August. Mission 61-D would be the fourth Spacelab flight, focusing on experiments in life sciences during its seven days in space. It would be the ninth flight of the orbiter Columbia. A commander and another pilot for 61-D would be named at a later date. (NASA Release 84-11) —Donald J. Johnston, Canadian Minister of State for Science and Technology, announced that a Canadian would fly as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, set for launch in October, in addition to two earlier Canadians already scheduled for Shuttle flights. NASA offered Canada the opportunity to fly a payload specialist in keeping with President Reagan’s initiative to increase international cooperation. Shuttle flight 51-A would be a six-day flight, carrying Telesat Canada’s ANIK C-l satellite and a Getaway Special experiment designed by two Canadian high school students. The Canadian crew member and backup for the October flight would be announced in March. (NASA Release 84-12) Seven hours after launch, the astronauts pushed Westar VI, Western Union’s $30 million satellite, out of the cargo bay to join two identical satellites already serving North America. However, NASA officials said that the satellite could not be contacted by radio and was considered lost in space. Officials said that the satellite’s on-board rocket engine, which was to propel it into higher orbit, either misfired or never fired. Radars operated by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NAADC) later found the satellite in an erratic orbit above and behind Challenger. The radars found two large pieces in an orbit more than 800 miles high at its peak and just over 200 miles high at its lowest point above Earth. On February 5, a large balloon that the astronauts were to chase through space exploded just after it had begun to inflate. Plans called for the astronauts to back up to 120 miles away from the balloon, then move in over the next eight hours to contact it. Instead, the crew spent 90 minutes tracking pieces of the balloon and never got farther than 20 or 30 miles from the debris. The astronauts tracked the balloon’s largest piece with radar for almost 20 miles and used special binoculars and an optical sextant to follow the same piece more than 20 miles by watching sunlight reflected off the balloon’s aluminum surface. The Indonesian satellite Palapa-B2, launched February 6, went into a useless orbit, believed to be caused by the same technical problem that Westar VI suffered. The NAADC located Palapa-B2 about seven hours after its ejection from the Challenger’s cargo bay, but it was in an orbit so low that it “cannot perform its mission,” said Richard Brandes of Hughes Aircraft Company, builder of the satellite. He added that both satellites’ rocket motors apparently shut down 15 seconds early; they were intended to burn for 80 seconds. On February 7, astronauts Bruce McCandless and Robert Stewart left Challenger and flew unrestrained for the first time, adding another milepost to man’s conquest of space. They unhooked their lifelines and rose up more than 100 yards away from the Space Shuttle. Propelled by $10 million jet-powered backpacks, they traveled at 4.8 miles a second, although they had no sensation of speed. The two reentered Challenger after 5 hours and 55 minutes. The exercise was a rehearsal for the next Shuttle flight, when other astronauts would try to retrieve an ailing satellite, bring it into the cargo bay for repair, and release it to orbit again. On February 9 the two took a second walk in space, which lasted 6 hours and 17 minutes. The Space Shuttle made its first landing at KSC on February 11, when it touched down at 7:16 a.m. EST. The Florida landing had been a Shuttle program goal because it would save money and time by eliminating sending maintenance crews to California to prepare the vehicle for a return flight to Florida on the back of a Boeing 747. It was the first Florida landing in two attempts and the first of six planned for the year. Challenger was in relatively good shape following the landing, although its windshield, fuselage, and landing gear were damaged. The windows were hazed and pitted; and 31 of its 33,000	protective tiles, two brake assemblies, and all four tires on the main landing wheels would have to replaced. Repairs should not slow the preparation of Challenger for its next flight in April. (NASA MOR M-989-41-B [prelaunch] Jan 30/84; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 6/84; WPost, Feb 2/84, A-2, Feb 4/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 8/84, A-l, Feb 9/84, A-12, Feb 11/84, A-2, Feb 12/84, A-l, Feb 13/84, A-3; W Times, Feb 6/84, 2A, Feb 7/84, 1A, Feb 8/84, 1A; USA Today, Feb 6/84, A-l)
The Washington Post reported that a secret military payload set for launch July 14 on the Space Shuttle had been canceled and that the mission would be scrubbed without it, according to Air Force and NASA officials. A Pentagon spokesman declined to identify the payload or say when it would be flown. Glynn Lunney, Shuttle program manager, said “if they remove the payload, we won’t fly.” The canceled mission left astronauts Thomas Mattingly, Loren Shriver, Ellison Onizuka, and James Buchli without a flight for the second time; they were to have flown the Shuttle in the fall of 1983 on a military mission canceled because of rocket problems. (W Post, Feb 14/84, A-l)
NASA announced the start of the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE), a new astronomy satellite project that would be launched into Earth orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1988. The purpose of the explorer was to make the first all-sky map in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) band of the electromagnetic spectrum, a band between ultraviolet and X-ray light. The EUVE, managed by JPL, with scientific instruments supplied by the University of California, Berkeley, was a true explorer in that it would conduct the first in-depth investigation of that critical band and was expected to discover stars and other celestial objects with unexpected characteristics. The EUVE would orbit Earth at an attitude of 340 statute miles and from that point above the atmosphere would be able to scan the sky for emissions of extreme ultraviolet radiation. EUVE would use four 40-centimeter (15.7-inc.h) ultraviolet telescopes to conduct the all-sky survey and a spectrometer to carry out detailed observations of the new sources and stars expected to be discovered. JPL was responsible for overall EUVE project responsibility. The UCB would supply the 1,100-pound science payload, consisting of the extreme ultraviolet telescopes and the spectrometer; and the university’s Space Sciences Laboratory would design and fabricate the payload. JPL would control flight operations, and the science operations center would be at the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley. (NASA Release 84-125) Discovery was oriented with the port side in direct sunlight, so when the crew awoke the next morning they found about half of the large ice block had melted. Then, astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr., switched on heaters in the pipes leading to the nozzle and fired the orbiter’s thrusters to see if the vibrations would shake the ice free. Next, Hartsfield, assisted by Judith Resnik, took the controls of the mechanical arm and following procedures outlined by Sally K. Ride on the ground knocked off with little difficulty all but about 5 inches of the ice chunk. The remaining ice apparently then melted in the warmth of the sunlight. Discovery landed September 5 at Edwards Air Force Base, completing its six-day maiden flight. During the flight, crew deployed three communications satellites, LEASAT-1 (SYNCOM-1), Telestar-3, and SBS-D in the first three days of the flight; extended an experimental solar-powered array in a test for future Space Station construction; and processed a sample of a hormone that could lead to a commercial pharamaceutical product. Lt. Col. Richard M. Mullane, one of the astronauts on board, said that Discovery “performed superbly,” while NASA officials pointed out that all the mission’s objectives were accomplished. (W Post, Sept 4/84, A-6; NY Times, Sept 3/84, A-l, Sept 4/84, A-l, Sept 5/84, A-l; W Times, Sept 5/84, 4A)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
MSFC announced that Morton Thiokol’s Wasatch Division near Brigham City, Utah; had successfully static-fired a new, lightweight version of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster at its northern Utah facility. Preliminary results from the two-minute firing indicated that all objectives were met and that the system operated as expected. The case of the new motor was made from a composite material of plastic reinforced with graphite fibers wound into a cylinder. Each of these filament-wound cases weighed about 30,000	pounds less than the current steel case that made up most of the length of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel focket booster. Use of the lighter cases could increase the Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity about 4,600 pounds. Two more of the filament-wound booster motors would be test fired by Motron Thiokol in the spring and summer of 1985. Also in the spring of 1985, flight motor segments containing filament-wound cylinders would be shipped to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for use by NASA and the U.S. Air Force in the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg planned for October The test was conducted under the direction of MSFC, Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 84-86; Marshall Star, Oct 31/84, 1) During October: The astronauts of western Europe formed an Association of European Astronauts (AEA), to which all European astronauts who had flown or been selected to train for a specific mission were eligible to join. The group would hold its first meeting on October 5 and 6. The purpose of the association was to encourage get-togethers for the exchange of views on training experiences and the projects concerned. The AEA had seven members: three ESA astronauts, Claude Nicollier, Ulf Merbold, and Wiibbo Ockels; two French astronauts, Patrick Baudry and Jean-Loup Chretien; and two German astronauts, Reinhard Furrer and Ernst Messerschmid. During meetings they planned to exchange experiences, compare USSR, U.S., and European approaches, and discuss future plans for Europe in manned spaceflight. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84) —Dan Germany, crew systems manager at JSC, observed that, after five years and $12 million, the Space Shuttle toilet still did not work, with failures on 10 out of 11 missions. “It’s very disappointing,” he said. On one mission, Robert Gibson had to use a crowbar to free the toilet mechanism; Sally Ride and Fred Hauck employed a camera bracket. NASA would test a new solution in August 1985 in which a bag would fit inside the commode and be removed after every flight. This reminded observers that NASA once spent $1 million to develop a pen to use in weightlessness. An engineer asked later, “Why didn’t you use a lead pencil?” (SF, Sept/Oct 84) —A commemorative envelope sold in the gift shop at JSC gave details and drawings of a U.S. Navy space program so secret that its name could not be used on the telephone, the Washington Post reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine as saying. The publication said that the envelopes, called postal cover, carried the words “Project Whitecloud,” accurate drawings of a mother satellite, and drawings of three smaller spacecraft. The envelopes said that the satellite disperses the smaller craft to cover more ocean surface and that it used radar-frequency antennae to detect shipboard radar and communications signals. The Navy had no immediate comment. (W Post, Oct 23/84, A-15) It was later revealed that the information had been taken from the May 1976 issue of Aviation Week & Space Technology.
President Reagan, in his State of the Union address, endorsed the development of the U.S.’s first permanently manned space station. “Wc can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic and scientific gain. Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade,” he said. “A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science, communications and in metals and life-saving medicines which can be manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these challenges and share in their benefits. .. .Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today,” he said. NASA presented the agency’s plans to the presidenl on the day that he spoke to astronauts in the Spacelab orbiting in the Space Shuttle in December 1983. NASA Administrator James N. Beggs had sought the space station as a science laboratory, astronomical observatory, space manufacturing center, servicing facility for spacecraft, and an assembly site for larger orbiting structures. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director William J. Casey had opposed any major commitment to space station funding because they feared it could draw money from their own space programs, government officials said. The officials added that military and intelligence agencies were concerned that they would have to share the space station with civilian agencies such as NASA and sometimes with astronauts of other countries. NASA also had found little enthusiasm when it turned for support from other agencies. When the National Academy of Sciences space science board was asked whether basic research in science would “require or be enhanced by the space station,” Thomas M. Donahue, chairman of the space board, said the answer was no. “I don’t think you could ever really justify $20 billion for a space station,” he said. At this early stage, there was no design for the space station, but officials of NASA had previously sketched the broad outlines of the most likely initial design. {Weekly Compilation of the Papers of Ronald Reagan, Jan 25/84, 87ff; NY Times, Jan 26/84, A-l; W Post, Jan 18/84, A-l, Jan 29/84, A-4)
NASA announced the delay of the 51-C Space Shuttle mission originally scheduled for launch from KSC on December 8, 1984. The agency had decided to replace up 2,800 thermal protection tiles on the underside of the orbiter Challenger due to the degradation of the bonding material. When Challenger returned from space on its last mission, a black tile from the left wing chine area just behind and below the crew door area was missing. About 100 tiles were removed from Challenger, and it was found that the adhesive substance known as “screed,” used to smooth irregularities in the surface of the orbiter, had softened. Screed was applied directly over the aluminum skin of the orbiter. All other areas were covered with a primer called red RTV-560 (room temperature vulcanizing), which was used as an adhesive for bonding the strain isolation pads (SIP) to the body and the tile to the SIP. The 51-C mission was the first completely dedicated DOD mission. The 51-A mission continued on schedule for launch November 7. (MSFC Release 84-91) During the flight, the crew recovered the satellites Palapa B2 and Westar VI, which had not operated properly following their earlier deployment from the Space Shuttle. The Palapa B2 recovery was the first retrieval ever of a satellite from space, although astronauts previously had caught and repaired the Solar Maximum satellite. Astronauts Allen and Gardner had to move Palapa B2 into the Discovery’s cargo bay themselves when an unforeseen obstacle prevented use of the spacecraft’s mechanical arm. This resulted in some damage to the power-generating solar cells surrounding the seven-footwide satellite, but the damage was not expected to interfere with a successful relaunching of the satellite. Later in the flight the same two astronauts took 5 hours and 42 minutes to retrieve Westar VI, a 2,300-pound communications satellite, and bolt it down next to Palapa B2—possibly the shortest $35 million salvage operation ever undertaken, the Washington Post reported. Insurance companies had to pay the owners of the two satellites, the government of Indonesia (Palapa B2), and Western Union Telegraph Company (Westar VI) $180 million. The insurance brokers paid NASA $5.5 million for the satellites’ retrieval and Hughes Aircraft Company $5 million for technical help in the retrieval operation. Stephen Merrett, chairman of Merrett Syndicates, an affiliate of Lloyds of London, that helped underwrite the insurance on the satellites, said “I’m proud to be a part of the crowd that put this mission together in just six months.” He added, “We expect Palapa to be resold for between $30 and $40 million and Westar for $30 million, and we expect those sales to be concluded very soon.” Merrett declined to identify potential buyers of the two satellites. In interviews later, Allen and Gardner noted that the task of retrieving the satellites was easier than dealing with small items such as tools and the tether wires that tied them to the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay. “As objects get smaller in space, they become more difficult to handle. It’s really extraordinary how much easier it is to move massive objects like satellites.” Allen pointed out that the only trouble they had in retrieving the satellites resulted from their tendency to grip the satellites too hard and move them too quickly in an effort to get them back and secured in the cargo bay in a limited amount of time. “Once you get over that difficult spot where you think you have to have the satellite in a death grip, things are a lot easier,” he said. In addition to the salvage missions, the crew during the flight deployed the Canadian Telesat-H and Hughes Syncom-IV-1 communications satellites. The Radiation Monitor Experiment and the Aggregation of Red Blood Cells experiments were carried out in the orbiter’s middeck. Discovery landed November 16 at 7 a.m. local time at KSC. “Two landings in a row at Kennedy, and this time with a cargo bay as full as it was when it took off,” said Jesse W. Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “It’s hard to believe those two satellites are sitting out there on the runway after being in space for more than eight months.” (NASA MOR EA20-51-A-11 [prelaunch] Nov 8/84; NASA Release 84-144; MSFC Release 84-90; JSC Release 84-051; W Post, Nov 13/84, A—11 and D-1, Nov 14/84, A-l, Nov 17/84, A-10, Nov 18/84, A-19, Nov 28/84, A-18; NY Times, Nov 18/84, 3A; H Chron, Nov 11/84, 24)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) spokesman Dave Alter said today that NASA had imposed a $131,250 penalty on contractor Hamilton Standard, Windsor Locks, Conn., for failure of two space suits that it had built for use on the fifth Space Shuttle mission in November 1982. Hamilton Standard was to be paid a $175,000 fee over costs for service from October 1982 through March 1983. However, the failures had prevented space walks by astronauts Joe Allen and Bill Lenoir on November 11-12, 1982. After a lengthy investigation, NASA blamed the contractor for the failure of a fan in Allen’s life support backpack and an oxygen pressure regulator on Lenoir’s suit. {WPost, Jan 28/84, A-7)
Speaking to 262 winners of the Secondary School Recognition Program and their teachers, President Reagan said that he had directed NASA to carry an elementary- or secondary-school teacher in orbit aboard the Space Shuttle as the nation’s first space passenger. “When the shuttle lifts off, all of America will be reminded of the crucial role teachers and education play in the life of our nation,” Reagan said in the announcement. This would be the first spaceflight of an American who was neither a scientist nor a trained astronaut. The only physical limitations were that the candidate be free of debilitating disease, have good eyesight, and not have hearing loss or high blood pressure. No age limit was specified. NASA had thought about the possibility of flying private citizens aboard the Space Shuttle more than a decade ago. The idea was a natural outgrowth of its legislative mandate that called for “the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning NASA’s activities and the results thereof. ...” NASA officials told reporters that they would begin a search for the most qualified teacher candidate and described a program in which each of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and Guam would submit the names of two teachers. A peer-review panel would help pare the applicants to 10, to 5, and finally to a prime and backup candidate. “When we decide on our final two candidates, we will give them eight weeks of preflight training at Houston’s Johnson Space Center right along with the astronaut crew they fly with,” said NASA Administrator James M. Beggs. “When the candidate’s flight is over, we will insist that he or she give a year of their time to NASA, visiting schools, talking to workshops, lecturing, and appearing on television and radio,” he said. Beggs said that it was impossible to predict how many civilians would be able to fly on Space Shuttle, noting that it depended on how many Space Shuttle flights NASA could schedule. (NASA Release 84-122; NASA anno Aug 27/84; W Post, Aug 28/84, A-l)
An Arianespace Ariane I rocket lifted off at 9:33 a.m. EDT to orbit a U.S. communications satellite 22,300 miles above the equator in the world’s first strictly commercial space venture. Virginia-based GTE Spacenet Corporation built the satellite, which was intended to relay thousands of simultaneous television, telephone, and data transmission channels to U.S. domestic subscribers over the next 10 years. The corporation would launch other satellites later in the year and early in 1985. ESA had contracts for 28 launches worth more than $800 million, plus options for another 19. More than 40% of the orders came from outside Europe. (W Post, May 22/84, A-24) During May: NASA and Deere & Company, Moline, 111., signed a memorandum of understanding to cooperate on the design of metallurgical tests to be conducted aboard a future Space Shuttle flight. In 1981, Deere became the first private company to sign a Technical Exchange Agreement with NASA that permitted the company to perform cast iron solidification experiments on board conventional suborbital NASA aircraft, which simulated microgravity for 30 to 60 seconds. Deere was already working on the design of additional metallurgical tests, where engineers used data from the low-gravity tests conducted earlier. Based on this work, Deere and NASA engineers concluded that further experimentation would be productive. The Space Shuttle tests would permit experiments in space for longer periods, which could yield new information to aid in the search for stronger irons. These tests could also provide new data about the process for forming iron molecules, leading to improved foundry efficiencies. (NASA Release 84-56) —NASA announced that astronaut Terry Hart, who had operated the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to retrieve the Solar Maximum Satellite during the April 6-13, 1984, Space Shuttle flight, would leave NASA effective June 15 to work in an engineering management position for the newly formed Military and Government Systems Division of Bell Laboratories in Whippany, N.J. The division would produce large digital communications networks for government applications. Hart was also a member of the astronaut support crews for Shuttle missions 1, 2, 3, and 7, serving as capsule communicators in mission control for those flights. (NASA Release 84-59) —Officials at the U.S. Department of State blocked an offer by the Soviet Union to use its rockets to launch Western satellites, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The Soviets had offered to “sell” their rockets to INMARSAT, the International Maritime Satellite Organization based in London, for launching a new generation of satellites in the 1980s. INMARSAT was running a network of communications satellites that routed telephone calls and data among some 2,300 ships and their shore bases. However, it had not decided on the companies that would supply the new satellites, which could number up to nine and cost up to $500 million. Under the Soviet Union plan, satellites would have to travel to the Soviet rocket site prior to launch into space, and the satellites would undoubtedly contain a large proportion of U.S. parts. Such a transfer would be prohibited under the technology control regulations that sought to stop the channeling to unfriendly countries of hardware that could be used in weaponry. The State Department said that “under no circumstances” would it permit the transfer to the Soviet Union of American-made satellite components. Only two organizations had submitted tenders to INMARSAT to build the satellites: a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Corporation and British Aerospace and a consortium of Marconi of the United Kingdom, Aerospatiale of France, and Ford Aerospace of the United States. The Soviet Union had said that it would make available its Proton rockets for a fee of about $23 million a launch. That was roughly half the comparable charge for a satellite launch by either the Space Shuttle or the Ariane rocket sold by Arianespace, a semipublic company dominated by French interests. U.S. officials feared shipment to the Soviet Union’s main launch site at Baykonur in Central Asia of hardware containing electronic components that could be useful to the Soviet’s military buildup. (CSM, May 3/84, 1) —NASA announced that Dr. Hans M. Mark, deputy administrator of NASA since July 1981, would become chancellor of the University of Texas System, effective September 1, 1984. In announcing the appointment, Texas Board Chairman Jon Newton said of Mark: “With his Air Force and NASA background, he has demonstrated the management ability to administer effectively a complex organizational enterprise such as the U.T. System, which involves 119,000 students, 50,000 faculty and staff, and an operational budget for FY84-85 of $1.8 billion.” Mark was born in Mannheim, Germany, and in February 1969, after receiving his doctorate in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1954, became director of NASA’s ARC. He had also served as a consultant to government, industry, and business, including the Institute for Defense Analyses and the President’s Advisory Group on Science and Technology. (NASA Release 84-65) —Martin A. Knutson was named director of Flight Operations and Ames Dryden Site manager for ARC. In this position, Knutson would be responsible for the operation of more than 40 highly specialized research and support aircraft at ARC and its Ames Dryden Flight Research Center. He also would be responsible for site management of the Mojave Desert facility that conducted NASA’s high-speed flight research and served as one of the prime landing sites for Space Shuttle missions. Knutson joined NASA in 1971 as the ARC’s manager of the Airborne Instrumentation Research Project. He was instrumental in creating the project and in acquiring its U-2 aircraft and was a pilot with over 6,000 hours of flight time. (ARC Release 84-11)
NASA announced that the fifth group of applicants to be interviewed for possible selection as Space Shuttle astronaut candidates, including 15 mission specialists and 7 pilot applicants, reported to JSC today for a week of interviews and medical evaluations. A total of 4,934 men and women had applied for the approximately 12 positions open. The selected candidates would begin in July 1984 a year of training and evaluation at JSC and be selected as astronauts after satisfactory completion of the evaluation period. The selected candidates were: David T. Allen, Ph.D., employed by University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA); Maj. Larry D. Autry, U.S. Air Force; Lt. Commander Dennis N. Bostich, U.S. Navy; Capt. Joseph A. Car-retto, U.S. Air Force; Lt. Commander Keith E. Crawford, U.S. Navy; William M. Decampli, M.D., Ph.D., employed by Stanford Medical Center, Stanford, Calif., Jan D. Dozier, employed at MSFC; Lt. Col. William A. Flanagan, U.S. Air Force; Wendy S. Hale, Ph.D., stationed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.; Rosario M. Izquierdo, employed by National Security Agency (NSA); Lt. Fred D. Knox, Jr., U.S. Navy; G. David Low, employed by JPL; Lt. Commander Michael J. McCulley, U.S. Navy; Kenneth J. Myers, M.D., employed by the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.; William S. O’Keefe, employed by Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Mich.; Donald R. Pettit, Ph.D., employed by Los Alamos National Laboratory; Lt. Commander William F. Readdy, U.S. Navy; Lt. Commander Gregory J. Rose, U.S. Navy; Lonnie Sharpe, Jr., Ph.D., employed by North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro, N.C.; Kathryn C. Thornton, Ph.D., employed by the U.S. Army Foreign Science and Technology Center, Charlottesville, Va.; C. Lacy Veach, employed by JSC; and Lt. Commander James B. Waddell, U.S. Navy. (NASA Release 84-018)
The Soyuz T-14 spacecraft carrying three Soviet cosmonauts made an unscheduled return to earth today because its commander, Vladimir Vasyutin, was ill and needed hospital treatment, the Washington Post quoted the official news agency Tass as saying. The illness forced the crew to leave the Salyut 7 orbiting laboratory, the first time in either the Soviet or U.S. programs that a spaceflight was curtailed because a crew member became sick in orbit, the Washington Times said. Vasyutin, who was making his first flight, landed after spending 65 days in space. He, Viktor Savinykh, and Alexander Volkov, who were both reported feeling well, had been conducting scientific experiments aboard Salyut 7. Tass gave no details of Vasyutin's illness, but western space experts said it was unlikely he was suffering from a simple case of space sickness—the inability to acclimatize properly to conditions in space. The Tass report quoted doctors who performed a preliminary examination on Vasyutin as saying his condition was satisfactory. The unscheduled return of the cosmonauts left the Salyut 7, which had been in orbit since April 1982, unmanned for the first time since June. Almost a week later, the Post reported that officials at Johnson Space Center said that cosmonauts who stayed in touch with U.S. astronauts had said Vasyutin caught a cold that grew worse and spread to his sinus cavity and lungs. The sources said Vasyutin had a fever that refused to break and may have come down with viral pneumonia, which was untreatable with the antibiotics the cosmonauts carried. (IV Post, Nov 22/85, A26, 27/85, A3; W Times, Nov 22/85, 2A)
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
"Let's face it, these brakes are right at the edge in a vehicle that lands as heavy and as fast as the shuttle does," said astronaut Daniel Brandenstein, commander of the next Space Shuttle mission. "My guess is we'll be landing for awhile out in the Mojave, where there's no end to the runways and there's almost nothing on either side of the runways to worry about either." Also, studies suggested that the Space Shuttle nose gear might require rebuilding to provide better steering during landing in a crosswind, a situation more likely to occur at KSC than at Edwards. Cost of such rebuilding could run as high as $3 million for each orbiter. (W Post, May 30/85, A19)
NASA launched at 11:15 a.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis, the maiden voyage of the orbiter and the 21st mission in the Space Shuttle program, on mission 51 -J, a secret flight for the Department of Defense (DOD), the NY Times reported. The secrecy was part of DOD's efforts to make it difficult for the Soviet military to monitor the Space Shuttle takeoff and find out the identity and mission of the payload. Despite these precautions, it was widely reported that a primary goal of the flight was to launch a pair of $100-million military communication satellites. DOD apparently planned to station the satellites, designated DSCS III for Defense Satellite Communications System, 22,300 miles above earth, where they would relay messages to U.S. military forces around the world. The commander of Atlantis was Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, flying his third Space Shuttle mission; the pilot was Air Force Lt. Col. Ronald Grabe. Other crew members were Maj. David Hilmers of the Marine Corps, Army Lt. Col. Robert Stewart, and Air Force Maj. William Pailes. The first four were members of NASA's astronaut corps; Pailes was an Air Force pilot assigned to the mission to assist in deploying its secret payload. In accordance with security rules, NASA gave out little information about the flight. There were no space-to-ground communications released to the public and no postlaunch news conference. Nearly five hours after the launch, mission control in Houston said, "On the maiden voyage of Atlantis, the crew is doing well and all systems on board the orbiter are performing satisfactorily." NASA officials said it would issue no other status reports during the mission, which might last a week or more. Atlantis was the lightest and most advanced of the four orbiters. In its planning and construction, engineers removed minor design flaws found in earlier versions and incorporated the latest in electronic technology and light-weight, high-strength structural materials. NASA strengthened Atlantis mainly so it could withstand more vigorous launchings from the Air Force's facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base. These launches, which would take the Space Shuttle into orbits around the earth's poles, required greater thrust from the Space Shuttle's engines. Although the mission was devoted to the military, NASA officials said there was a civilian experiment on board to study exposure of the orbiter and its crew to cosmic rays, which were extremely high-energy particles from space that bombarded the earth and the orbiting Space Shuttles. (NY Times, Oct 3/ 85, A18, Oct 4/85, B5)
During a news conference today at Johnson Space Center, Space Shuttle mission 51—F commander Gordon Fullerton said the Challenger's crew members could not endorse either the Coca-Cola or Fepsi-Cola they carried into space for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Both drinks were warm, fizzy, and full of froth whenever the crew tried to drink them. "They both failed miserably, mainly because we had no refrigerator. Warm cola is not on anybody's favorite list of things . . . They just weren't at the right temperature and we had no desire to drain the cans the two drinks came in," Fullerton said. He added that, although the crew suffered no gastric distress from drinking the two colas, "I just can't extrapolate to any great desire to want them." When reporters asked the seven crew members if they would forsake the fruit juices they usually drank for the colas if the colas were refrigerated, they all shook their heads. "The drinks we have on board now are quite attractive," said astronaut Anthony England. (W Times, Aug 15/85, A8)
Wesley Hymer, a biochemist at Pennsylvania State University and one of 20 researchers who analyzed tissue samples from 24 rats flown aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in April, said today the rats suffered significant reductions in the release of growth hormones, the NY Times reported. The findings could signal a problem for astronauts, in that weightlessness could affect the ability of special cells in their pituitary glands to produce growth hormones that govern development and maintenance of muscle and bone tissue. Richard Grindeland, a researcher at NASA's Ames Reseach Center, reported the previous month that the same rats lost bone and muscle strength. Grindeland said that they "were limp, like dishrags," and that dissection revealed "very drastic changes" in bone and muscle strength. However, researchers would need more test results before they could link growth hormone reduction to muscle and bone atrophy, Hymer said. But he added, "I think there's probably a good chance that there is a relationship." After a battery of tests that included implanting normal rats with growth hormone cells from the space rats, Hymer noted a reduction of up to 50% in release of the hormone. "Something is radically changed in those pituitary glands as a result of the space flight," Hymer said. And he added, "I think the surprising thing was these changes occurred so quickly. They happened in seven days in flight." However, Hymer said researchers did not know if astronauts suffered the same kind of changes. "I can tell you that there are data that show that the blood levels of growth hormones in the astronauts from Skylab were reduced by a significant amount," Hymer said. Hymer planned to send growth hormone cells, some of which would contain inhibitory and stimulatory chemicals, on a Space Shuttle flight the following September. He said he also would like to see similar experiments on primates. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C8)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $139,000 follow-on contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study a system for reclaiming unused propellant from Space Shuttle external fuel tanks and transferring it to an orbiting space station, Aerospace Daily reported. Martin Marietta Corp's New Orleans, Louisiana, manufacturing facility would perform the work on the preliminary design study. The contract followed one let in February 1984 and valued at $250,000 to examine the basic "propellant scavenging" concept. The system under study would consist of two to four propellant collecting or scavenging tanks in an aft cargo carrier affixed to the rear of the Space Shuttle external tank. After Space Shuttle launch and cutoff of the main engines, residual liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen would drain from the external tank into the collection tanks aided by a thrust system designed for zero-gravity conditions. Once filled with fuel, the scavenging tank assembly would separate from the aft cargo carrier as a self-contained, remote-controlled vehicle with its own propulsion system. After the vehicle moved into position beside the space station, technicians aboard the station would send an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV) to bring it to the space station fuel depot for transfer of the reclaimed propellant to permanent tanks. When out of fuel, the scavenger vehicle would return to earth in the Space Shuttle cargo bay for reuse on later missions. The proposed system would be capable of reclaiming and transporting up to 25,000 lb. of propellant per mission, depending on the Space Shuttle payload. Unused fuel on Space Shuttle missions to date had ranged from 9,500	to 28,300 lb. of the total 1.6 million lb. of propellant carried by the external fuel tank on each flight. It was currently estimated that the space station would require some 250,000 lb. of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants each year. Martin Marietta said the proposed system would result in reduced costs for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the space station; the company estimated the system could provide propellants at an average cost of approximately $350 per lb. NASA had studied other methods of scavenging fuel from the Space Shuttle external tank but found them to have a higher cost per lb. or to provide fewer opportunities for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the station. (A/D, July 12/85, 61) During July. Yvonne Clearwater, in an article in Psychology Today, described the work of the Space Human Factors team, an interdisciplinary team of which she was a member, to determine what could make the proposed space station a congenial habitat for living and performing highly sophisticated work. The team—representing psychology, architecture, and engineering— was defining what "habitability" meant in space by looking at the critical relationships among environment, psychological well-being, and performance. Clearwater said the team would begin by developing architectural and interior-design guidelines based on behavioral research. NASA contractors and development engineers at Johnson Space Center would then use the guidelines in designing and building the space station. The team would then turn to examining social and psychological issues such as crew selection, training, and support; organization and management; and operations planning. Although recommendations would focus on the physical and social-psychological environments separately, the team had to consider all the factors together in the planning process, because they interacted in the real world, whether on earth or in space. In contrast to the Soviets, who placed a high priority on the mental wellbeing of their space crews, NASA originally had focused on technological engineering rather than behavioral science. In addition, the early astronauts had little interest in psychological support or intervention; reportedly the first seven U.S. astronauts announced they would not tolerate psychologists. Clearwater pointed out, however, that NASA had grown more sophisticated and more sensitive to the fact that body-mind-environment interactions affected the health and performance of people. The formation of the Space Human Factors Office at Ames Research Center reflected NASA's commitment to psychological as well as physical health of space workers. The challenge was to troubleshoot the proposed space station systems and settings while they were still being developed conceptually by, first, identifying the environmental conditions likely to be significant stressors; second, defining the kinds of psychological, emotional, and behavioral problems these could produce; and finally, showing how such problems might affect work performance. Clearwater concluded that by defining and meeting human needs in space environments, it might be possible to create more supportive places for living and working on earth. (Psychology Today, July 85, 34)
Ministers from Belgium, Denmark, France, W. Germany, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., Austria, Norway, and Canada would meet in Rome January 30 and 31 to consider proposed space projects and set the agenda for European Space Agency (ESA) through the remainder of the century, the JSC Roundup reported. Ministers would consider proposals ranging from development of a space station program, possibly in conjunction with the U.S., to eventual pursuit of manned spaceflight. ESA said it would propose a substantial increase in its activities, particularly scientific and technological programs; developments in earth observations, telecommunications, microgravity processing, and technology; and construction of a new version of Ariane 5. ESA's efforts with Spacelab and Ariane and in a wide range of other activities such as the Giotto probe to intercept Halley's Comet had required the new decisions. With Ariane 3 operational, ESA said it expected to introduce an upgraded version, Ariane 4, in March 1986, followed by the proposed Ariane 5, which would be capable of generating up to 220,000 lb. of thrust, that could be used to launch European astronauts into orbit. The ministers had to decide whether to authorize development of the large cryogenic engine to power the launcher. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 1; ESA release Jan 17/85)
Commander Robert Overmyer landed the Space Shuttle Challenger today on a lake-bed runway at Edwards Air Force Base, after it had caused two sonic booms that triggered burglar alarms and calls to police, the Washington Post reported. Of the 15 experiments flown on Spacelab 3, 12 apparently operated successfully and two at least partially so. Among the successful experiments was photography of the Northern and Southern lights, which sent streaks of brilliant flashes at the extreme latitudes near the north and south polar regions at that time of year. Challenger's crew photographed 18 auroras. Another successful device was a laser spectrometer that for the first time measured from orbit the ozone layer that protected the earth from the sun's ultraviolet light. Crew members were able to restore two experiments that had initially been inoperable. One was an experiment to study the dynamics of droplets of fluids in weightlessness, the other an instrument that counted and measured cosmic rays striking Challenger in orbit. They were unable to deploy the wide-field camera intended to study the ultraviolet light of hot stars. The afternoon of the landing NASA personnel removed the monkeys and rats in their cages for a flight to Kennedy Space Center, where researchers would kill and dissect the rats to examine their vital organs under a microscope for changes caused by weightlessness. Physician/astronaut William Thornton said they had brought back two monkeys that were even friendlier than they were before the flight—"Those primates are part of the crew right now," he commented. During the flight, one of the monkeys experienced motion sickness for several days, requiring Thornton to feed it by hand. On May 4 the Greensboro News & Record reported that Thornton said, "Our feeding crisis is over. I wouldn't have believed the effect of a caring human hand." However, on May 14 Overmyer told reporters at Johnson Space Center that, "NASA has a problem that NASA has to solve if we're going to fly those cages again," the W Post reported. "I never dreamed that all that stuff would come out of those cages and escape into our atmosphere" [see May 2], He added that the experience with the animals "never took away the luster" of spaceflight, a sentiment echoed by pilot Frederick Gregory, an Air Force colonel who became the first black astronaut to take the Space Shuttle's controls. (W Post, May 5/85, A4, May 6/85, A3, May 7/85, A1, May 14/85, A3; Greensboro News & Record, May 4/85, A4)
NASA launched at 7:29 p.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B to practice methods for building a space station and to launch three satellites, the Washington Post reported. People more than 400 miles away in South Carolina and Key West, Florida, saw the launch. There had been only two other previous U.S. night launches: in 1972 when the Apollo 17 crew left for the moon in the middle of the night and in 1983 when the Space Shuttle Challenger departed in early morning. Nine minutes after launch, mission control reported Atlantis was in a secure orbit about 200 miles high, and launch director Gene Thomas said the countdown was the smoothest yet in the Space Shuttle program. Crew onboard Atlantis were Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, commander; Lt. Col. Bryan O'Connor, pilot; mission specialists Dr. Mary Cleave, Maj. Jerry Ross, and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring; and payload specialists Rudolfo Neri Vela (Mexico's first astronaut) and McDonnell Douglas engineer Charles Walker. During the mission the crew would launch Mexico's Morelos B satellite, Australia's AUSSAT 2, and RCA's Satcom KU-2. Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring would also take two long spacewalks to assemble 93 aluminum struts into a 45-foot beam and six 12-foot beams into a 64-lb. inverted pyramid to test techniques that might be used to build the proposed permanently manned space station. Following each spacewalk, the mission specialists would disassemble and stow the beams. Cameras would record every move so that later a computer could reduce the photos to a motion study that engineers would use to determine how construction work could best be performed in the zero gravity of outer space. (NASA Release 85-153; W Post, Nov 27/85, A3)
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
NASA announced today the selection of Dr. Samuel Durrance, associate research scientist in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Johns Hopkins University, and Dr. Ronald Parise, manager of Advanced Astronomy Programs at Computer Sciences Corp., to serve as payload specialists on Space Shuttle mission 61—E, for an ultraviolet astronomy mission known as Astro-1 scheduled for launch March 6, 1986. Dr. Kenneth Nord-sieck, associate professor at Washburn Observatory, University of Wisconsin, would serve as the backup. The Astro-1 mission would study Halley's Comet and other celestial objects through three ultraviolet astronomical instruments. In addition, a special visible-light, wide-field camera was incorporated into the payload to augment the Halley's Comet studies. The payload specialists, all experienced astronomers, would make decisions during the mission to ensure the best possible scientific return. The payload specialists were each members of one of three science teams that developed the ultraviolet instruments. Durrance and Parise would operate the ultraviolet instruments; astronaut mission specialists would operate the instrument pointing system (IPS), developed by the European Space Agency (ESA) for precise aiming at celestial targets and first flown in early August 1985 on Spacelab 2, on which the three instruments were mounted. NASA scheduled the Astro-1 flight to coincide with the Halley encounter missions by ESA, the USSR, and Japan. Dr. Burton Edelson, NASA associate administrator for space science and applications, said, "The opportunities for science synergism between Astro-1 and the armada of Halley encounter spacecraft are significant. The scientific study of Halley's Comet will be an internationally coordinated effort." In addition to the Halley's observations, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope on Astro-1 would study faint astronomical objects such as quasars, active galactic nuclei, and normal galaxies in the far ultraviolet range; the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope would record image-intensified photos of faint objects such as hot stars and galaxies in broad ultraviolet wavelengths and with a wide field of view; and the Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photopolarimetry Experiment would study the polarization of hot stars, galactic nuclei, and quasars. The instruments would make a total of 200 to 300 observations during the mission, the first of three in a series scheduled for launch within the next two years. (NASA Release 85-137)
"The Dream Is Alive," a new IMAX movie that was perhaps the most advanced film of its kind ever made, opened today at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Post reported. The $3.6 million production, narrated by Walter Cronkite, was the first ever shot almost completely on location in space and was an informal sequel to "Hail, Columbia," the story of the U.S.'s first Space Shuttle. Because the film was shot on three of the most dramatic and action-packed Space Shuttle flights of the previous year, it was essentially a video yearbook full of special happenings, the Washington Times reported. The film showed the rescue and repair of the Solar Max satellite, the deployment of the 100-foot-tall solar array that someday could help power the space station, launching of two communications satellites, and the first spacewalk by an American woman. Among what appeared to be special effects produced in Hollywood were the immensity of Hurricane Josephine as seen from 200 miles overhead and the silence of a satellite drifting noiselessly in the blackness of space. The astronauts who shot the footage said the IMAX format came as close to capturing the real view and the true feel of spaceflight as any format ever had. IMAX expert Graeme Ferguson, who produced and directed the film, said the next step was to modify an IMAX camera so it could be taken outside the Space Shuttle. (W Post, June 22/85, D1; W Times, June 20/85, 3B)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
NASA launched Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today through the worst weather of the Space Shuttle program, the NY Times reported. After two postponements in three days because of bad weather and a computer failure, Discovery barely got off the ground before the darkening clouds moved over the launch pad and the rain descended in torrents. "We could see large holes in the system 50 or 100 miles across so we prayed for the breaks that would let us thread the needle when the time came," launch director Robert Sieck said later. "We had two things in our favor: There was no lightning in the cloud cover, and most of the rain was south of the launch pad, not right over it." Launch directors gambled that rain would not be falling on the pad at liftoff time, which was delayed three minutes to make sure the gamble was the right one. As heavy rain fell on the press site three miles to the west, Discovery roared away from the pad through a hole in the clouds and sped into the air 10 minutes before the pad was pelted with rain. Commanding the flight was Air Force Col. Joe Engle, who commanded the second Space Shuttle test flight in 1981 and on August 26 turned 53. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Covey was pilot; mission specialists were John Lounge, Dr. James van Hoften, and Dr. William Fisher. A malfunction encountered two hours into the flight forced the astronauts to deploy a day early one of the three satellites in the orbiter's cargo bay. During a cargo inspection by remotely controlled cameras, a shield that was to protect Australia's AUSSAT 1 from direct exposure to sunlight stuck in a partly open position. An astronaut then used the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm to nudge the sunshade completely open so they could release the spring-loaded satellite. Any delay of more than six hours could have resulted in radiation damage to the exposed satellite's electronics. Less than five hours after deploying the Australian satellite, Discovery's crew deployed ASC 1 for the American Satellite Co. The second deployment marked the first time a Space Shuttle crew deployed two satellites in one day. (NYT, Aug 28/85, D18)
NASA announced it would transfer on December 6, 1985, the title to the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum. The NASA Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, on November 16 would deliver Enterprise to Washington Dulles International Airport, where cranes would remove Enterprise from the top of the 747 and lower it to Dulles's tarmac. Rockwell Internatl., NASA's Space Shuttle prime contractor, constructed Enterprise, which was the first orbiter built. NASA used Enterprise, Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle 101 (OV 101), to test airframe loads, flight dynamics characteristics, and other aspects of the orbiter as it flew through earth's atmosphere. NASA also used Enterprise as a test bed for manufacturing techniques, aerodynamics, and flight control tests, and mating and fit checks for the remainder of the Space Shuttle components—the external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and mobile launch platforms at both Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base. On September 17, 1976, Enterprise rolled out from Rockwell's assembly facility at Palmdale, California, and was first flown on February 15, 1977, aboard the modified 747 in taxi tests at Edwards Air Force Base. There were then five approach and landing tests, commanded and piloted alternately by astronaut teams of Fred Haise, Jr. (commander) and C. Gordon Fullerton (pilot) and Joe Engie (commander) and Richard Truly (pilot). After ground vibration tests, engineers at Kennedy Space Center used Enterprise for fit checks with the other Space Shuttle components and the mobile launch systems. More recently, engineers used Enterprise for fit checks at the Space Shuttle launch complex at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 85-150)
In reporting on NASA's concerns over the effects of vibrations and noise on the Space Shuttle's passengers and cargo, the Washington Post quoted astronaut Air Force Col. Frederick Gregory saying that after his return from a Space Shuttle mission that "Nothing prepared me for the sensation of those main engines starting and those solids lighting up underneath us. That son-of-a-gun really rattles and rolls when it takes off." Although NASA maintained that the Space Shuttle was no rougher a ride than the Titan launch vehicle, doubts were creeping into the minds of some people planning the Space Shuttle program, the Post said. Troubles arose on Gregory's flight when astronauts discovered the latch that released the airlock holding the Spacelab wide-field camera was badly bent—possibly because of the rough ride. In another Spacelab incident, all pressure was lost after four days in the laser spectrometer at the heart of an experiment to measure molecules of synthetic chemicals that could be attacking the earth's protective ozone layer. Space Shuttle managers were quick to defend the spacecraft, the Post reported. Columbia, Challenger, and Discovery had flown 17 times in four years without a serious incident. At least two of the three satellites that failed in space did so because of onboard rocket engine difficulties, not because the Space Shuttle was too rough. Johnson Space Center Director Gerald Griffin said in an interview with the Post that "occasional" mistakes had led to mishaps, but he insisted that "we are not repeating our mistakes." He used as an example the Syncom (Leasat-3) satellite deployed in April with no power to raise it to a higher orbit. He said that NASA would not have deployed the Syncom without any power if NASA had insisted that Hughes Communications Corp install a device that flashed a warning to the Space Shuttle's cockpit that the satellite had no power. "We've always insisted our customers adhere to our safety standards to protect the crew and the shuttle, but we've never insisted they do anything else," Griffin said. "We don't want to be 'Big Brother' but we're beginning to think that some of the [the customers] design features are not good for us. I'd like to see more data for the crew in the cockpit." (W Post, May 24/85, A1)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)
NASA announced selection of 13 new astronaut candidates, six pilots and seven mission specialists, who would report to the Johnson Space Center in late summer to begin a one-year period of training and evaluation. Upon successful completion of the training, they would be eligible for assignment to Space Shuttle flights. The candidates would join 90 current astronauts. Including the new group, NASA had named 157 astronauts since the beginning of the program. In making the latest selections, NASA considered 33 civilians from the selection rosters developed during the 1984 selection process and 133 nominees from the military services. Those selected as pilot candidates were LCdr. Michael Baker (USN), Maj. Robert Caban (USMC), Capt. Brian Duffy (USAF), Stephen Oswald (civilian), and LCdr. Stephen Thorne (USN). Mission specialist candidates were Jerome Apt (PhD—civilian), Capt. Charles Gemar (US Army), Linda Godwin (PhD— civilian), Richard Hieb (civilian), Tamara Gernigan (civilian), Capt. Carl Meade (USAF), and Lt. Pierre Thuot (USN). (NASA Release 85-84)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that NASA would sponsor an exhibition July 22 through July 30 at the 1985 National Scout Jamboree at Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia. The jamboree, celebrating scouting's 75th anniversary, was expected to draw more than 35,000 U.S. and international scouts and leaders and many thousands of general public participants. The NASA exhibit, for which LaRC was serving as lead coordinator, would include information on subjects ranging from current aeronautics research to the Space Shuttle and man's future in space. A 100-seat theater would have video presentations and live programs throughout each day. Astronaut Frederick Gregory, a former scout and long-time scouting enthusiast, would participate in the jamboree's opening program on July 24 and would talk with scouts in the NASA exhibition area on that day. NASA would sponsor July 24 through 28 model rocket launch demonstrations and presentations on earning the Space Exploration merit badge. (LaRC Release 85-38)
NASA announced that astronauts Paul Weitz, Dr. Kathryn Sullivan, and Dale Gardner would support NASA activities at the 36th Paris Air Show at Le Bourget from May 31 through June 9 [see Space Station Program, Mar. 22], Weitz, then chief of astronaut appearances at Johnson Space Center, was a member of the first Skylab crew in 1973 and later commanded the first flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger in April 1983. He had logged 793 hours in space. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED i m ..JNWiTIOlunj Sullivan, an astronaut since 1978 with 197.5 hours in space, served as a mission specialist on the October 1984 Space Shuttle mission 41-G and was the first American woman to perform an extravehicular activity or space walk, during which she and astronaut David Leestma conducted a 2.5-hour demonstration of the potential of refueling satellites in space. Gardner, an astronaut since 1978 with 337 hours in space, had flown on the August 1983 Space Shuttle mission STS-8, the first night launch and landing using the orbiter Challenger, and in November 1984 on the 51-A mission, during which the crew retrieved two communications satellites that had failed to achieve proper orbits after launch from an earlier Space Shuttle flight. NASA refurbished the satellites for reflight. During the Air Show, the astronauts would make numerous public appearances, participate in media interviews, and assist NASA's marketing efforts at its exhibit in the U.S. pavilion. (NASA Release 85-72)
NASA deputy associate administrator for space science and applications Samuel Keller, speaking at a weekly staff meeting, said "We expect 1986 will be the most demanding year we've ever had,'' the Washington Post reported. In January Voyager would encounter the planet Uranus. In March the Space Shuttle would fly a mission dedicated to observing Halley's comet. In May NASA would launch Ulysses, which would fly to Jupiter and use the planet's gravity to "slingshot" itself around the sun, and Galileo, which would orbit Jupiter. In August the Space Shuttle would carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit. The three spacecraft cost $2 billion not including launch costs. Keller's toughest time would occur in May, the Post said, when Ulysses and Galileo at the same time would be in the cargo bays of two Space Shuttles on their launch pads. NASA would try May 15 to launch Ulysses and then Galileo four days later. If anything delayed the May 15 launch, NASA had 24 days to get the Space Shuttle into space, a launch window that allowed the two spacecraft to fly to Jupiter using the least amount of fuel. "I'll be glad when 1986 is over," Keller said. (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21) October24: NASA announced that an October 29 conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies would provide a forum for government executives to discuss the Reagan Administration's program to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. Following welcoming remarks by Dennis Whitfield, chief of staff to the Secretary of Labor, and David Braunstein, director of NASA's productivity programs, conference participants would be briefed on several perspectives on the President's productivity improvement program. Stephen Scholossberg, deputy under secretary for labor-management relations, Department of Labor, would then provide a labor-management view of quality and productivity. In the afternoon, NASA astronaut Bruce McCandless, first human to freely maneuver in space without a tether, would speak on the importance of quality and productivity in the space program. John Franke Jr., assistant secretary for administration, Department of Agriculture, would then give case examples of management's commitment to quality; and Commodore John Kirkpatrick, commander, Naval Aviation Logistics Center, would discuss quality improvement through total quality management. (NASA Release 85-146)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
The Indian Department of Space announced today the selection of two Indian astronaut candidates, one of whom would fly aboard the Space Shuttle carrying India's INSAT-1C satellite, FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English reported. The candidates were N.C. Bhatt of the Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore, and P. Radhakrishmam of Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, Trivandrum. The chairman of India's Space Commission, Professor U. R. Rao, said the commission would select one of them to fly on the mission scheduled for July 1986. (FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English, Nov 8/85) "There has to be a difference between some senator or Arab prince and the qualified scientists who fly aboard the shuttle," said Ulf Merbold, crew interface coordinator for the D-1 mission. "We demand that the science astronaut concept be developed so that these proficient crew members can be designated for such a flight," said Hans-Ulrich Steimle, Spacelab D-1 mission manager at the German aerospace research establishment. "Instead, NASA now has become involved in running a travel office for visiting dignitaries, and this is counterproductive when you want to perform a serious science mission." German officials said they might raise the issue again when planning was finalized for a follow-on Spacelab D-2 mission targeted for 1988. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 24)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
NASA announced that John Young would command Space Shuttle flight 61-J scheduled for launch August 1986, Vance Brand mission 61-K scheduled for September 1986, and Donald Williams mission 61—I. Other crew for the 61-J mission, during which astronauts would deploy the Hubble Space Telescope, were pilot Charles Bolden Jr. and previously named mission specialists Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce Mc-Candless. S. David Griggs would pilot mission 61—K, and other crew would be mission specialists Robert Steward, Owen Garriott, and European Space Agency astronaut Claude Nicollier. NASA previously assigned payload specialists Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg to the mission. Remaining mission 61-1 crew would be pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists James Bagian, Bonnie Dunbar and Manley "Sonny" Carter. NASA also announced that Norman Thagard would replace John Fabian on mission 61-G scheduled for May 1986 during which crew would deploy the Galileo interplanetary spacecraft. Fabian was leaving NASA; he had not announced his plans. James Buchli would replace Thagard on mission 61-H in June 1986. (NASA Release 85-131)
Astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today completed repair of the Leasat 1 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Steven Dorfman, president of Hughes Communications Corp., satellite owner, referred to the effort as the "most remarkable salvage mission" tried in space. During the second day of the salvage mission [see Satellites, Aug. 31], astronaut John Lounge, using the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm, raised the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay and placed its center of gravity on a straight line with that of the orbiter Discovery. Outside, van Hoften stepped into foot restraints on the end of the arm, and Lounge lifted him to the satellite. Reaching up, van Hoften placed gloved hands on the bar he had earlier attached to the satellite and pushed down as hard as he could to start the satellite spinning. Three more pushes sent the satellite spinning evenly into space over the equator near the west coast of South America where officials planned to operate it as a Navy radio relay. Although Hughes was still concerned that very cold temperatures might have permanently damaged the satellite, it did beam to earth its first signals since deployment on April 13. The signals indicated that temperatures in the satellite's outer shell were normal, suggesting that the inner drum holding the two onboard rocket engines and more than 7,500 lb. of rocket fuel might have survived the varying temperatures of space and be ready to carry the satellite into permanent position 22,300 miles above earth. (IV Post, Sept 2/ 85, A3)
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)
Already far ahead of their work schedule, astronauts aboard Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 began preparing tools they would use in an attempt to revive the U.S. Navy Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Mission planners had hoped the satellite repairs could be made during an August 30 spacewalk, but they added another spacewalk for August 31 because ground tests showed that the Space Shuttle crippled robot arm could not work fast enough to complete the repair job in one day. "It appears we are faced with a two-EVA (extravehicular activity) plan," flight director Bill Reeves said. He blamed a failed circuit that prevented Discovery's robot arm from operating in an automatic mode. Reeves noted that ground tests showed that the robot arm, when operated manually, would need about 75% more time to maneuver the Syncom 3 satellite and that it would take two 6-and-a-half hour spacewalks to complete the repair. Mission specialists Dr. James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher spent about four hours August 28 checking out electronic gear they would use to repair the satellite. Mission specialist John Lounge would work the robot arm from inside the cockpit, while van Hoften and Fisher worked outside on the satellite. The robot arm would play a crucial role, holding van Hoften in place while he worked on the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay. Lounge would also use the robot arm to help van Hoften turn the satellite so Fisher, standing in foot restraints inside the bay, could remove a panel and disengage a timing lever, then plug two electrical cables into the panel and, in effect, jump start the satellite. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A3)
"Space and Society—Progress and Promise" was the theme of the twenty-second Space Congress, a nonprofit technical symposium sponsored by the Canaveral Council of Technical Societies, April 23-26 in Cocoa Beach, Florida, Spaceport News reported. Speakers discussed new space initiatives, including operation and robotics in space, advanced missions and transportation, Space Station plans and development, and private sector investment and participation in space activities. Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, director of the Strategic Defense Office, would speak about the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). The traditional "Meet the Astronauts" session would be open to the public, as would be a one-man play entitled Leviathan 99 by Ray Bradbury, a noted science fiction writer. (Spaceport News, Apr 12/86, 8) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
NASA announced the astronaut crews for two upcoming Department of Defense (DOD) Space Shuttle missions, including the 1st from Vandenberg AFB. Robert Crippen (Capt., USN) would command mission 62-A, scheduled for launch no earlier than Jan. 29, 1986, from Vandenberg. Other crew members named were Guy Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), pilot; and mission specialists Dale Gardner (Commander, USN), Jerry Ross (Maj., USAF), and R. Michael Mullane (Lt. Col., USAF). Crippen had flown with John Young on the orbiter Columbia's maiden flight in April 1981 and was commander of STS-7, 41-C, and 41-G. Dale Gardner had served as a mission specialist on STS-8 and 51-A; Mullane on 41-D. Karol Bobko (Col., USAF) would command mission 51-J, scheduled for launch September 1985 from KSC. Ronald Grabe (Lt. Col., USAF) would serve as pilot; David Hilmers (Maj., USMC) and Robert Stewart (Col., USA) as mission specialists. Bobko had served as pilot on STS-6 and would command 51-E scheduled for launch in March; Stewart had flown as mission specialist on 41-B and had been the 2nd person to fly the manned maneuvering unit on that flight. (NASA Release 85-25)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
Americans on board were commander Henry Hartsfield, Jr.; Air Force Lt. Col. Steven Nagel, pilot; and mission specialists Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, a biomedical engineer, Marine Corps Col. James Buchli, and Air Force Col. Guion Bluford, Jr., who had a doctorate in aerospace engineering. The two West Germans in the crew were Dr. Ernst Messerschmid and Mr. Reinhard Furrer, both physicists. The eighth crew member, Dr. Wubbo Ockels, a physicist from the Netherlands, represented the European Space Agency (ESA), which provided several scientific instruments in the Spacelab. The Europeans had prime responsibility for conducting the experiments; Bluford and Dunbar would assist them. Spacelab D-1, designed, built, and checked out in Europe, was flown to KSC for installation in Challenger's cargo bay. The V\fest German space agency's center in Oberphaffenhofen, near Munich, controlled scientific operations during the flight; ground control for flying the Space Shuttle was in Houston, as usual. Spacelab D-1 carried 76 experiments on racks that lined its walls. German researchers designed most of the experiments, which were for German and other foreign universities, research institutes, and industrial enterprises as well as ESA and NASA; other experiments were from France, Spain, Italy, Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, and the U.S. All experiments were intended to take advantage of the weightlessness of space to study various processes that were normally affected by gravity. The Washington Post reported that West German officials said Spacelab was a major step toward what they hoped would be a larger laboratory module attached to the permanently manned space station that NASA envisioned for the 1990s. Most experiments were in materials processing. Along two sides of the Spacelab, the experiments were in racks containing small furnaces for heating metals and making alloys that were lighter and stronger than anything produced in full gravity of earth. Other materials processing experiments would study the flow of liquids in weightlessness; yet others would grow very pure and large crystals that could lead to improvements in electronic semiconductors. In a variety of life sciences experiments, the crew would study the growth of plants (corn and lentils) under microgravity conditions. Other studies were on how embryos of frogs and insects developed in weightlessness. Crew would use tadpoles for tests on how weightlessness might affect the development of vestibular, or balance, organs in vertebrates. ESA's vestibular sled ran down a pair of rails in Spacelab's center aisle. Experimenters would accelerate and tilt crew members riding in the chairlike device to test how the human balance system in the inner ear responded to weightlessness and a moderate gravity force, because it was thought the inner ear, which relied on gravity to function normally, might be the source of astronauts' motion sickness. Crew would use instruments in the cargo bay outside the Spacelab for navigation tests, such as synchronization of atomic clocks in space with those on the ground, checking for any discrepancies caused by weightlessness, and precise distance measurements by radio signals between the Space Shuttle and the ground. To accommodate the crew of eight, NASA installed an extra sleep station, bringing the total to four. Crew would conduct laboratory work in shifts around the clock. Despite early concern over the condition of the Space Shuttle's steering jets, mission control gave the Challenger the go-ahead for orbital operations. Later the mission control flight director said a valve malfunction prevented the flow of fuel through one line to Challenger's steering jets, but NASA considered an alternate line sufficient for regular operation to maneuver Challenger. Flight controllers also reported erratic temperature readings on one of the three fuel cells that generated electricity, but with crew supervision the affected unit was operating at full strength. (NASA Release 85-145; NASA MOR M-989-61-A [prelaunch] Oct 28/85; NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13; W Post, Oct 31/85, A30)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B today launched satellites for Mexico and Australia, the Washington Post reported. The crew launched Mexico's Morelos B in the morning, just hours after liftoff. Morelos B was a Hughes 376 satellite, a standard design used by many foreign national and private companies, Kennedy Space Center's Spaceport News said. It would provide telephone, TV, and wire services to Mexico through a total of 22 transponders. A PAM-D payload assist module then boosted the satellite to geosynchronous orbit 22,300 miles above earth. The satellite would drift, unused, until it reached it final stationary position in 1989. Mexican officials chose to store Morelos B in orbit because launch cost for the satellite could increase to four times the amount that Mexico paid to NASA for today's deployment. Payload specialist Rudolfo Neri Vela, the first Mexican astronaut, was onboard to observe satellite deployment. In June 1985 crew in the orbiter Discovery deployed the first Morelos satellite. At 8:20 p.m. the Australian satellite AUSSAT 2 spun out of the Atlantis's cargo bay. "We got a good deploy," said mission specialist Sherwood Spring, who supervised the satellite's spring ejection. "It looked like it might have gone a second early," he added. AUSSAT2, also a Hughes 376 satellite, was the second of three operations satellites for the government-owned Australian National Satellite System. It had eleven 12-watt transponders and four 30-watt transponders to provide domestic communications to Australia's 15-million population. Australia would also use the satellite to improve maritime and air traffic control communications, relay digital data for business purposes, provide standard telephone communications, and direct satellite to home TV broadcasts. A PAM-D would also boost the satellite to geosynchronous orbit. In August 1985 the Discovery crew deployed the first AUSSAT. Mission commander Brewster Shaw had tested all systems aboard Atlantis and reported that one of four videotape recorders was not working. Mission control gave him permission to take apart an electronic cabinet to look for a wiring flaw, but Shaw said he could not see anything that was obviously wrong. Later, following directions from the ground, Shaw cycled a circuit breaker and reported, "Bingo. That seems to get power to VTR1." (IV Post, Nov 28/85, A28; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
The Johnson Space Center's (JSC) Space News Roundup conducted an interview with Christa McAuliffe, selected by NASA to be the teacher in space, and her backup, Barbara Morgan. When asked to give her impressions of JSC, McAuliffe said, "Big. Wry big . . . But that's one of the messages we want to get across. There are, what, 100 astronauts in the program, but thousands of employees here . . . And we've gotten so much information. When I'm 62, I'll finally read the last piece of paper that I bring back from here." The Roundup reporter questioned the two teachers about the national attention they had received, the effect it had on them, and the possibility of moving into different careers after the flight. McAuliffe commented, "Oh, but you're talking to a teacher. I didn't choose my career so I could get monetary rewards. My God, I never would have gone into teaching ... A year of this is going to be fun and I'm enjoying what I'm doing. I see it as an extraordinary year out of my life . . . We don't see this as a stepping stone to something else. When I go into a radio or TV station, I am looking at everything that is happening and I can't wait to tell my kids what happens in a TV studio, because I have never been in one before." Morgan then said that one of the funny things that had happened since beginning their training was that, "all of a sudden we are being asked questions as if we are the experts on the Space Shuttle." McAuliffe agreed, noting that she received a phone call from a reporter asking her what she believed was the cause of a problem the previous summer with the orbiter Challenger. In answer to the question, "What message will you take to people after this experience?" McAuliffe said, "That space is for everybody. It's not just for a few people in science or math, or for a select group of astronauts. That's our new frontier out there, and it's everybody's business to know about space." (JSC Roundup, Dec 6/85, 3)
Astronauts aboard the Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F spent an extra day in space gazing at the sun after the instrument pointing system was back in order, the Washington Post reported. The sudden recovery on August 4, as a result of a lucky radio command transmitted on a whim after a jolting rocket firing, of a fourth solar telescope called a solar optical universal polarimeter added to the science data. Most of the August 5 sun observations used that telescope after NASA had considered it a failure. The telescope initially recorded images of sunspots, dark splotches that erupted through the visible surface of the sun when underlying magnetic fields became convoluted, the Washington Times reported. The astronauts turned the telescope on the sunspot again on August 5, and the TV image was so clear scientists on the ground reported that they could see changes in its penumbra, a surrounding halo-like feature made up of jets of gas streaming out from the dark central area. (W Post, Aug 6/85, A5; W Times, Aug 6/ 85, 2A)
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah) today joined five astronauts and a French pilot for the final two-hour practice aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger, which they would fly in two weeks, the Washington Post reported. They had run through launch procedures and checked all spacecraft systems to avoid any surprises at liftoff, ending with a simulated liftoff at 4 p.m. Garn, who would fly on Challenger as a congressional observer, was chairman of a subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding. The other non-NASA spaceman was French Air Force Lt. Col. Patrick Baudry, who would serve as a payload specialist. (WPost, Feb 18/85, A14)
President Reagan and USSR Chairman Konstantin Chernenko had approved the idea of establishing ties between the U.S.'s Young Astronauts and the Soviet's Young Cosmonauts, the Washington Post reported, as a step toward better U.S.-Soviet relations and peaceful cooperation in space. The program would begin with a Young Cosmonauts' delegation visiting the U.S. to view a space launch and tour space facilities. Young Astronauts would then write to Young Cosmonauts, explaining their interest in space and what the groups might accomplish together. Those writing the best letters would visit, all expenses paid, their letters' recipients. In addition, the International Aeronautical Federation had adopted the Young Astronaut program and planned to offer it to other nations to establish ties between Young Astronauts and Cosmonauts around the world. In his Washington Post column, Jack Anderson wrote that the Young Astronaut Council was recruiting 6-to-16-yr-olds for future space exploration and that those joining would be eligible to participate in the "Letter to a Young Cosmonaut" contest. (WPost, Feb 6/85, FIT)
NASA had scratched four squirrel monkeys scheduled to be carried into orbit by the Space Shuttle Challenger in April because NASA found they had a form of herpes that could be transmitted to the astronaut crew, the Washington Post reported. The monkeys' herpes, called Herpes Samirii, was not the virus transmitted sexually by humans, but was unique to New World primates whose natural habitat was the rain forests of South America. Researchers suspected the virus of causing cancer in lower mammals such as rats and therefore classified it as potentially cancerous in humans. NASA replaced the monkeys with those from colonies bred to be virus-free. Four monkeys recruited from the National Institutes of Health and one from Harvard University had been in training since January for their flight on the second mission of Spacelab, scheduled for April 29 at the earliest. Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian, NASA's chief of space medicine, said they were looking for a sixth monkey even though only three might be flown. "One of the monkeys in training is too small and will have to be replaced, and it will be nice to have a backup when the time comes for them to go into orbit," he said. In space the monkeys' cages would have their own oxygen and food and water supplies in the Spacelab portion of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, which was shut off from Challenger's cabin by an airlock. The upcoming flight was a shakedown cruise for the monkeys to ascertain that their cages functioned properly and to make sure the monkeys wouldn't get frightened or injured during launch or return to earth. (Washington Post, Mar 27/85, A20)
In assessing the status of the Syncom IV-3 (Leasat 3) satellite that was drifting in low-earth orbit after its apogee kick motor failed to push it into proper orbit [see Apr. 18], aerospace engineers said astronauts might be able to salvage the satellite, the Washington Times reported. Payload specialists originally believed it would be too dangerous to return the satellite to earth on the Space Shuttle because of the nearly six tons of highly volatile rocket fuel it carried. Jerome Hammack, a spacecraft safety operations expert, said deactivating the satellite's electronic systems would significantly reduce the chance of stray sparks igniting the fuel, most of which would turn to gas upon descent. To ensure that there was no power going to any of the electrical circuits, a spacewalking astronaut would have to cut power circuits running to the satellite's batteries and solar power cells. However, NASA would mount a rescue attempt only if Hughes Communications Inc., Leasat 3's manufacturer, and Hughes' insurance underwriters agreed to a salvage contract. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
NASA Administrator James Beggs stirred up a controversy when he reportedly told a Washington gathering of the American Stock Exchange that the Soviets had "turned us down, flat, with no explanation" on the proposal of a joint space mission, the Washington Times reported. Later NASA spokesman Miles Waggoner said the Soviets had not rejected the idea, but a joint manned space mission was not likely to happen within the next few years. President Reagan had offered the Soviets a chance to participate in a cooperative space venture about a year previously. The Soviets responded that they believed it was not the time to fly that kind of mission. "To us, that means the item is still open," Waggoner said. "This time, though, Mr. Beggs decided to look at it from the other perspective." Other NASA officials, indicating the agency hadn't received any new word from the Soviets about the proposal, speculated Beggs might have said what he did to provoke a reaction from them. Originally, NASA planners envisioned a joint practice rescue mission in which a U.S. astronaut would use a jet backpack called a manned maneuvering unit (MMU) to fly from a Space Shuttle to a Soviet Salyut space station. The astronaut might also use the MMU to push a cosmonaut back to the Space Shuttle for a brief time. (W Times, June 12/85, 4A)
NASA announced it had signed a memorandum of understanding for its materials processing in space research program with Grumman Corp. to experiment with directional solidification of gallium arsenide and other semiconductor materials and various metals and alloys. The process would apply to production of semiconductor crystals and magnets for electrical motors, with initial emphasis on semiconductor materials. Directional solidification would use precisely controlled temperatures to melt and solidify a material, during which the material's crystalline structure would align in a fashion that should virtually eliminate any compound imperfections. Flawless semiconductor crystals would yield a greater quantity and quality of microcircuit chips, leading to higher-speed electronic devices that would consume less power and to greater miniaturization. The agreement called for an information exchange, with NASA and Grumman Corp. designating personnel for the program. NASA would put up no funds for the program; Grumman expected to spend $6 million in the first three years. (NASA Release 85-23; W Times, Feb 13/85, 8B) NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION During October: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) announced that its university programs, primarily involving undergraduate students, combined futuristic space concepts with realistic engineering design challenges. The first program, cosponsored by NASA Headquarters and Ames Research Center (ARC) and Johnson Space Center (JSC), required students to design a spacesuit glove that would allow astronauts maximum flexibility at eight lb.-per-sq-in., the pressure planned for future extravehicular activity. Ten universities responded to a request for proposals, and a team from Kansas State University won the design competition. The second broader program, entering its second phase of a two-year pilot effort, required universities to adopt NASA advanced space design projects for senior design classes. Each university received a grant and was aligned with a NASA center that provided guidance, data, and lecturers during the academic year and 10-week summer work assignments for three students. The initial group of centers, schools, and projects were: ARC/University of Wisconsin/manned Mars habitat; ARC/University of Colorado/geosynchro-nous space station; Langley Research Center; (LaRC)/Virginia Polytechnic Institute/orbital servicing center; LaRC/Massachusetts Institute of Technology/ lunar base-manned Mars mission; Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)/ Georgia Institute of Technology/lunar site preparation; Lewis Research Center (LeRC)/University of Washington/space manufacturing facility; LeRC/Univer-sity of Michigan/lunar space transportation system; and JSC/University of Texas and Texas A & M/manned Mars mission. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 10)
Engineers with Hughes Communications Inc., owner of the Syncom 3 communications satellite, sent at 11:53 a.m. today from the company's Guam ground station a radio command to fire the marooned satellite's rocket booster, causing the satellite's ICBM-type rocket motor to fire for 64 seconds as planned, the Washington Times reported. The undertaking capped the most ambitious space salvage effort ever attempted, the Times said, a two-day effort in August by two astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery (see Satellites Apr 22 and Aug 31). The engineers fired the rocket without knowing whether it would blow up or work properly after months exposed to freezing temperatures. "We really nailed it," said Albert Wheelon, president of the Hughes space communications group. "We'll have it in synchronous orbit round about the first of November and then we still have 30 days of checking out the radio equipment and all the systems." Insurance underwriters stood to recoup 85% of the insured cost of the satellite, a boost for an industry that had lost more than $600 million in the past 20 months because of seven satellite failures including Syncom 3. (W Times, Oct 28/85, 3A)
The National Space Institute (NSI) announced establishment of "Space Outreach '85," a program to acquire original ideas from the public as to potential uses of space for social and economic benefit. The program was intended to broaden what appeared to be a too narrow debate on a new and clarified set of long-term civilian space goals. Rules for the program were that ideas could not exceed 750 words; submissions could not include projects already under review by the federal government; and proposals must be creative, innovative, and feasible. The NSI would present all ideas received during the program to Congress, NASA, and, in particular, the newly created National Commission on Space [see Mar. 30]. Judges for the program, which had the support of the Sophron Foundation of McLean, Virginia, were Walter Boyne, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum; Evert Clark, technology editor, Business Week, former astronaut Michael Collins; and Robert Cowen, science writer for the The Christian Science Monitor. The NSI would present awards for the outstanding entries, with the writer of the most innovative suggestion receiving an all-expense-paid trip to see a Space Shuttle launch. (NSI Release, May 13/85) August 9; World amateur radio operators participated in the shuttle amateur radio experiment (SAREX) on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, the Lewis News reported. SAREX allowed people connected with amateur radio to talk with Challenger's crew and watch TV transmissions from the flight deck. The SAREX test, conducted during off-duty hours in cooperation with onboard mission specialists/ham operators Tony England and John-David Bartoe and mission commander Gordon Fullerton, allowed world amateur radio operators access to the Space Shuttle's voice and video transmissions to earth on amateur 2-m band. A video buffer circuit designed, built, and tested by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ham operators was key to SAREX's success. The SAREX system worked in two primary modes, one mode at a time. The first allowed voice communications back and forth between radio operators on the ground and spacecraft crew. The second primary mode was amateur TV. Using a set-up similar to the ham radio system, amateur TV operators and the Space Shuttle crew sent images to one another—the first such use of two-way video in space. Users transmitted color TV pictures in a slow-scan-mode—one picture every 8 to 36 seconds. SAREX, closely connected to the Young Astronaut Program, was a joint effort of the American Relay League and NASA. A ham radio experiment with mission specialist Owen Garriot conducted in 1983 on STS-9 was generally credited as the genesis for the current SAREX. (Lewis News, Aug 9/85, 1)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
As five military officers on the Space Shuttle Atlantis orbited earth on the secret 51 —J mission, a debate was growing in the U.S. over how much secrecy was necessary in the civilian-run space program and what the military's role in it should be, the NY Times reported. Proponents of an expanded role for the Defense Department (DOD) said the U.S. needed to counter a growing Soviet threat in space. They pointed out that the USSR launched four to five times as many spacecraft a year as the U.S., with the majority of missions devoted to military objectives, and that Soviet military officers had logged years in space, while the U.S. military had logged days. Critics of an expanded DOD role said the U.S. already had an advantage in military space technology. They said U.S. systems worked better and lasted longer, pointing out the USSR was still trying to perfect a vehicle similar to the Space Shuttle. The critics also argued that the U.S. military's assertions about the Soviet Union were often veiled excuses to try to edge civilians out of the astronaut corps and to classify the most mundane Space Shuttle payloads. This goal of secrecy, they said, was not heightened security but was intended to protect DOD's plans and programs from public scrutiny. The debate was likely to become more vocal, the Times said, as the military expanded its manned space activity when secret military missions would account for 25 to 30% of all Space Shuttle flights in the next decade. Carl Sagan, professor of astronomy and space sciences at Cornell University, said there was a "fundamental tension" between open scientific inquiry and "the necessarily closed world of military activities ... As military programs expand," he said, "there's a huge deflection of resources, financial and intellectual, from peaceful uses into the production of weapons." Daniel Graham, a retired Army lieutenant general who formerly headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, disagreed, saying the military had been at the forefront of U.S. space exploration since its earliest days. "The myth since the Eisenhower Administration is that there's a distinction between military and civilian matters in space," he said. "That's a pretense that a lot of people in NASA would like to believe, that all their activities are sweetness and light," he insisted. However, even military proponents saw emerging tensions in the manned space program, the Times reported. William Gregory, editor of Aviation Week & Technology said in an editorial, "The original legislation creating [NASA] specified a civilian space program, separate from the military . . . That line is being crossed now not so much as a formal policy change as out of simple economic necessity. The shuttle needs the military as a customer to spread the system's overhead costs." Some critics feared that NASA's charter for free and open dissemination of scientific information was eroding as the military's role grew. Scientists ineffectually protested last year when NASA announced that its Defense Department Affairs Division would review and possibly censor images from a large camera and radar carried on a civilian Space Shuttle mission. "There's a real question of how the decision was made to move the space agency from being open to substantially closed," the Times quoted Morton Halperin, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What's at stake is the public's right to participate in the process of making government policy." (NY Times, Oct 6/85, A1)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
NASA announced that it signed a 21-month agreement with Scott Science and Technology, Inc. (SST) to provide technical expertise to SST in the development of a commercial liquid-fuel upper stage for boosting Space Shuttle-deployed satellites to geosynchrous orbit. SST, whose president was former astronaut David Scott, had worked for two years on developing the upper stage, called the Satellite Transfer Vehicle, which would be able to boost satellites ranging from 2,000 to 19,000 lb. On some missions, the stage would be recoverable. Engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center would monitor the stage's development and consult with SST staff on technical problems. SST would reimburse NASA for the use of any test facilities and the salaries and travel of JSC personnel working on the project. (NASA Release 85-143)
In their last full day aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51-B, the crew concluded an array of experiments and prepared for their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Answering questions radioed from reporters at Johnson Space Flight Center, the astronauts reported progress not only in working out space station construction techniques, but also in developing a gravity-free pharmaceutical factory to be based on the proposed space station. Payload specialist Charles Walker of the McDonnell Douglas Corp. was in charge of the experiment for development of a space-based factory for purification of a human hormone produced by genetically engineered bacteria. Astronauts on previous flights had tested the basic purification technique, called continuous-flow electrophoresis in a gravity-free environment; the current experiment simulated an actual production run of the hormone, which might prove useful in treating certain forms of anemia. During the questioning, astronauts Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring and Maj. Jerry Ross acknowledged that they were extremely fatigued after each of their spacewalks and that their hands were stiff and numb after the practice assembly, manipulation, and disassembly of a 45-foot-long truss and a pyramidal module. Nevertheless, the two deemed the exercise a success. "We don't know yet what this will mean for a future space station," Spring commented, "but it's a start. Personally, it was really exhilarating for me out there, face to face with the universe." (NYT, Dec 3/85, C3)
NASA launched at 12:02 p.m. EDT today from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger mission 51 —B carrying seven astronauts, Spacelab 3, 24 rats, and two squirrel monkeys for the most intensive science mission to date, the Washington Post reported. Launched 17 days after Discovery left the same launch pad, the Challenger flight bested the previous "turnaround" record of 34 days. Challenger carried the oldest crew ever to fly in space. Marine Col. Robert Overmyer, commander, was 49; Frederick Gregory, pilot, and Taylor Wang, payload specialist, were 44; Don Lind, mission specialist, was 54; Lodewijk van den Berg, payload specialist, was 53; William Thornton, mission specialist, was 55; and Norman Thagard, mission specialist, 41. The crew called the flight one by scientists for science. "This mission marks the first time that scientists who designed their own experiments will be executing those experiments in space," said Lind, who had been waiting 16 years for the flight. The five scientists would work in around-the-clock shifts on the 15 experiments inside the European-built Spacelab. Before liftoff NASA decided not to have the crew launch two Get-Away Special satellites, one a student experiment and the other a Pentago payload, because a nine-volt battery had failed on the last Space Shuttle flight. Ground tests showed that three other batteries from the same batch failed after 18 hours in vacuum. The satellites would return to the ground with the Space Shuttle. The crew successfully deployed a satellite intended to calibrate air traffic control radars on the ground, but encountered difficulties when trying to deploy a U.S. Navy satellite that would locate drifting weather buoys. The satellite would not move from the cargo bay despite repeated signals to trigger deployment. Later the crew discovered they had no fresh water from their galley faucet and had to bypass the faucet and reconnect themselves to their water supply using an all-purpose hose carried for such emergencies. Other problems ranged from an overheated hydraulic system power unit to a urine collection device that one crew member said sprayed water "all over the place." The monkeys and rats appeared to be doing well. Four of the rats had surgical implants in their hearts to record changes in heartbeat and blood flow. The others were testing cages and equipment for future animal experiments. The monkeys were on a shakedown flight to determine how they tolerated living in orbit. If they didn't get nervous or frightened in space, later flights would carry squirrel monkeys with surgical implants to test for space sickness and heart changes. (W Post, Apr 28/85, A18, Apr 29/85, A3, Apr 30/ 85, A7)
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
At the halfway point in Space Shuttle mission 61-A in which the orbiter Challenger carried Spacelab D-1 [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Missions, Oct. 30], a slow air leak in one of Spacelab's vacuum chambers developed, but flight controllers in Houston did not consider it serious, the NY Times reported. Terry White, a public affairs officer at Mission Control, said the oxygen leak was so slight that, "provided there are no additional fluctuations, we have enough gases to go to the end of the mission." After encountering some Spacelab equipment malfunctions during the mission's first two days, Challenger's crew indicated they had achieved encouraging success with nearly all of the Spacelab's 76 scientific experiments on the effects of microgravity on metals, biological growth, and human physiology. Mission planners in Houston and scientists at the West German science control center near Munich were studying the possibility of extending the flight by a day to permit more time for experimentation. The crew reported preliminary results showing that, as expected, seedlings growing in the virtual absence of gravity developed roots that curved in odd directions. "The roots, lacking gravity, do not seem to know which way to go," a crew member commented. In another experiment, the Bacillus subtilis bacteria showed a higher rate of growth than anticipated. Mission control scientists said this "may be taken as an indication that bacteria do react differently in space." Most of the studies in processing metal alloys and growing crystals for electronics were still underway, so results were unavailable until completion of the mission. Earlier in the mission, crew member Dr. Ernst Messerschmid, a West German physicist, reported being "disoriented" when he awoke, a symptom of the space motion sickness that had plagued nearly half of all Space Shuttle astronauts. (NYT, Nov 3/85, A27)
Jacques Louis Lions, president of the French National Center for Space Studies, announced today that Aerospatiale and the Dassault-Breguet Aviation Company under the center's auspices would work together over the next several years to build two models for the European space shuttle Hermes, FBIS Hong Kong AFP in English reported. The European Space Agency (ESA) would likely also sponsor the project, and the center would undertake negotiations with European partners who would develop the main Hermes subsystems. Aerospatiale would lead the project and assemble Hermes components in its Toulouse factories; Dassault would be in charge of aeronautical aspects. Hermes, about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle, would carry two to six astronauts and cargo up to 4.5 tons into low earth orbits. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Oct 19/85) During April: In response to a request from the Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory to acquire more information on how to predict ocean wave behavior, the Wallops Flight Facility's P-3 aircraft participated October 1984 in NASA's Seasat Imaging Radar B (SIR-B) experiment to monitor ocean waves while, 140 miles above it, the Space Shuttle Challenger produced images of the same waves with its radar. Scientists knew what caused waves to swell, but found it difficult to predict exactly how they would behave. Researchers hoped they might be able to predict through the use of satellite data the occurrence of dangerous waves before they caused serious damage to ships and coastal towns. Analysis of previous data from the SIR had indicated that a synthetic aperture radar could observe ocean waves from space, but the lack of information on the actual directional wave spectrum on the ocean at the time of the SIR observations made it difficult to obtain an accurate assessment of the radar's performance. During Challenger's eight-day flight, the P-3 underflew the spacecraft for five nights off the coast of Chile to obtain sea surface observations. Each night the aircraft flew along several hundred kilometers of the Space Shuttle's imaging radar taking sea-surface observations with its complement of remote sensing instruments. The P-3's airborne oceanographic lidar provided laser elevation profiles of the wave field and the radars (surface contour radar, radar ocean wave spectrometer, and advanced applications flight experiment altimeter) measured significant wave height and provided information on the directional wave spectrum. Because state of the sea varied over the series of flights from low seas to waves with 6-m height and 400-m wavelengths, the data sets collected should become classic and provide a basis for the quantitative evaluation of synthetic aperture radars in space. (Inside Wallops, Apr 85, 1)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-1 took time August 29 to observe Hurricane Elena, the Washington Post reported. Commander Joe Engle took photos of the storm, a dense white circular mass that stretched across almost half of the Gulf of Mexico, and noted a second storm in the western part of Gulf. Among the contingencies NASA faced was the possibility that the storm could strike the Houston area and knock out communications with the Johnson Space Center. A NASA spokesman said they could quickly switch operation to the Goddard Space Flight Center. The crew also that day launched the Syncom IV-4 satellite, which was almost identical to the satellite the crew would attempt August 30 to salvage. (IV Post, Aug 30/85, A3)
NASA indicated it might remove squirrel monkeys from an April 30 Space Shuttle flight because the species carried a herpes virus known to cause cancer in some subhuman primates, the NY Times reported. Research had shown the virus could not survive in high-order primates, including humans, and NASA officials emphasized it was not one of the forms known to cause a variety of ailments in humans. The agency had spent more than a year trying to assess the risk possibilities to astronauts. (NYT, Feb 14/85, B8)
Japan nominated three astronaut candidates, one a woman, to fly in January 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, a UPI bulletin in NASA Current News said. The one selected to fly would become the first Japanese in space. Those selected were Takao Doi, a researcher at a NASA center; Mamoru Mori, assistant professor of nucleonics at Hokkaido University; and Chiaki Naito, an assistant at Keio University's Medical School in Tokyo. Japan's National Space Development Agency selected them from among 533 applicants. The Japanese astronaut would conduct a 12-minute experiment during Columbia's one-week mission. The other two candidates would serve as backups. The three would take further medical and space simulation tests at Johnson Space Center and then undergo training before selection in May 1987 of the astronaut to fly on the mission. (UPI bulletin in NASA Current News, Aug 7/ 85) Launch Vehicles
NASA announced it would alter its process of soliciting astronaut applications for pilot and mission specialist positions to one where it would accept applications from civilians on a continuing basis beginning August 1, 1985, and nominees from the military on an annual basis. NASA would make selections in the spring of each year with successful candidates reporting in the summer. Mission requirements and attrition rate of the current astronaut corps would determine number of candidates selected. (NASA Release 8589)
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51 —J landed just after 10 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, ending a four-day flight operated under secrecy rules imposed by the Department of Defense (DOD), the Washington Post reported. "Of course, I can't say anything about our mission," said flight commander Karol Bobko, an Air Force colonel and one of five military men on the mission, "but I can say Atlantis performed superbly its first time in space. I've flown Challenger, Atlantis, and Discovery now, and I think that NASA really has quite a fleet of orbiters and that we have a great national asset here," he added. NASA ground operations manager Fritz Widick said Atlantis was in "excellent condition" at the end of the 1.7 million-mile flight, although engineers were inspecting an underside area of the left wing to see if tile-insulation damage might have exposed its aluminum mainframe to reentry heat. Such heat might have discolored a region along the portside engine pod under the Space Shuttle's tail. Widick said Atlantis's brakes came through the 190 mph landing on the lake-bed with only "minor damage" to one of four brake assemblies on the main landing gear. Bobko appeared to apply minimum braking after landing into a stiff headwind that brought Atlantis to a stop on the center line halfway down the 15,000-foot desert runway. Fewer than a dozen reporters and about two dozen NASA employees were present for the landing, an event that usually drew hundreds of spectators, the NY Times reported. The military gave just 24 hours notice of when the mission would end and had barred members of the public from watching. (W Post, Oct 8/85, A3; NYT, Oct 8/85, C3) Air Force Maj. Ronald Rand said the Department of Defense (DOD) approved dissemination of information about the payload because it was experimental and not designed to carry out an operational mission. He said there were two payloads: an assembly of six space physics experiments that would remain in the Space Shuttle's open cargo bay and an experimental airplanedetecting experiment. "In light of the mounting Congressional and public interest in this historic first manned polar orbit and first west coast shuttle mission, we've made an exception to our policy with the understanding that we'll continue to protect performance data and results of these two experiments," Rand said. "This doesn't mean we've changed our policy of classifying DOD payloads." Flying aboard Discovery, which was scheduled for launch March 20, 1986, would be Comdr. Robert Crippen of the Navy; pilot Guy Gardner; astronauts Jerry Ross, Dale Gardner, and Richard Mullane; Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward Aldridge; Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson; and a DOD specialist to tend the cargo. (NYT, Oct 11/85, A6)
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-F made major progress in fixing the instrument pointing system (IPS) for a $60 million solar telescope, the Washington Post reported; and flight planners moved closer to extending the mission one day to make up for lost sunwatching time. The extension would have Challenger landing in California after eight days in orbit. The IPS's improved operation enabled the astronauts to increase the pace of their observations of the sun, the only star close enough for detailed study. Although the balky telescope mount late in the evening again failed to work properly, the Space Shuttle scientists manually locked the telescope on target. New computer commands radioed earlier from earth had helped solve some initial problems with the IPS, and it aimed its three solar telescopes precisely at specific spots on the sun, holding them there for a few minutes each time. However, the steadiness did not last. During one long sun-sighting period, astronaut-physicist Loren Acton said the solar chronosphere, a layer of gas that resembled a flaming forest, appeared more active than he had suspected. The phenomenon was dubbed the "Acton effect." A decision to extend Challengers's mission depended largely on the orbiter's supply of hydrogen for generating electricity. {W Post, Aug 3/85, A10)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
NASA announced that a NASA scientist and a Stanford University engineer developed the bone stiffness analyzer, an instrument that might aid in treating bone fractures and bone-weaking diseases including osteoporosis, which afflicted millions of the elderly. The two originally developed the instrument, which measured bone mass and stiffness, to help scientists combat bone loss that might occur during long-term spaceflights, particularly on manned space stations or extended space journeys such as trips to Mars. The instrument was based on a theory, initially demonstrated by Dr. Donald Young, a physiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center, that bone behaved as a structural beam and that well-developed concepts for testing the stiffness and displacement properties of structural beams could be applied to measuring the same properties in arm and leg bones. Dr. Charles Steele, professor of mechanical engineering at Stanford University, adapted the instrument for clinical application. The analyzer gauged the bone's resistance to a small amount of pressure applied to the forearm or leg bone, while the subject's arm or leg was positioned so the ends were immobile. The instrument's probe, an electromagnetic "shaker" or iron core wrapped with wire, was placed at mid bone and current was run through it, causing the bone to vibrate. A microprocessor then measured the bone's displacement using algorithms stored in its memory, deducing the bone's stiffness and effective mass. Since the analyzer responded quickly—a test took less than one minute and did not damage the bone or tissue—the analyzer might have wide applications for screening diseases such as osteoporosis, which weakened bones but was usually diagnosed only after a fracture occurred when the disease was well advanced. Although the bone analyzer could not be used on the spine where osteoporosis often first appeared, it could detect the disease long before X-rays, which did not show evidence of change until after at least 20% bone loss. Steele was planning to adapt the device for use on fingers, which also showed early evidence of the bone disease. Since the analyzer could also monitor a bone's strength as it healed, the device might also aid in the treatment of fractures. The analyzer's quantitative measure of bone strength could replace the inference and guesswork that usually was the basis for a decision on removing a cast from a fractured bone. After three years of clinical testing on more than 300 subjects, Steele believed the device was at a useful level of precision. To find normal values for bone stiffness, Young and Steele tested participants in the Stanford Invitational Rugby Tournament in 1984. In the coming year, they would conduct more tests on healthy subjects and a data search to find normal "loads," the amount of stresses and strains needed to maintain healthy bones. After further tests, Young and Steele planned to use the instrument to create an exercise program for maintaining bone strength during the weightless environment associated with extended spaceflight missions when bones tended to atrophy. Young hoped to develop a program efficient enough to place the necessary stresses on bones through short periods of daily exercise. "It would be great if it could be done in an hour a day," Young commented. He believed a trampoline-like device, with restraints to hold the body, might be effective. Eventually, the analyzer itself might go into space with astronauts, who could test their own bone strength, perhaps determining when they needed to return to earth. (NASA Release 85, 163)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with Space Industries, Inc. (Sll) for the company to construct and operate an industrial space facility (ISF), the first habitable privately owned commercial platform in space, which NASA would deploy from the Space Shuttle. Sll also signed a separate agreement with NASA's space station office that would provide for exchange of information during the definition and preliminary design phase of the space station. The agreement laid the groundwork for subsequent discussions and negotiations during the space station development period to begin in mid-1987. Sll was the first private company to sign an agreement with NASA's space station office to share information that could result in a commercial facility capable of compatible operations with the space station. The modular ISF would initially measure 35 by 14.5 feet. Although not intended to be permanently manned, it would be habitable and provide a shirt sleeve work environment for astronauts when docked with either the Space Shuttle or space station. NASA Administrator James Beggs said, "We hope the ISF will be the first of many such platforms to be funded and built by private industry that will complement the permanently manned space station and lead eventually to an industrial park in space." Max Faget, president of Sll, said, "The facility is scheduled to be deployed in 1989 and will respond to a variety of private research and manufacturing needs. Industry could take advantage of the unique gravity-free environment of space to conduct experiments that cannot be effectively duplicated here on earth." Sll considered the cost of building the ISF to be proprietary. Under the novel agreement, a provision stipulated that Sll would reimburse NASA for all costs incurred by the government associated with the deployment of the ISF when it became operational and was revenue generating. (NASA Release 85119)
The U.S. Air Force announced today that it had selected Air Force Undersecretary Edward "Pete" Aldridge to fly on the first Space Shuttle mission launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Arizona Daily Star reported. The Air Force said Aldridge and Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson would serve as payload specialists with five astronauts named by NASA for the Defense Department's mission set for launch March 20, 1986. Aldridge, 47, who had been Air Force undersecretary since 1981, said in a statement, "I'm thrilled at the opportunity and thrilled at the prospects that I will be able to apply what I have learned to expanding U.S. efforts in space." NASA and the U.S. Air Force were building the Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch facility primarily for military missions. Because the Space Shuttle could be launched from there directly south, it could go into a north-south orbit that covered the entire globe, passing over both poles and allowing Space Shuttle crews to observe Soviet military forces anywhere in the world. Space Shuttles launched from Kennedy Space Center could not go directly north or south because they would fly over inhabited areas during the initial minutes of flight, possibly endangering the population if something went wrong. Those Space Shuttles launched into east-west orbits did not fly any closer than about 2000 miles to the poles. (Ariz. Daily Star, Sept 12/85, A3)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1985 activities, which included nine Space Shuttle flights and launches of three Atlas Centaurs, two Scouts, and an Aerobee vehicle, its last flight. In 1985 NASA introduced the last and lightest-weight Space Shuttle orbiter—Atlantis. McDonnell Douglas inaugurated its upper stage booster, the Payload Assist Module D-2. Fifty two individuals flew aboard Space Shuttles in 1985. Of this group 19 were scientists performing observations, experiments, or investigations; 27 were U.S. military officers, and six were payload specialists from foreign countries (Mexico, Saudi Arabia, France, the Netherlands, and two from West Germany). The 52 individuals' combined time in space was nearly 55 days or over 880 earth orbits, for a combined travel distance of nearly 22 million miles. Six Space Shuttle astronauts spent a total of more than a day in extravehicular activities during the year. Two Spacelab missions aboard the Space Shuttle and an encounter by the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) with Comet Giacobini-Zinner highlighted the year for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	167 ^^LLLLjWTENTlONAai 8LANK On April 19, 1985, a little more than a year after President Reagan directed NASA to develop within a decade a permanently manned space station, NASA awarded competitive contracts to eight industry teams for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements of the station. NASA signed a memorandum of understanding with Canada, the European Space Agency, and Japan for cooperation during the definition and preliminary design phase of the program. NASA's aeronautical research and technology efforts included continuing work on such programs as the NASA/Department of Defense X-29 X-wing research aircraft, the tilt rotor/JVX aircraft, the advanced X-29 aircraft featuring a forward-swept wing, and the mission adaptive wing that could change its curvature. In the area of space technology, Langley Research Center completed development, assembly, and testing of a 15-meter hoop column deployable structure and antenna system. Other advances in space technology included significant modification to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to measure dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for design and testing for the space station space reactor power program, and completion of space construction experiments outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA's advances in space tracking and data systems included transition from ground network station support for low earth-orbiting spacecraft to use of the first Tracking and Data Relay Satellite in geosynchronous orbit. NASA had scheduled TDRS-2 and 3 for launch in January and July 1986, respectively. In February NASA completed consolidation of the Deep Space Network (DSN) and later an upgrade of the network that would enable the DSN to receive significantly more images from Voyager as it encountered Uranus in January 1986. NASA's Office of Commercial Programs funded and opened the first five of a planned series of centers for commercial development of space, which NASA expected would become self-supporting through research collaboration by industry, academia, and government agencies. (NASA Release 85177)
The Circumnavigators Club in New York City would present Sally Ride, the first American woman astronaut, with its Order of Magellan, the Washington Post reported, which was presented to individuals who were dedicated to advancing peace and understanding in all parts of the world and who had circumnavigated the globe. Ride was only the 17th person to receive the award. Other recipients were Gen. Douglas MacArthur, former President Hoover, Neil Armstrong, Sen. Barry Goldwater, Lowell Thomas, and Thor Heyerdahl. (W Post, Nov 11/85, C3)
The Coca-Cola Co. had developed the first container capable of dispensing carbonated beverages in weightlessness, and NASA officials said Coca-Cola could be aboard Space Shuttle flights as early as July, the Washington Post reported. Coca-Cola President Donald Keough said that including carbonated soft drinks on a Space Shuttle flight reflected NASA's interest in providing home-like comforts for the astronauts. Because liquids did not pour in weightlessness, astronauts had to sip drinks from straws inserted into plastic containers that collapsed as they were emptied. However, gas in carbonated drinks expanded in weightlessness and low atmospheric pressure and therefore could escape from plastic containers. A company spokesman said Coca-Cola had solved the problem with a steel supercan equipped with a drinking spout, a screw to adjust beverage flow, and a safety lock to prevent leaks. (WPost, May 9/85, A8)
NASA launched today at 2:50 p.m. EST the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-C with its five-man military crew to carry out secret military objectives, the NY Times reported. NASA, which had delayed launch due to subfreezing temperatures [see STS/Launch Schedules, Jan. 23], did not announce liftoff time until nine minutes before launch. One and a half hours after launch, Houston Mission Control reported the Space Shuttle had reached its intended orbit, the altitude and position of which were secret. How long the astronauts would remain in orbit was unknown; although most Space Shuttle flights lasted five to eight days, the apparent Discovery mission to launch a single satellite might limit it to three or four days. Discovery carried a 32,000-lb. propulsion, inertial upper stage capable of boosting a large satellite to 22,300 miles above the equator south of the USSR. This was the first test of the rocket system since a predecessor had misfired on a Space Shuttle mission in April 1983. Many newspapers had already published reports, based on information in the aerospace trade press and other unclassified documents, that the secret payload was an electronic spy satellite. Both the U.S. and USSR had engaged in electronic eavesdropping from orbit for several years, and the USSR had obtained many of the plans and engineering information for the earlier U.S. electronic reconnaissance satellite Rhyolite. The Carter administration had cancelled an advanced version of Rhyolite, the Argus, but the Reagan administration had revived the project. Most reports described the Discovery's payload as the most advanced and sensitive form of orbital electronic spying. The Air Force began an investigation to find the officials or contractor employees who had provided information about the secret payload aboard Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Inquiries were not aimed at news organizations, Michael Burch, a Department of Defense (DOD) spokesman, had said. When questioned about a photo of an early-warning satellite published on the cover of Aviation Week, Burch said the picture should not have appeared. However, the Pentagon later acknowledged that the Air Force had given the photo to the magazine after determining it was unclassified. Burch refused to say what action the government would take if it could identify those who leaked information on the Space Shuttle mission. Brig. Gen. Richard Abel had previously warned reporters not to speculate about the Space Shuttle's cargo. After the Washington Post had reported it was an intelligence satellite intended to eavesdrop on the USSR, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the story might have given "aid and comfort to the enemy." Abel later had told a Univ. of Georgia journalism class that little or nothing in the Post story was not available from public sources. Aviation Week's January 21 issue had described the Pentagon's next generation of early-warning surveillance satellites, which would monitor missile and spacecraft launches from Soviet territory and be protected against Soviet laser weapons. {NYT, Jan 25/85, A1; W Post, Jan 25/85, A3)
NASA announced it would test on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, scheduled for mid-July 1985, a Coca Cola Co. technology, developed at its own initiative and expense, to dispense its carbonated beverage in space [see NASA/Technology Transfer, May 9]. Previously it was impossible for astronauts to consume carbonated soft drinks in microgravity because there was no way to dispense the beverages. The test was part of an agreement between NASA and Coca-Cola under which the company would grant NASA a license to use the company's patented technology, a specially designed can, for unrestricted use in dispensing carbonated beverages in space. NASA would also receive the technical information necessary to fabricate its own cans. NASA added that other companies in the carbonated beverage industry were welcome to propose different technology for the same purpose. (NASA Release 85-96)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
Researchers in the Workload and Ergonomics Branch of the Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory were working to adapt machines to pilots rather than the traditional other way around, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "The success or failure of a modern Air Force aircraft and mission depends on whether the pilot has the ability to handle the unpredictable situations typical in a wartime environment," said Maris Vikmanis, supervisory industrial engineer for the lab. He explained that laboratory researchers studied how pilots performed in different environments, including combat, to provide information to aircraft designers so that future aircraft would be better adapted to pilots. But he pointed out there was more to it than simply assessing new aircrafts' cockpit designs. "Not only do we have to observe how the pilot performs in the aircraft cockpit, we also have to tap into the pilot himself," Vikmanis explained. "We must know how much effort the pilot is expending, his mental capability, and his workload limitation." In analyzing cockpit design, researchers checked into how well a pilot could see and reach cockpit controls and displays. Only in existence as an aerospace research field since 1979, workload research measured both the pilot's performance and his internal state of wellbeing. By combining experiments in the laboratory and in flight, lab researchers measured human performance/workload using three different methods. First, researchers used a computer-based performance test to measure a pilot's physical and mental action. By having the pilot perform up to 11 different tasks, researchers could characterize various aspects of human behavior. Second, pilots answered, after flying a simulator or an actual aircraft, subjective questions about their experience. A third method measured human performance/workload from a physiological viewpoint by collecting and analyzing variable responses of the human brain, heart, muscles, and visual system. Lab scientists and engineers used the test data to prepare a workload scale, which focused on problems the pilot, aircrew, and the aircraft itself might encounter in the future. NASA was applying similar methodology to the Space Shuttle and its crew, particularly to examine the effects on astronauts of microgravity as an element of stress. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 7)
I. V. Franklin, manager of future projects at British Aerospace Dynamics Group's Space and Communications Division, said at a recent international space meeting in Italy that British Aerospace had completed preliminary definition of a 50- by 60-foot-long, 24,250-lb. unmanned platform that Europe could develop as part of its Columbus space station program, Aviation Week reported. The platform would use a long beam as a common backbone that would contain docking ports for standardized plugin payload and resources modules. A single Space Shuttle flight would carry the basic platform into orbit, and the company envisioned that astronauts could assemble it in six hours of extravehicular activity. Franklin said the company would submit the platform proposal to the European Space Agency as one of the work packages in Europe's Columbus program. "The space platform is of particular interest to Europe, following President Reagan's invitation for international participation in the space station program," Franklin continued, "because it represents an element with relatively few direct interfaces to the rest of the program. Although it is not a 'core' component, it would be an important component of the space station complex and [a component] in which there would be substantial European user interest. The platform provides a point for reducing space operation costs at a price that Europe could afford." In addition to evaluating the platform in low earth orbit in conjunction with the U.S. manned Space Station, British Aerospace also considered the platform in a polar, sun synchronous orbit. The polar-orbiting platform offered possibilities for earth observation and earth resources missions. U.S. officials had encouraged European development of the polar platform to supplement low earth orbit activities performed on board the manned Space Station and its associated free-flying elements. "The polar platform does not need to work with a manned space station— and indeed, it cannot until a station facility is available in polar orbit," Franklin said. "The platform can be man-tended by a polar orbiting shuttle, although the shuttle's altitude is well below that of the platform." This problem could be overcome by using the platform's on-board propulsion to deorbit and dock with the Space Shuttle for payload replacement, repair, and maintenance and then return to the operational altitude. Franklin concluded that the concept of a polar space platform was justified by the level of user interest in both Europe and the U.S. and by the relatively favorable economics when compared with other systems. "The polar platform does not require use of a manned space station, and it therefore is not paced by development of the space station," he noted. (AvWk, Apr 8/85, 60)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
Astronauts Maj. Jerry Ross of the Air Force and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring of the Army today stepped outside the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B for the second construction exercise in the weightlessness of space [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Nov. 30], the NY Times reported. To TV viewers on earth, the two appeared to manipulate with ease the heavy structures they were building, although both were sweating and breathing heavily after the first 20 minutes of work. Two hours into the spacewalk, they reported that though their hands, feet, and backs were moist with sweat, they were working comfortably. The purpose of today's spacewalk was the same as previously, to test the efficiency of techniques to build a 45-foot-high aluminum tower. However, the astronauts changed the way they worked and had the assistance of astronaut Dr. Mary Cleave, who was operating the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm. She moved the men from place to place as their work required. Later in the exercise, the Washington Post reported, Ross and Spring took turns stringing cable along the four-story metal frame they had constructed, just as future crews might lay cable for a space station. They also removed parts of the tower and replaced them with other parts, simulating a space repair. NASA officials commented after the first spacewalk on November 30 that the work had proved more taxing than expected, perhaps because the astronauts' gloves, unlike the rest of their spacesuits, were not air-conditioned and could not carry away excess heat. Most of the work had entailed repeated squeezing and twisting with the hands. Ross and Spring said after the exercise that they would not want to repeat it before having a day of rest. They indicated that the activity had left their hands so numb and fatigued that they had trouble fastening the airlock of the Space Shuttle as they reentered it. NASA officials did note they were favorably surprised by the astronauts' rapid improvement in performance as they learned from successive repetitions of the exercise. (NYT, Dec 2/85, B6; W Post, Dec 2/85, A3)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center (LeRC) was developing a liquid droplet radiator intended to solve the problem of dissipating heat that builds up inside a spacecraft, allowing a livable temperature for astronauts. Heat removal was currently accomplished through a heavy, bulky, rigid metal heat transfer system, which added considerable weight to the spacecraft. The LeRC system would use the surface of a liquid coolant to radiate away excess heat and save as much as 90% of the current hardware weight. The system entailed exposing a moving stream of hot droplets, the diameter of a human hair, directly into space, allowing the heat to radiate from the droplets' surface. In the process, a generator would eject the droplets into a collector where they would rejoin to form a liquid; the system would then recirculate and reuse this coolant. Selection or development of a heat transfer fluid with proper vapor pressure and a sufficiently long life was essential to the project. Also crucial to system feasibility was development of a micromachining capability to produce holes with 0.002-in. diameters for use in the liquid droplet generator. "This is a very advanced concept," Alden Presler, LeRC program manager, said. "The technology we're developing here at Lewis will result in a very lightweight and compact piece of hardware." (NASA Release 85-53)
Astronauts aboard the orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F released today a six-and-a-half-foot-long drum-shaped satellite, the Plasma Diagnostics Package, from the orbiter's payload bay, shot it with a looping beam from an electron gun, and then retrieved it with the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm, the NY Times reported. One purpose of the demonstration was to study the electrical effects the Space Shuttle had as it moved through the electrically charged gases of the ionosphere, effects which occasionally caused the Space Shuttle to emit a soft golden glow. Researchers considered solving that riddle important to the success of future mission, which would carry sensitive instruments that the aura might disturb. Another goal was to achieve a better understanding of the aurora, known in the northern hemisphere as the northern lights, which was a disturbance in the atmosphere that created bright lights in the night sky over polar regions. The astronauts reported seeing flashes of light as the beam followed natural magnetic lines to the satellite, the Washington Post reported; the newspaper said scientists on the ground called the demonstration "a fabulous success." (NYT, Aug 2/85, D14; W Post, Aug 2/85, A4)
The Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) office said today that the Space Shuttle Discovery would participate in June in the first SDI experiment in orbit, carrying a mirror intended to intercept and reflect a laser beam fired from earth, the Washington Post reported. In some missile defense systems, a large orbiting mirror would receive a powerful beam from a ground-based laser and reflect it to destroy an enemy missile, but in the space shuttle experiment, the laser beam would be too weak to harm the spacecraft. A small mirror would reflect the beam back to the ground so engineers could verify their ability to keep the laser pointed at the orbiting mirror. The laser would travel from an Air Force Base on Maui, Hawaii, and bounce back by a special 8-in.-diameter "retroreflector" that astronauts would place in one of the Space Shuttle's middeck side windows while the spacecraft was over the Pacific. An SDI spokesman said the laser had successfully tracked during earlier tests an airplane carrying the mirror at an altitude of 30,000 feet. The Space Shuttle flew in orbit at 100 miles and more. The test, called the high precision tracking experiment, was the first in a series that the SDI office had booked aboard the Space Shuttle. Beginning in 1987,	the Pentagon would fly two major SDI experiments each year. (IV Post, May 24/85, A8) During May: Brigadier General Robert Rankine, Jr,, U.S. Air Force, writing in Aerospace about the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), said that, "In the long term, we have confidence that SDI will be a crucial means by which both the U.S. and the Soviet Union can safely agree to very deep reductions and eventually even the elimination of ballistic missiles and the nuclear weapons they carry. This does not represent a shift from the basic deterrent strategy of the U.S., but represents a new means for enhancing deterrence. ". . . A ballistic missile defense capability has the potential of increasing deterrence and adding to stability, by increasing substantially the uncertainties in the success of nuclear attack by an enemy, thoroughly confounding his targeting strategy, thus significantly reducing or eliminating the utility of preemptive attack. The system need not be perfect to accomplish this objective, but most meet three important criteria: —effective against the systems and countermeasures that exist or could be deployed, —sufficiently survivable that it would not encourage an attack on the system itself . . . —effective at lower cost than any proliferation or countermeasure attempts to overcome it. ". . . Some of the opponents of the Strategic Defense Initiative," Rankine said, "have argued that the research and technology program currently under way is inconsistent with the ABM treaty and conflicts with arms control in general. Quite to the contrary, the initiative it totally consistent with current U.S. ABM treaty obligations. The initiative contemplates only research and experimentation on a broad range of defense technologies to provide the basis for a decision in the future whether or not to develop systems which would provide an effective ballistic missile defense capability." Rankine then described the technical scope of SDI and said the program was broken into five major program elements: surveillance, acquisition, tracking and kill, assessment; directed energy weapons; kinetic energy weapons; systems analysis and battle management; and an assortment of other high-priority technologies that did not warrant separate program elements. Rankine concluded that the goal for SDI had not changed since the President's March 1983 speech proposing the system, when he "challenged all of us in the scientific community to create a means for rendering ballistic missiles impotent and obsolete." (Aerospace, Spring 85, 2)
The Celestis Group, an organization of Florida undertakers, signed a contract with Space Services, Inc., headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original seven U.S. astronauts and based in Houston, to orbit a payload of cremated human remains at 1,900 miles high, the NY Times reported. The mission, scheduled for late 1986 or early 1987, would cost about $15 million. The Department of Transportation (DOT), which must approve the contract, indicated it had no immediate objections. In 1982 Space Services had become the first private company to launch its own rocket, the 36-foot Conestoga, into suborbital flight. The company's original liquid-fuel rocket had exploded on the launching pad a year before. The space-burial mission would use a second-generation Conestoga capable of putting 1,500 lb. into orbit. John Cherry, who had formed the Celestis Group, said that a Conestoga nose cone could contain as many as 13,000 capsules, each 3/8 inches by 1/4 inches, holding ashes reduced in volume by a Celestis-developed technique. Burial price would be $3,900 a customer. A reflective material would cover the nose cone in the first launch, enabling viewing of the satellite mausoleum as it passed overhead. Later missions would be deep-space burials, in which the nose cone would eject the capsules for dispersion into the cosmos. The Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 empowered the DOT to license all commercial space launchings. DOT examined proposals for their effect on public safety, national security, and international treaty obligations. (NY'^Jan 25/85, A13)
30 p.m. they had done in four hours a job given them to complete in five. NASA referred to the first activity as ACCESS (assembly concept for construction of erectable space structures), researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center explained, and the second as EASE (experimental assembly of structures in extravehicular activity). Together they were the first flight demonstration of construction of large space structures, so called because they were distinguished by different assembly methods and physical characteristics. The astronauts used no tools in the construction, rather they snapped together prefabricated components to form the EASE/ACCESS structures. EASE/ACCESS should provide NASA with valuable on-orbit construction experience as well as a comparison of assembly rates and techniques used in space to those used during simulations on the ground and in neutral buoyancy water tank tests. The activity should also help evaluate potential assembly and maintenance concepts and techniques for the proposed space station and identify ways to improve erectable structures to ensure productivity, reliability, and safety. TV views at NASA Headquarters showed the astronauts trading places twice during their work and appearing in almost complete control of a job that had never been done before in space. Ross had the only complaint, saying his gloved hands were sweating and that he was using too much oxygen. When the two had finished assembling the six required pyramids, astronaut David Leetsma at mission control told them to take a break. "I'd be willing to do at least one more," Ross replied. "It feels good to do some good hard work." The two then proceeded to begin work again. Spring once hit his feet against the tower, and Ross by mistake hit a switch with his hand that turned on an outside light, the only "accidents" that occurred during the exercise, although they triggered a warning from Atlantis's commander Brewster Shaw, Jr. "You guys are going great but just remember to be careful. The way that thing shakes up there, it's not going to be easy to chase anything down if it breaks loose," he cautioned. (WPost, Nov 30/85, A1; Marshall Space Flight Center Release 85-60)
The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) approved plans of a Florida-based undertakers and engineers' consortium to orbit in 1986 or early 1987 a mausoleum [see U.S. Space Policy/Commercialization, Jan. 25] with the announcement that the plan represented "a creative response to the president's initiative to encourage the commercial use of space," the Washington fast reported. The approval was the first granted by the DOT'S new licensing authority for commercial space activities and followed checks with the Department of Defense, the State Department, and NASA. The mausoleum's 1,900 mile-high orbit would place the spacecraft in the Van Allen radiation belts, a region of space rarely used by other spacecraft. The mausoleum would be in the nose cone of a rocket, Conestoga 2, designed and built by Space Service Inc. (SSI), a Houston firm headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original Project Mercury astronauts. Conestoga 1, a one-stage rocket, had made a successful test flight in 1982. The Celestis Group, Melbourne, Florida, would pay SSI $14 million to put the 300 lb. cargo into orbit and charge $3,900 per cremated body. A Celestis spokesman said that since announcement of its plans, the group had received hundreds of calls from people wanting to sign up. Slayton said seven or eight other companies had approached him about setting up similar businesses. (WPost, Feb 13/85, A2)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that Warren North, JSC specialist in astronaut selection and training, retired February 1 after 38 years with NASA. North had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA's predecessor agency) in 1947 as a test-pilot engineer at LeRC. In 1959 North had transferred to NASA Headquarters, where he participated in early planning for Project Mercury, including selection and training of the seven original Mercury astronauts; in 1962 North assumed leadership of the JSC division responsible for training astronauts for Gemini rendezvous and docking development flights and for the Apollo lunar landing program. North was currently special assistant to the JSC flight-operations director for planning Space Shuttle crew training and flight-simulation equipment and techniques. North received a bachelor's degree from Purdue University and master's degrees from Case Institute of Technology and Princeton University. (JSC Release 85-7)
The Congressional Record reported the remarks of Cong. Frank Annunzio (D-lll.) during a U.S. House session on May 22. ". . . Today I am introducing legislation to strike medals in commemoration of the Young Astronaut Program. The medals would be sold by the Young Astronaut Council to raise money to help fund the program. ". . . The Young Astronaut Program is designed to use the excitement of the United States space program to increase student interest and skills in math and science through a comprehensive program in elementary and junior high schools. ". . . This September, the council will launch its 'Decade of Discovery.' Already more than 20,000 schools have responded to the program. The council estimates every elementary and junior high school in the nation will be signed up for the program by the beginning of the next school year. ". . . To assist the council, and commemorate the'Decade of Discovery,' the Young Astronaut Program Medal Act will authorize the United States Mint to strike up to 750,000 gold, silver, and bronze medals for the council to sell to raise money for this exciting educational endeavor. The council will pay the mint the cost of manufacture plus a 10 percent surcharge. "... I urge my colleagues to join with me in cosponsoring this worthwhile legislation." (CR-House, May 22/85, H3585)
NASA announced it was discussing with representatives of the Chilean Government possible arrangements for landing support for the Space Shuttle in the event of an emergency during launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The discussions were consistent with arrangements made with other countries since 1981 supporting launches from Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning provided for emergency landing options for all phases of the flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. Since the first launch of the Space Shuttle from KSC, NASA had plans for each mission for trans-Atlantic landing sites (TAL) and contingency landing sites (CLS) in addition to the primary landing sites. This was consistent with relevant international agreements relating to the rescue and recovery of astronauts in distress and return of the space vehicle. Space Shuttle launches, scheduled to begin from Vandenberg in early 1986, required one or more trans-Pacific landing (TPL) and CLS sites in the Pacific Basin. NASA had determined that Mataveri Airfield on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) could serve as a Space Shuttle TPL/CLS in the event of an emergency. A Chilean contractor was working on preliminary designs for minor improvements at the airfield, which would be necessary in the event an agreement was reached. Improvements would be in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island. Any actual improvements were contingent on final agreement with the Government of Chile. (NASA Release 85-74)
During Space Shuttle mission 51-1 astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher spent seven hours and eight minutes, a new record for a spacewalk, in the first stage of repair of the Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. During the walk, they retrieved the 15,000-lb. satellite, fastened Discovery's mechanical arm onto it, disarmed its Minuteman rocket motor, and exposed its electronic connections. Later Fisher said he could see no evidence of what caused the satellite to go dead after astronauts deployed it in April. "There is no evidence of debris on anything that would cause a problem. It's clean as a whistle," He said. Van Hoften and Fisher were outside the Space Shuttle from about 8:00 a.m. to shortly after 3:00 p.m. EDT, breaking by one minute the spacewalk record set April 1984 by van Hoften and George Nelson when they repaired the scientific satellite Solar Max. Although the astronauts accomplished more than half of what was needed in the salvage mission, they were planning a four-hour spacewalk on September 1 to finish the job. They would put a "space blanket" over the engine bell that served as the Minuteman motor's rocket nozzle to trap more of the sun's heat to warm it, because Leasat-3 had been in the cold of space so long that its rocket motor was too cold to fire correctly. Then the astronauts would install a vertical bar along the 20-foot length of the satellite to serve as a handle for van Hoften to spin the satellite and push it away from Discovery into space. It would then be seven days before the satellite acquired enough power to thaw its liquid-fuel tanks and almost two months before the solid-fuel rocket motor was warm enough for ground controllers to command it to ignite. (W Post, Sept 1/85, A5)
Astronaut Robert F. Overmyer announced that he planned to leave NASA, on June 1, and retire from the Marine Corps. His past accomplishments include piloting the November 1982 Columbia mission and serving as commander of the April 1985 Challenger flight. Colonel Overmyer joined NASA in September 1969. (NASA Release 8648)
Al Louviere, who headed a team of engineers at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, recommended to Shuttle Program Director Arnold Aldrich that an escape system be built into orbiters. Equipped with pressure suits and an oxygen supply, astronauts could bail out of the aircraft while it was in gliding flight below 100,000 feet. Although no specific plan was given, Louviere stressed the fact that no escape system could have saved the Challenger crew. (p Inq, Jul 2/86)
Astronaut Joe H. Engle retired from the United States Air Force as a colonel and resigned from NASA. After coming to NASA in 1966, he commanded Columbia and Discovery flights and was named Deputy Associate Administrator, in March 1982, for the Office of Space Flight. (NASA Release 86166; W Post, Dec 3/86)
Astronaut Frederick H. Hauck, former Navy Captain, was appointed Acting Associate Administrator for External Relations. He was commander of STS51A and pilot for STS7, as well as a member of the support crew for STS1 and reentry capsule communicator on the support crew for STS2. In midOctober, Kenneth S. Pedersen would become the Deputy Associate Administrator, upon his return from Georgetown University. Since 1979, he had been Director, International Affairs Division and Assistant Associate Administrator for External Affairs. Hauck's duties included policy level management and direction and coordination of the Agency's relationships with public and private organizations. (NASA Release 86130)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident released its report, two hundred pages, plus appendices, that recommended reorganization of NASA's management structure. Other changes cited by the Commission included more rigid quality control, reorganization of the lines of communication in the NASA chain of command, a larger role for NASA astronauts in Shuttle matters, and a Shuttle escape system. By the time these conclusions were announced, the report had been sent to the printers; it was scheduled to be on President Ronald Reagan's desk by June 9. (Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident; W Post, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; B Sun, Jun 3/86; Jun 10/86; NY Times, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86; WSJ, Jun 4/86; Jun 10/86)
Evidence revealed the Challenger crew cabin did not explode with the midair accident, but remained intact until it struck the water. The cabin, said engineers, was seven times stronger than other parts of the Shuttle because it had to maintain an Earthlike atmosphere while in space. All seven astronauts, however, were probably killed instantly by shock from the initial blast, sudden depressurization of the cabin, or the tumbling ninemile descent. (W Post, Apr 10/86; NY Times, Apr 10/86; W Times, Apr 10/86; CSM, Apr 10/86; USA Today, Apr 10/86; C Trib, Apr 10/86)
Speaking to NASA employees, Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an intense safety program to include reassessment of Shuttle management structure, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for aborting Shuttle flights, and recertification of all critical Shuttle parts. He noted that "the business of flying in space is a bold business," and added, "We cannot print enough money to make it totally riskfree. But we certainly are going to correct any mistakes we have made...and we're going to get going ahead just as soon as we can." When the Shuttle Program resumes, he continued, the first Shuttle would be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards Air Force Base, in California. (USA Today, Mar 26/68; W Post, Mar 26/86; WSJ, Mar 26/86; NY Times, Mar 26/86; W Times, Mar 26/86)
Astronaut Paul J. Weitz was named deputy director of the Johnson Space Center (JCS), Houston, Texas. Past achievements include participation in the first astronaut visit to the Skylab, serving as commander of the sixth Space Shuttle mission, and serving as technical assistant to the JSC Director. (NASA Release
For the third time in 19 days, launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed. This time, a malfunction with Columbia's computer control failed to close an oxygen valve. Engineers were successful in closing the valve under manual control, but the additional time it was open resulted in 1,500 gallons to 3,000 gallons of oxygen entering the fuel lines to the main engine, lowering temperatures to an unacceptable level. With 15 flights slated for 1886, another attempt was immediately planned for January 7. The chief goal of the mission was to carry a $50 million communications satellite, Satcom, for RCA. When an RCA engineer announced that 8:47 PM was the cut off point for a launch that would later deliver the satellite at an optimum time, the mission was canceled. Scheduled to ride into space with NASA's astronauts and engineers was Florida's Democratic Congressman Bill Nelson, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications that oversees NASA's budget. (NY Times, Jan 7/86; W Post, Jan 7/86; P Inq, Jan 7/86; C Trib, Jan 7/86; W Times, Jan 7/86; B Sun, Jan 7/86)
Astronaut James Van Hoften announced his resignation from NASA to enter private industry. His past achievements include two Space Shuttle Flights and the position of Assistant Professor of Civil Engineering at the University of Houston. He was the fifth astronaut to leave NASA since the January 28 accident. (NASA Release 8678; USA Today, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jul 29/86)
NASA and SPACEHAB signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish cooperation for the latter's efforts to develop and market payload bay habitable modules, truncated metal cylinders that would be additions to the orbiter's crew department and connected by tunnel adapters. These modules, designed to increase the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle, would serve as additional living and work space for the astronauts by providing an additional 1,000 cubic feet. Another MOU, signed by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), was intended to give NASA access to Synthetic Aperture Radar data from the first European Remote Sensing Satellite for Government research purposes at the Fairbanks, Alaska, station0*that NASA was developing in connection with its Navy Remote Ocean Sensing Satellite System Scatterometer (NROSS). The data received from the ERS1 satellite, engineers hoped, would enhance NASAsupported polar ice research, NROSS, the Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation and Shuttle Imaging RadarC. NASA was then to exchange its Scatterometer and radar imagery for other ERS1 data of interest. The ERS1 was scheduled for launch in 1989. (NASA Release 866; 867; B Sun, Jan 17/86)
The Peoples Republic of China announced that it was nearing human space flight and was in the process of choosing astronauts for its planned Space Shuttle. It had built and was using an extensive training center and had solved many of the problems space has to offer, such as maintaining life support. No date was given as to when a craft would be built. (W Post, Sep 1/86; W Times, Sep 1/86)
A Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope for studying gamma ray sources in the universe was the basis for a $93,000 contract awarded to Martin Marietta. By housing the telescope inside of a Space Shuttle external liquid hydrogen tank, which is normally discarded just before the Shuttle achieves orbit, Martin Marietta deemed it possible that the unit could also be set into orbit. Telescope components would be carried in the cargo bay and assembled inside the emptied tank by astronauts, who could enter via an existing 36inch aft manhole port or through tank modifications. The satellite could then be pressurized to provide the needed environment for gamma ray detection technique; the rays would be converted to positrons and electrons that travel the length of the telescope emitting light. Gamma ray astronomy is essential to understanding the evolution of stars and the universe and the physical processes occurring in pulsars, quasars, and black holes. (NASA Release 86111)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command and former NASA astronaut, was appointed Associate Administrator for Space Flight. The new position called for Truly to head the Space Shuttle program and to direct NASA's Design and Data Analysis Task Force, which reviewed the Shuttle Challenger's January accident. He succeeded Jesse W. Moore in both of these roles. (NASA Release 8615; WSJ, Feb 20/86; NY Times, Feb 20/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; B Sun, Feb 21/86)
NASA and the Astronauts Memorial Foundation, Inc. announced plans to build a memorial at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, dedicated to astronauts who lost their lives while flying, training, or awaiting assignment to fly for the space agency. The memorial would honor the 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger crewFrancis Scobee, Michael Smith, Judith Resnik, Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, Christa McAuliffe, and Gregory Jarvis; the 1967 Apollo crewVirgil Grissom, Edward H. White II,0*and Roger Chaffee; Charles Bassett and Elliott See, killed in 1966, Theodore Freeman killed in 1964, and Clifton Williams killed in 1967all killed in T38 trainer aircraft accidents; and Edward Givens, killed in 1967 in an automobile accident. (NASA Release 8638)
For the first time since the Challenger accident, astronauts boarded a Space Shuttle; they took part in a mock countdown at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on the Atlantis. Computers halted the drill 25 seconds short of simulated engine firing, but officials deemed the test successful. (W Post Nov 19/86; NY Times, Nov 19/86)
Astronaut Owen K. Garriott planned to leave both NASA and government service during the current week. His past achievements include a 2month stay in space aboard Skylab and the 10day Spacelab 1 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 8675)
NASA extended a oneyear, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86184) 'J0** The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to a 10year, $99 million contract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the personnel, equipment, and supplies necessary to carry out duties at the Slidell Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86185) During 1986: The Space Shuttle Challenger accident and the subsequent investigation and recovery activities headed the list of prominent events for NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of note: Voyager 2 encountered the planet Uranus in January, continued with its journey and was expected to reach Neptune by 1989. A new baseline configuration was drafted for the Space Stationa major milestone for development. NASA and the Department of Defense initiated a joint AeroSpace Plane research program concerning vehicles capable of horizontal takeoff and landing, singlestage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle, and Dr. James C. Fletcher, for the second time, became Administrator of NASA. Two books concerning NASA endeavors were published in 1986. Joseph P. Allen's EnteringSpace deals with an astronaut's journey into the last frontier, and William E. Burrows' Deep Black looks into space espionage and national security. (NASA Release 86177)
Following a review of the wreckage and all other available data from the Challenger flight, copies of the final report on the investigation into the cause of death of the crew were released. Although NASA was unable to arrive at a positive determination, it seemed possible, after examining the transcripts from internal communication, that the crew was unaware of the events immediately preceding the breakup of the Release of the Challenger tapes to the news media, however, revealed that some members of the crew may have been aware of the accident. Seconds before the crash, pilot Michael Smith uttered the phrase "Ohoh" and subsequent to that other evidence revealed that a few astronauts attempted to use emergency air supply. The exact cause of death was never determined, but sources agreed that it was doubtful that the initial blast was sufficient to cause death or injury and whether any of the crew were able to maintain consciousness until the cabin struck the ocean's surface could not be determined. (NASA Release 86100; W Post, Jul 29/86; W Times, Jul 29/86; NY Times, Jul 29/86; WSJ, Aug 5/86)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
Astronaut Sally K. Ride was named Special Assistant to the Administrator for strategic planning, where she would be responsible for reviewing NASA's goals and objectives for near'40*tolongterm planning. Ride was a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle flights and a member of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86114)
NASA announced the creation of an Office of Exploration, responsible for coordinating the Agency's missions to "expand the human presence beyond the Earth." Dr. Sally K. Ride, who had been in charge of a NASA study group to determine U.S. goals in space, was named the Acting Assistant Administrator until midAugust 1987. h)(NASA Release 8787; H Post, June 2/87)h)0*0*0*June 3: An Information Science Division was established at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to conduct research in artificial intelligence for applications to space exploration. It was expected that artificial intelligence would be used to develop automated systems for all phases of space missions, from launch to mission control and for onboard operations. Artificial intelligence technology would also be used to advance spacecraft performance and safety, and would free astronauts from routine chores. Research in artificial intelligence and the development of automated system would be a joint effort between the Information Science Division, other NASA Centers, private industry, and academic institutions. (NASA Release 8789)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
NASA announced that it was studying four major initiatives to help determine the next major goal in space. The initiatives emerged from proposals by NASA's Strategic Planning Group and by a group headed by astronaut Dr. Sally Ride. The four initiatives were a considerably expanded study of Earth systems, an enhanced program of solar system exploration, establishment of a permanent scientific base on the moon, and human exploration of Mars preceded by untended missions. At the same time, the independent NASA Advisory Council recommended that exploration of Mars be the Nation's primary goal in space. (NASA Release 8736)
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
Top astronaut John W. Young told the Orlando Sentinel that he had been forced to resign as chief of NASA's astronaut office. Young claimed that his reassignment to a new post, as special assistant to the director for Shuttle engineering and safety, stemmed from his frequent criticism of NASA safety policies after the Challenger disaster. (LA Times, July 30/87)
NASA announced that 5 civilians and 10 military officers were selected as new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. Of the 15, 7 were chosen as pilot astronaut candidates and 8 as mission specialist candidates. The elite group also included the first Black woman, Dr. Mae C. Jemison, to be chosen for the program. (NASA Release 8793; NY Times, June 6/87; LA Times, June 6/87; H Chron, June 6/87)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehicle, Soyuz TM2, toward a rendezvous with the orbiting Mir space station. This was the first crewtended Soviet space launch since July 1986 and only the second launch in the Russian human space program to be shown live on Soviet television. Western experts speculated that the two astronauts would aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin link up operations with the Mir space station on February 7. NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C Trib, Feb
The first fullscale test of the redesigned Space Shuttle booster since the Challenger accident was labeled a spectacular success by all who watched it. The firing of the 126foot Shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains, witnessed by 300 officials from NASA and Morton Thiokol, Inc., the company that designed the booster rocket, was the first of six fullscale tests. Also present at this test were the five astronauts scheduled to fly the Space Shuttle in June 1988. (B Sun, May 28/87; NY Times, May 28/87; W Post, May 28/87)
NASA announced that two Shuttle crew escape systems would be tested in November at the Naval Weapons Center in China Lake, California, using dummies and Navy volunteers. NASA is toh)$0*0*0*make a decision early in 1988 on whichif eitherof the two systems would be installed aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. One of the escape systems involved the installation of twofootlong tractor rockets that would extract the astronauts through an open hatch. The other system consisted of a telescoping slide pole that would extend through the hatch for the crew members to slide down, away from the disabled spacecraft. The crew would be connected to the rocket or the slide pole with a lanyard. Neither system would be of use in a Challengertype explosion that occurred without warning. But either could function in the event of a main engine failure aborting the mission during launch. Both systems require the Shuttle to be equipped with a hatch that can be blown off the spacecraft in an emergency. (NASA Release 87170; H Chron, Nov 13/87; H Post, Nov 13/87; NY Times, Nov 14/87)
NASA announced that astronaut Dr. Sally K. Ride would leave the agency in Fall 1987. Dr. Ride, the first American woman to fly in space, would assume the position of Science Fellow at the Stanford University Center for International Security and Arms Control in Palo Alto, California. (NASA Release 8784; B Sun, May 27/87; NY Times, May 27/87; W Post, May 27/87; W Times, May 27/87)
Astronaut John A. McBride was named acting Assistant Administrator for Congressional Relations, effective September 1, 1987. He would replace John F. Murphy, who was appointed Chief of the Office of External Affairs at NASA's Ames Research Center, in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 87116)
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
The Canadian government announced that it would become an active partner in the international Space Station Program and would provide equipment worth $1.2 billion to the project. Canada's main equipment contribution to the Space Station would be a roving space robot that would serve as the "arms and legs" of the Station. The robot, which would be comparable to but more advanced than the "Canadarm" currently carried on U.S. Space Shuttles, would be a critical tool in Station construction and docking activities. In return for Canada's contribution, Canadian astronauts would be entitled to sixmonth tours of duty on the Station every two years. Canadian space officials announced plans to expand their astronaut corps in anticipation of the Canadian presence on the Space Station. (Tor Star, Apr 22/88)
A Soyuz TM7 spacecraft, carrying a joint SovietFrench crew, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, for a monthlong tour in the Mir space station. With French President Franois Mitterand in attendance, the threeman crew, which included French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, lifted off from Baikonur on the second FrenchSoviet crewtended mission. '(0*Chretien had also been aboard the first joint mission in July 1983. The threeman Soyuz crew planned to join the twoman crew, aboard Mir since January, to perform a series of scientific experiments. Additionally, Chretien was scheduled to become the first West European to perform a spacewalk. (FBISSov88228; SSR 1988 104A; NY Times, Nov 27/88; W Post, Nov 27/88; CSM, Nov 28/88)
A Soviet Proton launch vehicle, carrying a Soyuz TM5 spacecraft with a threeman SovietBulgarian crew, took off from the Baikonur launch facility. The Soyuz TM5 crew was to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station. The launch, which occurred at 10:04 a.m. EDT, was the first Soviet crewtended launch in 1988. The Mir visit was to be a 10day mission in which the visiting astronauts would perform over 40 experiments aboard the station. The two astronauts aboard Mir were to remain after the departure of their colleagues and continue a yearlong endurance0*mission that was expected to break the record established by Yuri Romanenko in 1987. (FBISSov88110, Jun 8/88; SSR 1988 048B; NY Times, Jun 8/88; B Sun, Jun 8/88)
Two Soviet cosmonauts and a French astronaut returned to Earth aboard a Soyuz TM6 capsule, following the completion by the Soviets of a record breaking yearlong endurance mission aboard the Mir space station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, launched into space on December 21, 1987, and French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, successfully landed their capsule in Kazakhstan. Titov and Manarov were to undergo extensive medical tests to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness. (FBISSov88245, Dec 21/88; NY Times, Dec 22/88; W Post, Dec 22/88; WSJ, Dec 22/88; CSM, Dec 22/88; B Sun, Dec 22/88; P Inq, Dec 22/88)
President George Bush announced the selection of Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, a former astronaut and head of the Space Shuttle program, to succeed Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator. The White House also announced that J.R. Thompson, Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, would be appointed NASA Deputy Administrator. Truly, a veteran of two Shuttle flights, was named to head the Shuttle program by Administrator Fletcher following the 1986 Challenger0*accident. Truly was credited with helping to restore safety and reliability to Shuttlerelated activities. (FBISSov89070, Apr 13/89; AP, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 12/89; NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89; WSJ, Apr 13/89; USA Today, Apr 13/89; W Times, Apr
The United States and West Germany signed an agreement to send two German astronauts and German scientific payloads on a future Space Shuttle mission. The German astronauts would fly aboard a 1992 Spacelab mission that would test materials processing techniques. Two Germans and a Dutch astronaut flew aboard a Shuttle Spacelab mission in November 1985. (NASA Release 89113, Jul 10/89; AP, Nov 10/89; UPI, Nov 10/89; P Inq, Jul 12/89)
NASA named 18 astronauts to fly on future Space Shuttle missions, including the first AfricanAmerican woman and the first member of the Coast Guard to fly aboard the Shuttle. Dr. Mae Jemison, a physician, would become the first African American woman to fly in space. She was scheduled for the June 17, 1991, Spacelab mission aboard Discovery. (AP, Sep 9/89; UPI, Sep 29/89; USA Today, Oct 4/89; W Times, Oct 2/89) During September: The Soviet news magazine Izvestia published an article confirming that the Soviet Union had established a secret program in the 1960s to beat the United States in landing astronauts on the Moon. The Izvestia article claimed that the Soviet Union had secretly conducted a crewassisted lunar landing program from 1961 to 1969 comparable to the Apollo program and had developed a boosterknown as the N1comparable to the United States Saturn V. The Soviet lunar program was eventually abandoned after three attempts to launch the N1 failed; the United States successfully landed astronauts on the Moon in 1969. (FBISSov89210, Nov 1/89; H Chron, Sep 17/89)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that a NASA T38 jet trainer aircraft being flown by a Space Shuttle astronaut had experienced a near collision with a Pan American World Airways widebody jet about 30 miles West of Washington, DC. The pilots of the Airbus A310 jetliner reported the two planes had come within 500 feet of each other while on perpendicular flight paths. The T38 was flown by Navy Captain David M. Walker, Commander of the recently completed Space Shuttle mission STS28. The near collision occurred when Walker's aircraft strayed below its assigned flight elevation. (AP, May 17/89; UPI, May 17/89; NY Times, May 17/89; W Post, May 17/89; B Sun, May 17/89)
Engineers from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology returned from a visit to the Soviet Union with photographs of a crewassisted lunar landing vehicle that was to be used to land Soviet cosmonauts on the Moon in 1968. The westerners were given the first concrete evidence of a Soviet lunar landing program when they were shown components of a lunar lander at the Moscow Aviation Institute and were allowed to take photographs. Soviet officials confirmed that a race to land astronauts on the Moon had indeed occurred during the 1960s but that the Soviets had0*fallen behind the United States as a result of several launch failures of their N1 rocket. At the time of the successful lunar mission of Apollo 11, the Soviet Union had denied having a crewtended lunar landing program. (UPI, Dec 18/89; NY Times, Dec 18/89; USA Today, Dec 18/89; W Post, Dec 18/89; W Times, Dec 18/89; P Inq, Dec 18/89; C Trib, Dec 18/89; B Sun; Dec 18/89)
Acting NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of former Space Shuttle astronaut William B. Lenoir as Associate Administrator for Space Station. Lenoir replaced James B. Odom, who was retiring. Truly also announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs as Director, Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 8877, May 18/89; UPI, May 18/89; AP, May 19/89; NY Times, May 19/89; W Post, May 19/89; WSJ, May 19/89; LA Times, May 19/89; W Times, May 23/89)
NASA scientists reported that a group of eight newly fertilized chicken embryos carried aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS28 had failed to hatch upon returning to Earth, raising questions about the viability of animal reproduction in zero gravity. A group of 16 eggs fertilized nine days before launch were all successfully hatched. Of a third group of eight eggs scheduled to hatch Saturday, only a few embryos remained viable. Discovery astronaut James Bagian speculated that the results may indicate that gravity plays a previously unknown critical role during the process of cell differentiation. Bagian suggested that, should the experiment demonstrate a relationship between gravity and embryogenesis, the results would have "great0*implications" for future longduration space missions. (UPI, Mar 29/89; W Post, Mar 30/89; P Inq, Mar 30/89; NY Times, Mar 31/89)
Great Britain and the Soviet Union signed an agreement to send a British astronaut to the Mir Space Station aboard a Soviet crew rotation flight in 1991. (USA Today, Jun 30/89; W Times, Jun 30/89; LA Times, Jun 30/89)
NASA announced that Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, had won a $297 million contract to develop the Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS), a space robot that would help construct and maintain the Space Station Freedom. Development of the robot was expected to take nine years and would include flight testing of a prototype aboard the Space Shuttle. Once deployed during an early Space Station construction mission, the mobile robot would be controlled remotely by astronauts from within the station, thereby minimizing the amount of "spacewalk" activity that astronauts would need to perform. (W Times, Apr 21/89; B Sun, Apr 21/89)
Space Shuttle astronaut David S. Griggs was killed while off duty when a single engine propeller plane he was flying crashed near a private airstrip in Arkansas. Griggs had been performing aerobatic maneuvers in a vintage ST6 training plane when the craft struck the ground, killing the astronaut instantly. Griggs was a mission specialist aboard an April 1985 flight of the Space Shuttle Discovery and had been designated pilot for Discovery mission STS33 in November. (AP, Jun 18/89; W Post, Jun 18/89; UPI, Jun 19/89; NY Times, Jun 19/89; P Inq, Jun 19/89)
Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin Jr., and Michael Collins participated in the first of several planned ceremonies at NASA facilities commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted lunar landing on July 20, 1969. Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins gathered at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, with a crowd of 6,000 NASA employees and their families to commemorate the launching of their Saturn V rocket from KSC on July 16, 1969. The ceremony included a playback of the final three minutes of the Apollo 11 countdown and statements by the former astronauts. Following the ceremony, the astronauts rode in a 20mile motorcade to Cocoa Beach, where they `"attended a luncheon in their honor. (UPI, Jul 16/89; USA Today, Jul (#17/89; B Sun, Jul 17/89)
Two Soviet astronauts were successfully launched aboard a Soyuz TM8 capsule for a rendezvous with the Mir Space Station. The Soyuz TM8 capsule was launched aboard a Proton launch vehicle emblazoned with several commercial advertisements. Cosmonauts Alexander S. Viktorenko and Alexander A. Serebrov were scheduled to reoccupy the Mir station during a sixmonth tour and supervise the attachment of two new modules to the facility. Mir had been left unoccupied since April 27 because of funding constraints and delays in manufacturing of the new modules. (FBISSov89171, Sep 6/89; SSR 1989 071A; W Post, Sep 6/89; WSJ, Sep 6/89; C Trib, Sep 6/89; P Inq, Sep 6/89)
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
The first scientific results from the Hubble Space Telescope confirmed that it would reveal a more detailed view of the heavens than any ground telescope, in spite of its flawed mirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view yet of a supernova discovered in 1987 and of densely packed stars in a distant galaxy that could be the result of a black hole. Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellan spacecraft was operating in another safe mode and communication with it had been offandon. The navigation problem had been0*narrowed down but not pinpointed, and the mapping survey of Venus would be delayed two or three weeks. (NY Times, Aug 30/90; W Times, Aug 30/90; NASA Release 90117; 90118) During August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator, and astronaut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire. Mahon had served with NASA for almost 30 years, managing and directing untended launch vehicles, Shuttle carrier systems, and spacelab operations. Captain McCulley, who planned to retire from the Navy, was to join Lockheed Space Operations Company and be involved with daytoday processing of Space Shuttle vehicles. (NASA Release 90116; 90119)
NASA selected 23 new astronaut candidates from a list of 1,945 qualified applicants for one year of training and evaluation that was to begin in July 1990. Of 11 civilians and 12 military officers, 7 were selected as pilots and the other 16 as mission specialists. (NASA Release 907)
The White House began looking at other ideas for astronaut expeditions to the Moon and Mars besides those presented by NASA. The unprecedented move stemmed from NASA's cost and time estimate, $400 billion over 30 years for the project. A panel representing 54 aerospace companies had met in the previous week, and the National Research Council planned to review its own efforts to seek innovative ideas later in the week. NASA joined the search for sources of outside ideas as well. Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Director for Aeronautics, called the move "highly appropriate" and added, "A lot of our ideas are good, but we certainly haven't covered the waterfront." NY Times, Jan 15/90)
The House passed a $44 billion, 3year spending authorization bill for NASA that included establishment of a Moon base and a crewassisted expedition to Mars. The bill was to next go to a conference committee to work out differences with the Senate. (LA Times, Sep 29/90) During September: Astronaut Bruce McCandless retired from NASA and as Captain from the U.S. Navy. He helped develop the space agency's Manned Maneuvering Unit, a jetpowered backpack he was the first to wear during a Space Shuttle Challenger mission in February 1984. (W Times, Sep 12/90)
NASA considered a proposal for a major repair of the Hubble Space Telescope that would include the reinstating of full observation abilities. In addition to replacing the telescope's main camera in 1993, as already planned, astronauts would also replace another device with corrective optics for light that reached other important scientific instruments. The plan called for repairing or replacing the craft's solar panels, as well, because their vibrations had interfered with many sensitive observations. (NY Times, Oct 27/90)
President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budget spending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satellite program to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Jan 29/90)
NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 9077) 0*June 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principal means of reaching space. This was the second successful launch of the rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (W Post, Jun 9/90; NY Times, Jun 9/90)
Space Shuttle pilot Donald E. Williams announced his retirement from NASA and the Navy, beginning March 1. He piloted two Shuttle missions, in April 1985 and October 1989, was Chief of the Astronaut Office Mission Support Branch, and Deputy Manager of Operations Integration. (NASA Release 9031)
Officials announced that an advisory committee created by Vice President Dan Quayle and the National Space Council was set up to examine how to manage future efforts in space. The committee, made up of two former congressmen, a former astronaut, and several top industry executives, was to report to the National Space Council in about four months. Quayle said that he had urged the committee's creation because of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, grounding of the Shuttle fleet, and design flaws in the proposed Space Station. (NY Times, Aug 3/90)
NASA released a call for proposals to lease a commercially developed and owned space module, the Commercial Middeck Augmentation Module, which would ride in the payload bay of the Space Shuttle and add about 50 lockers to the orbiter's capacity. The need for greater capacity resulted from NASA's Commercial Development of Space Program, which was designed to enlarge research opportunities for private use by conducting experiments in materials processing, protein crystal growth, `"biotechnology, and fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 9046; Sp News, Mar 1218/90) During March: A NASA study released to the Senate disclosed that designs for the planned Space Station Freedom needed significant changes that would drive up the initial cost. The study found an elaborate program of preventative maintenance that would require about 2,200 hours each year for space walks by astronauts and0*begin before the station was even completed. Possible solutions included use of advanced robots for maintenance, newly designed spacesuits to ease space walks, and a redesign of Space Station parts that would make them easier to repair. (NY Times, Mar 19/90; Mar 20/90; Mar 28/90; Mar 29/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
Astronauts who retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility in early January said, in a press briefing, that the satellite was in worse shape than engineers had expected after its nearly 6year orbit. The conclusion was that materials used for the planned Space Station would require greater scrutiny. (W Times, Jan 31/90)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS38, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite, probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would be assigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagon planned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the future. The satellite was deployed the following day. Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a continuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the 7mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the 3mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had not been used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixth time the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since the Challenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (NY Times, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; W Post, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the completion of the merger of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and the Office of Exploration; the two offices were merged into the Office of Aeronautics, Exploration, and Technology. Arnold D. Aldrich was named to head the new NASA office, which was intended to combine the analysis of exploration mission alternatives with innovative technologies, two closely related efforts that Truly felt should proceed under a strong central management. Truly also announced the establishment of the Office of Legislative Affairs, effective March 18, 1990. Headed by Martin P. Kress, this NASA office would be responsible for legislative matters and the coordination of budgetary and policy matters with Congress. (NASA Release 9032; 9033) During February: Daniel Brandenstein, NASA's chief astronaut, returned from a tour of Soviet space facilities and said the original untended Russian shuttle, maiden voyage in 1988, would never fly again. He also reported that the Soviets planned to launch a second untended space shuttle in 1991 and automatically dock it with Mir. The station's crew planned to run some tests. Again untended, it would undock and reenter the atmosphere. (UPI, Feb 21/90)
The Department of Defense and NASA announced the appointment of contractors to continue research and development on the National AeroSpace Plane. General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, United Technologies (Pratt & Whitney), and Rockwell International planned to jointly pursue hypersonic technologies. (NASA Release 9071)0*May 31: The Apollo 204 Capsule, which caught fire on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida, and claimed the lives of three astronauts on January 27, 1967, remains at Langley Research Center in Virginia, where it has been stored since shortly after the accident. The capsule was slated to be entombed with the illfated Space Shuttle Challenger in an abandoned missile silo at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release 9076)
A report released by NASA, concerning plans for the Space Station Freedom, said that 3,700 hours of maintenance would be required annually to keep it running. The final figure from the 6month study was up from the 2,200 hours that a preliminary version had given in March and dwarfed the original goal of 130 hours. The most alarming statistic was that 6,200 hours of maintenance would be needed before the station could even be habitable. "The significance is that there's no one up there to do this," said Dr. William J. Fisher, an astronaut who headed the 12member panel that did the estimate. (NY Times, Jul 21/90; W Post, Jul 21/90; WSJ, Jul 23/90)
NASA launched the first of 10 expected Shuttle flights in 1990 (flight STS32) from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a 10day mission to orbit a Navy communications satellite and to retrieve another. The liftoff, originally scheduled for December 18, had been delayed three times because of problems with the renovated launch pad and once because of low clouds. The Navy satellite was deployed January 10. On January 12, the spacecraft closed in on and retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), an 11ton satellite, into the cargo bay, using a 50foot robotic arm. The LDEF was sent up with Space Shuttle Challenger in April 1984 to provide vital information on the design of spacecraft and NASA's Space Station, as well as other experiments. The orbiting laboratory was scheduled to be recovered 10 months after its deployment, but the nearly 5year postponement caused by scheduling problems and the Challenger accident resulted in a decaying orbit that was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere by March of 1990. The 57 experiments aboard the 30footlong cylindrical satellite included an array of potential space building materials being tested for reactions to radiation, extreme temperature changes, and collisions with space matter. Also tested for prolonged space exposure were optical fibers, pure crystals for use in electronics, and a student experiment involving tomato seeds. Interstellar gases and cosmic radiation were also trapped in an attempt to find clues into the formation of the Milky Way and the evolution of heavier elements. For the remainder of the mission, astronauts carried out other scientific and engineering work. Columbia landed on a concrete runway early in the morning on
The projected cost for NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS) had soared from an estimated $12 billion to $30 billion dollars, Administration sources announced. It was the largest and most expensive project yet undertaken by NASA. President George Bush had asked the National Academy of Sciences to review the matter and recommend cost reductions. Lauded by environmental scientists and termed by former astronaut Sally Ride as a "mission to planet Earth," the plan called for putting platforms, launched by Titan 4 rockets from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, into polar orbit. Each platform would carry 10 sophisticated scientific instruments that could send 10 trillion bytes of data daily. The first EOS platform, said NASA, would not be in orbit until 1998. (LA Times, Jan 26/90)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, commended U.S. government-sponsored educational displays at the Experimental Aircraft Association's exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin. It specifically complimented NASA's Space Station and Space Shuttle displays and astronaut Steve Nagel's presentations as effectively communicating U.S. space leadership. (AvWk, Aug 5/91)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Fisher, M.D., would resign effective January 31, 1991. He was to return to full-time medical practice in Texas. With NASA since 1980, Fisher took part in research and in the 20th Space Shuttle mission in August 1985 where he engaged in the longest spacewalk in the history of spaceflight. (NASA release 91-4; UPI, Jan 8/91)
The crew of Shuttle Discovery prepared for a 38-hour "space ballet" with a satellite that will study Discovery's exhaust plumes. With two recorders not working, the astronauts turned to other instruments. The satellite launch was delayed to allow the crew to complete as many observations as possible of Earth's aurora before the coolant for the telescope ran out. (B Sun, Apr 30/91; W Times, Apr 30/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; USA Today, Apr 30/91; LA Times, Apr 30/91; AP, 30 Apr 91; UPI, 30 Apr/91)
The Christian Science Monitor carried a descriptive article about programs of the Howard B. Owens Science Center in Prince Georges County, Maryland. Schoolchildren spend two hours there simulating either landing on the moon or rendezvousing with Halley's comet. The program is part of the Challenger Center for Space Science Education, founded by the families of astronauts killed in the Challenger disaster and to which NASA contributed.
Extensive coverage was given to the launch of Columbia on June 5 and the astronauts' biomedical studies. (B Sun, Jun 6/91; P Inq, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; W Post, Jun 6/91; W Times, Jun 6/91; C Trin, Jun 6/91; LA Times, Jun 6/91; AP, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
Navy Captain Michael L. Coats, the astronaut to command the Discovery mission, said that astronauts in Discovery, although with no military charge, would seek to observe the Persian Gulf War in their flight. The Discovery's military payloads would provide data to help the united States detect missiles fired in future wars. (H Post, Jan 24/91)
Japan's space agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Development Agency (NASDA), plans to have three NASDA astronauts, including one woman doctor, participate in NASA Space Shuttle flights. (NY Times, Mar 24/91)
NASA announced that astronaut Mary L. Cleave would become Deputy Project Manager for Sea Viewing Wide Field Sensors at the NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Her work would involve supervising a joint NASA and commercial project to learn about the biological mass in the ocean by studying the chlorophyll content to determine how much plankton is produced. (NASA Release 91-68; H Chron, May 3/91)
William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said discussion was taking place concerning the possibility of a Soviet cosmonaut flying on a US Shuttle and a US astronaut spending six months on the Russian Space Station Mir. (UPI, Mar 15/91)
The media reported that Discovery astronauts had succeeded in getting data from three scientific instruments to the ground by splicing wires and rearranging cables in a complicated operation. In this way they bypassed the nonfunctioning recorders, based on procedures worked out from the ground. The astronauts earlier had performed additional tests involving fuel canisters hurled from the Shuttle. (AP, May 4/91; UPI, May 4/91; NY Times, May 4/91; C Trin, May 4/91; LA Times, May 4/91; NY Times, May 5/91; P Inq, May 5/91; W Post, May 5/91; CSM, May 6/91)
The media carried extensive coverage of the preparatory stages for the mission of Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew. The four medical specialists were to conduct tests on human body functions while the three astronauts flew the Shuttle and were subject to some of the tests. Scientists hoped to learn why astronauts return to Earth with weakened immune systems, reduced bone mass, a decrease in body fluid or blood, fewer red blood cells, and less muscle protein, as well as space motion sickness. The 30 white rats and 2,478 tiny jellyfish being carried were to be analyzed after the flight. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91; W Post, May 20/91; AP, May 20/91; UPI, May 20/91; CSM, May 20/91; NY Times, May 21/91; USA Today, May 21/91; UPI, May 21/91)
Atlantis made six passes by Soviet Space Station Mir as it prepared to land. The astronauts finished experiments and tested a manual system for chasing down targets in orbit. (P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Times, Apr 10/91; B Sun, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; NY Times, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 10/91; C Trin, Apr 10/91; AP, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that Mae Jemison, the first black female astronaut, who was scheduled to be a member of the crew of Endeavour in August 1992, had received an honorary doctor of science degree from Lincoln University. (P Inq, May 6/91)
NASA announced the naming of two additional NASA astronauts and three payload specialists to the crew for the Spacelab Life  Sciences-2 mission, set for launch in mid 1993. (NASA Release 91-201)
A giant black granite "space mirror" at Cape Canaveral, Florida, honoring America's 15 fallen astronauts was prepared for dedication, five years after the Challenger disaster. The monument was dedicated by Vice President Dan Quayle on May 9, in the presence of relatives of the astronauts killed. (UPI, May 9/91; B Sun, May 10/91; P Inq, May 10/91; W Times, May 10/91;  USA Today, May 10/91; C Trin, May 10/91; AP, May 10/91; UPI, May 10/91; Newsweek, May 13/91)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
The New York Times cited a report by Jean O. Dickey, a geodesist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and Raymond Hide, a geophysicist at Oxford, published in the journal Science. They analyzed the rotation of the earth, which is fitfully and almost imperceptibly slowing. More accurate measurements than in the past were possible by bouncing laser signals off quartz reflectors left on the moon by Apollo astronauts. (NY Times, Aug 9/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer described the Temple University Hospital study on behalf of NASA to determine whether amino acid supplements could retard muscle loss. If so, astronauts on long space flights might not need to devote so many hours to exercise. Eighteen volunteers were being cycled through the six-day bed rest program, in groups of three. (P Inq, Dec 31/91)
A feature article in the Los Angeles Times discussed the changing qualifications for astronauts. In the early days of NASA they were tough, independent male test pilots. More recently, they became better educated and diverse in backgrounds, men and women and different ethnic origins. A second article described Mae Jemison, NASA's only black female astronaut. (LA Times, Oct 13/91)
NASA announced that as part of the agreement between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev during the July 30-31 Summit in Moscow, the U.S. and the Soviet Union had agreed to expand space cooperation. This is to consist of flying a U.S. astronaut on a long-duration Soviet Space Station Mir mission and a Soviet cosmonaut on a U.S. Space Shuttle mission, increasing cooperation in monitoring the global environment from space, and initiating annual consultations between the two governments on civil space issues. (NASA Release 91-122; P Inq, Aug 1/91; NY Times, Aug 1/91; AP, Aug 1/91; W Post, Aug 1/91)
According to Florida Today, the Atlantis astronauts were scheduled to arrive at Kennedy Space Center in a few days, to begin preparations and a practice countdown for the Space Shuttle flight. (Fla Today, Oct 28/91; UPI, Oct 31/91)
Astronaut Guion Bluford Jr., in a commencement speech at Drexel University's 100th anniversary, called for a new national commitment to "scientific literacy."
The press cited concern over "millions of pieces of trash zooming around in space" and the fear that they might hit the Hubbell Space Telescope or some orbiting astronauts. The concern caused work on new debris-monitoring devices and a system to warn astronauts of impending collisions with space junk so they could take evasive action. The U.S. Space Command's space surveillance network already kept track of about 6,700 pieces of larger litter at least four inches in diameter that might damage a Space Station. (AP, May 10/91; W Times, May 24/91)
The Discovery astronauts held a press conference at which they answered questions about their flight. They indicated it was easy to avoid the Soviet rocket chunk but that space debris could be a major threat to future crews. The amount of haze in the atmosphere from Mount Pinatubo or other sources, particularly struck astronauts who participated in earlier flights and aroused concern for the environment. (AP, Sept 27/91; UPI, Sep 27/91; LA Times, Sep 28/91)
The media covered the final countdown preparations of the astronauts for the scheduled launch of Atlantis on July 24. Mission managers were satisfied with the completion of all necessary repairs. Then a storm on July 23 threatened to delay the blastoff, followed by the discovery early the morning of July 24 of trouble with a critical main engine computer. The discovery forced launch cancellation and postponement of the flight by at least one week to install a new unit. UPI reported on repair efforts and attempts to discover the source of the problem. (AP, Jul 22/91; C Trin, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91; AP, Jul 23/91; UPI, Jul 23/91; NY Times, Jul 24/91; USA Today, Jul 24/91; W Post, Jul 24/91; W Times, Jul 24/91; AP, Jul 24/91; LA Times, Jul 24/91; CSM, Jul 24/91; UPI, Jul 24/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; AP, 25 Jul/91; UPI, 25 Jul 91)
NASA announced that astronaut John M. Lounge would leave NASA June 21 to become Director of Houston Operations for Spacehab, Inc., which is providing a pressurized module for future space flights. (NASA Release 91-86)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had completed one year of operation on April 25. Joseph H. Rothenberg, Associate Director of Flight Projects for Hubble Space Telescope at Goddard, summarized the Hubble's achievements. These included the taking of various images and presentation of data from observations at key scientific meetings. Scientists planned to compensate for the spherical aberration by modifying the telescope's replacement instruments. These included the placement of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II in 1993 and further servicing plans during astronaut space walks. (NASA Release - Hubble Space Telescope; LA Times, Apr 29/91)
AP reported that astronaut John Blaha, commander of the Atlantis mission, said he used the post-flight news conference to express his views on the space program and the importance of the Space Station, after reading criticism of the latter. (AP, Aug 21/91)
Robert Gibson, an astronaut removed from command of a Shuttle mission for violating flight-safety rules, unofficially has set a new altitude record of 27,000 feet in a single-engine Cassutt Formula 1 "midget" racing plane. (UPI, Feb 1/91; LA Times, Feb 3/91)
The Hubble Space Telescope proved more useful than expected despite the flaw in its mirror. The congressional appropriation of an additional $30 million in NASA's 1991 budget allowed some repairs to be made from the ground using computer processing and radio control. NASA plans additional repairs by astronauts in 1993, attaching new mirrors to the outside of the telescope. (W Times, Apr 11/91)
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology approved a $14.27 billion space program for the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly 6 percent over 1991 but $488 million less than President Bush had requested. Included was $1.9 billion for the Space Station with $128.9 million to be added when the National Academy of Sciences comments on NASA's plans to reduce the size of the station. The committee specified that NASA spend $25 million of the Space Station money on developing a return emergency vehicle for Space Station astronauts. It also called for spending $30 million to develop advanced propulsion systems, including the first new Shuttle engine in more than 20 years. Closer scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union and continuation of the Landsat earth-monitoring program were also specified. (AP, Apr 24/91)
The scheduled launch of Atlantis on August 1 was delayed by false alarm over a pressure valve and then by bad weather, the media reported. The launch was rescheduled for August 2. The astronauts' first task after takeoff was to launch the $120 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, which was done successfully. Various onboard experiments were begun, together with some medical research experiments designed to test the effects of weightlessness. (B Sun, Aug 2/91; USA Today, Aug 2/91; NY Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; UPI, Aug 2/91; P Inq, Aug 3/91; NY Times, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 3/91; AP, Aug 3/91; UPI, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 4/91; NY Times, Aug 4/91; UPI, Aug 4/91; C Trin, Aug 4/91; B Sun, Aug 5/91; W Times, Aug 5/91; USA Today, Aug 5/91; P Inq, Aug 5/91; C Trin, Aug 5/91; LA Times, Aug 5/91; AP, Aug 5/91; UPI, Aug 5/91)
Discovery astronauts captured amazing aurora observations and continued to try to fix the two faulty recorders. After releasing the retrievable SPAS-2 satellite, using Discovery's 50-foot robot arm, the astronauts had difficulties getting the satellite oriented properly to observe the Shuttle. Discovery was to play the role of an enemy missile, repeatedly firing one of its two orbital maneuvering system rockets as instruments on the SPAS-2 recorded visible light, infrared, and ultraviolet emissions. (W Times, May 1/91; P Inq, May 1/91; AP, May 1/91; UPI, May 1/91; LA Times, May 1/91)
The two astronauts on NASA's first Shuttle flight 10 years ago, John Young and Robert Crippen, returned to Cape Canaveral for an anniversary celebration. The 20,000 workers at Kennedy Space Center and their families were invited for the occasion. (AP, Apr 13/91; B Sun, Apr 14/91)
Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California, one day late. It was to be flown to Cape Canaveral atop a modified Boeing 747. The astronauts appeared in excellent condition. (P Inq, Apr 12/91; B Sun, Apr 12/91; W Times, Apr 12/91; USA Today, Apr 12/91; NY Times, Apr 12/91; WSJ, Apr 12/91;  W Post, Apr 12/91; LA Times, Apr 12/91; AP, Apr 12/91; UPI, Apr 12/91)
NASA announced that astronaut Bryan D. O'Connor would leave NASA July 29 to become Commander of the Marine Air Detachment at the Naval Air Test Center, Patuxent River, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-101; UPI, Jun 28/91)
Chase Manhattan Bank granted $64 million five-year financing to Spacehab Inc. Spacehab was building a large pressurized chamber to fit into the storage bay of the Space Shuttle, giving the astronauts or technicians more room to run experiments. Spacehab planned to send its first unit aloft in December 1992. It obtained capital from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Aeritalia of Italy, which was designing and building most of the module and its thermal controls, and the Mitsubishi Corporation of Japan. (NY Times, Mar 14/91)
William Lenoir, NASA space flight chief, outlined the revised plans for the Space Station to the National Space Council on February 5. The revision would save $6 billion over five years and would cut in half the number of astronauts to live aboard as of September 1999. The new design would assemble the station in larger pieces on the ground, thus requiring 23 Space Shuttle flights to build instead of the original 34 flights. The plan is due to Congress on March 5 but may be extended to a later date. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91)
Randy Berridge of the Astronauts Memorial Foundation stated that the memorial to American astronauts killed in the line of duty was closed for inspections after strange noises were heard coming from the monument. After engineers checked the structure, it reopened on August 17. Subsequently, Representative Vernon Peeples, chairman of the Florida House Transportation Committee, questioned whether money for the monument had been misused. (UPI, Aug 6/91; P Inq, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91; USA Today, Aug 7/91; LA Times, Aug 19/91; P Inq, Aug 20/91)
The New York Times carried an extensive article with diagrams describing many of the proposed reductions contemplated by NASA in the cost and role of its orbiting Space Station. The mission was to study the long-term effects of space on astronauts and other living things and to see whether the nearly weightless environment offers commercial possibilities. NASA was scheduled to deliver the modified proposal to Congress March 5. (NYT, Mar 5/91; W Times, Mar 5/91)
The media reported that a British woman, Helen Sharman, went into space in a Soyuz TM-12 rocket with two Soviet astronauts, destined for Space Station Mir. The astronauts were to remain on Mir to do repairs while Sharman was to return with the two Soviet astronauts now on Mir. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; NY Times, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91)
Soviet space program experts announced that the 40-ton Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 would break up and fall to earth in February. Tass, the official Soviet press agency, implied Soviet officials had lost control of the station when it said the authorities would issue a "timely warning" to all countries on whose territory station "parts are likely to fall." Salyut 7 was launched in 1982 and last inhabited in 1986, holding up to six astronauts. The Soviet Union had planned to send a rescue mission with the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran but the Shuttle was delayed. (NY Times, Jan 1/91)
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
The press reported that NASA was considering having two astronauts engage in a spacewalk to fix a cargo-door seal of Columbia that could prevent a safe return to Earth. The seal apparently shook loose during launch. It was later reported that NASA ground personnel determined the seal posed no re-entry problems so no spacewalk was needed. This allowed the astronauts more time to pursue their scientific experiments and medical research. (P Inq, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 7/91; W Post, Jun 7/91; W Times, Jun 7/91; LA Times, Jun 7/91; AP, Jun 7/91; UPI, Jun 7/91; B Sun, Jun 8/91; NY Times, Jun 8/91; W Post, Jun 8/91; AP, Jun 8/91; UPI, Jun 8/91; NY Times, Jun 9/91; W Post, Jun 9/91; C Trin, Jun 10/91; LA Times, Jun 10/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
According to the Washington Post, as part of U.S.-Soviet discussions leading to a summit, was the possible exchange of American astronauts flying on Mir and Soviet cosmonauts being launched on a U.S. Space Shuttle. (W Post, Jun 29/91)
The media reported that because of high winds in California, Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The right tire was severely damaged on landing, but the new stronger brakes worked well. In addition, twice as much fiberglass thermal tile filler would have to be replaced than was customary after a flight. The astronauts accomplished 32 of 33 planned primary observations, 18 of 21 secondary observations, and 41 of 44 category-3 experiments. (P Inq, May 7/91; W Post, May 7/91; NY Times, May 7/91; USA Today, May 7/91; B Sun, May 7/91; WSJ, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; P Inq, May 8/91; AP, May 8/91; UPI, May 9/91)
NASA announced the naming of astronaut Colonel Guy S. Gardner as Commandant of the USAF Test Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, California. He was to leave the astronaut corps in June 1991 to assume his new post, which is part of the Air Force Systems Command. (NASA Release 91-52)
NASA indicated that the Shuttle Atlantis had landed 200 yards short of its lakebed runway at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The reason was that astronauts were unaware of the wind shift, of which ground controllers did not inform them because they thought the information was not needed. Measures have been taken to prevent similar incidents in the future by installing more efficient brakes and a drag chute to help slow the aircraft after touchdown. (O Sen Star, Apr 23/91)
NASA announced delivery of its "restructuring" report to Congress, redesigning Space Station Freedom. William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, stated that NASA cut costs (by $8.9 million through 1999), simplified the design, and reduced the complexity of the project in accordance with Congress's directions and the Augustine Commission's recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be needed to achieve the human-tended phase when astronauts, brought by the Space Shuttle, work for two-week periods. A permanently manned configuration would be achieved in fiscal year 2000, consisting of the US laboratory and habitat, and European and Japanese laboratories; the Canadian Mobile Servicing System; accommodations for a live-in crew of four; and three sets of solar arrays providing 65 kilowatts of electric power. Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return Vehicle must be available to evacuate crew in emergency; this phase requires 17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scaling back some plans and resulting in some layoffs by contractors and subcontractors. (NASA release 91-45; B Sun, Mar 21/91; W Post, Mar 21/91; WSJ, Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM, Mar 22/91; W Post, Mar 22/91; B Sun, Mar 22/91; NY Times, Mar 22/91; W Times, Mar 22/91; UPI, Mar 22/91; The Citizen, Mar 24/91)
The Soviet bank, Moscow Narodny, financing the May Anglo-Soviet mission aboard the Soviet Mir Space Station, announced that Helen Sharman, a chemist, would be Britain's first astronaut. (AP, Feb 22/91; LA Times, Feb 23/91)
NASA announced that astronaut Michael L. Coats would retire from the Navy and leave NASA August 1 to become Director of Advanced Programs and Technical Planning at Loral in Houston. (NASA Release 91-104; AP, Jul 3/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reviewed The Steel Albatross, a novel about an underwater craft undetectable by sonar,just published by NASA astronaut Scott Carpenter. Concurrently, it reviewed Aurora 7, an account of the way in which various actual and fictional people were affected by Carpenter's flight in the Aurora 7 space capsule. (P Inq, Feb 10/91; W Post, Feb 17/91)
Extensive media coverage of experiments performed by the astronauts aboard Atlantis continued. Among such experiments were testing of equipment to be used on the Space Station, such as fiber optic cables to transmit signals, a cooling system, and modifications in controls for computers. Another experiment involved lighting a small fire to learn how flames propagate in the absence of gravity. In addition, a NASA optometrist tested eye drops on himself and astronauts performed treadmill tests and blood experiments. Astronauts commented on the large amount of haze around the Earth, possibly from the Kuwaiti oil field fires or from the volcanic eruptions of Mount Pinatubo. (P Inq, Aug 6/91; NY Times, Aug 6/91; W Times, Aug 6/91; W Post, Aug 6/91; USA Today, Aug 6/91; AP, Aug 6/91; UPI, Aug 6/91; P Inq, Aug 7/91; W Times, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91; USA Today, Aug 7/91; AP, Aug 7/91; UPI, Aug 7/91; P Inq, Aug 8/91; NY Times, Aug 8/91; W Post, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 8/91; AP, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91; B Sun, Aug 9/91; W Times, Aug 9/91; AP, Aug 9/91; UPI, Aug 9/91)
The wire services commemorated astronaut Alan B. Shepard's flight 30 years ago on May 5 as the first American in space. (AP, May 4/91; UPI, May 4/91)
The press reported that the panels of the astronaut memorial monument that developed jagged cracks, which are being investigated. (AP, May 21/91; USA Today, May 22/91; LA Times, May 22/91)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
Astronaut Manley Lanier "Sonny" Carter, who flew on the Shuttle Discovery in 1989, was one of those killed in the crash of the commuter plane carrying former Senator John Tower. Biographic data were given. (UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 6/91)
NASA announced it was seeking applications from new astronaut candidates with a cut-off date of July 1, 1991. The next class of candidates was scheduled for July 1992. Two types of positions were available: mission specialist for those with significant scientific backgrounds and pilot for those with extensive piloting experience in jet aircraft. (NASA Release 91-67; H Chron, May 3/91)
The Discovery astronauts conducted final experiments, celebrated the 30th anniversary of U.S. space flight on May 5, and prepared to return to Earth. (P Inq, May 6/91; W Times, May 6/91; USA Today, May 6/91; B Sun, May 6/91; C Trin, May 6/91; AP, May 6/91; UPI, May 6/91)
Astronauts on Space Shuttle Discovery aimed a research satellite at rocket fuel spewed in space, then captured the satellite and put it back in the Shuttle's cargo bay. (W Post, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91; LA Times, May 3/91; AP, May 3/91; UPI, May 3/91)
Astronaut Mark Lee said a Space Shuttle flight in Endeavour, scheduled for August 3, 1992, in which his wife Jan Davis would also participate, would be just another work assignment. The media featured them as the first married couple in space. (AP, Mar 24/91; H Post, Mar 25/91; LA Times, Mar 27/91)
Resigning astronaut Dr. William F. Fisher warned that the planned $37 billion NASA Space Station could be canceled if its redesign is superficial. He stated that the Space Station needed total rethinking, adding that both Congress and a White House panel also indicated such a need. (NY Times, Jan 9/91)
The media covered the flawless touchdown of Shuttle Columbia on June 14. The Shuttle apparently suffered no major damage. After a night's sleep, four of the astronauts remained to undergo a series of medical and physical tests of their readjustment to gravity. Tests also were to be performed on the animals that traveled on Columbia. (UPI, Jun 14/91; W Post, Jun 15/91; P Inq, Jun 15/91; AP, Jun 15/91; UPI, Jun 15/91; W Post, Jun 16/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was scheduled to teach ninth grade geometry students at George Washington Junior High School, Alexandria, Virginia, on February 22. Selected as an "All-Star" engineer by the National Engineers Week 1991 committee, Truly was to share his engineering and aerospace knowledge with students. Astronauts Mary Cleave and Bonnie Dunbar were among the more than 10,000 engineers participating in the teaching program. (NASA Release N91-13)
Former astronaut Thomas Stafford, head of the Synthesis Group, told Congress it would not require much start-up money to set the U.S. on a course to Mars in the next century. He said funds could come in savings from the Department of Defense and Department of Energy budgets. (AP, Jul 10/91)
According to the media, the Columbia astronauts were ahead of schedule on their experiments after spending 16- to 18-hour days working and planned to ease off and enjoy space more. On June 12 and 13, the press reported the continuing scientific experiments of the astronauts, culminating in efforts to fix two malfunctioning freezers in order to preserve experiment samples prior to final preparations for a landing on June 14. (P Inq, Jun 11/91; NY Times, Jun 11/91; B Sun, Jun 11/91; W Post, Jun 11/91; USA Today, Jun 11/91; UPI, Jun 11/91; USA Today, Jun 13/91; W Post, Jun 13/91; AP, Jun 13/91; UPI, Jun 13/91; LA Times, June 13/91; P Inq, Jun 14/91; NY Times, Jun 14/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; W Times, Jun 14/91; B Sun, Jun 14/91; Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 14/91; UPI, Jun 14/91)
The Synthesis Group, a White House study group, planned to recommend US development of nuclear-propelled rockets to send manned expeditions to Mars, according to Aviation Week and Space Tehcnology. NASA established the group, chaired by retired Air Force General Thomas P. Stafford, an Apollo astronaut, to gather innovative ideas for lunar and Mars exploration. (AP, Mar 15/91;
NASA scientists connected with the Hubble Space Telescope correction project were quoted with reference to the amount of work to be done. The Hubble science team, subject to top-level NASA approval, was to build a second generation Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WFPC) with only four instead of eight of the powerful electronic light detectors known as charge-coupled devices (CCDs). The proposed change took account of tight money and time pressures but meant that the photographic operation might take 10 to 20 percent longer, according to Ed Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble scientist. The extent of repairs to be made would be decided by the end of 1991 but probably would involve Shuttle astronauts making three or four spacewalks of at least six hours each. (W Post, Oct 20/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91)
The media covered the refusal of a Federal judge on December 12 to order the public release of the audio tape of the last moments of the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986, saying it would violate the privacy of the victims' families. (NY Times, Dec 13/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; USA Today, Dec 13/91; W Times, Dec 13/91; AP, Dec 13/91)
Brief biographies appeared of each Atlantis astronaut. (UPI, Apr 5/91)
Tass announced that the first British astronaut and two Soviet cosmonauts had returned safely from Mir Space Station, landing on the steppes of Kazakhstan. Soviet space officials considered British participation valuable in terms of Soviet-British cooperation, although commercially the mission failed to gain British sponsorship. (UPI, May 27/91)
The Christian Science Monitor reviewed NASA's nine proposed Space Shuttle missions for 1992. It noted the strong international flavor of the missions, including the ascent of the first Italian Space Agency astronaut aboard Atlantis in July 1992. Astronauts from Canada and the European Space Agency were to fly on several missions. In August, Japan's first professional astronaut was to ride on the new orbiter Endeavour, scheduled to debut in May as replacement for the Challenger. Other proposed missions and their scheduled dates were outlined. (CSM, Dec 19/91)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
Former astronaut Michael Collins in his new book, Mission to Mars, said that he believed homosexuals and lesbians should be barred from space exploration because they would be likely to create interpersonal problems. NASA never considered sexual orientation in hiring. (AP, Apr 9/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, Apr 9/91)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
Launch Box - Your TV Connection to Outer Space, a new 14-episode program, is an educational series created by teachers for classroom use. NASA, Nickelodeon, and the Astronauts Memorial Foundation joined to fund the series, whose first segment was scheduled to appear on May 9. The series includes footage of actual NASA missions as well as lesson plans for teachers. (Business Wire, Mar 18/91)
AP reported that statistically it was inevitable that astronauts would be obliged to make detours to avoid space junk. It happened twice within the previous three months, most recently with Atlantis a week and a half earlier, when it had to dodge 3,200 pounds of rocket debris. Under mission rules adopted after the Challenger explosion in 1986, astronauts must distance themselves from orbiting objects if they are expected to pass within a security zone that is 3.1 miles long, 1.2 miles wide, and 1.2 miles deep. NASA estimated there was one chance in 100,000 that a detectable object would collide with a spacecraft once inside that zone. (AP, Dec 9/91; NY Times, Dec 10/91)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA announced that astronaut James F. Buchli (Col., USMC), a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, was to retire from the U.S. Marine Corps and leave NASA to accept the position of Manager, Station Systems Operations and Requirements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release: 92-77)
Veteran NASA astronauts Richard O. Covey and Kenneth        Bowersox and ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier were named to the crew for STS-61, the Hubble Space Shuttle Telescope servicing mission scheduled for late 1993. Covey was appointed the mission commander, and Bowersox was to be the pilot. Nicollier was named to be a mission specialist. Three other crew members previously named to the STS-61 mission were payload commander Story Musgrave, and mission specialists Tom Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Kathryn D. Thornton. (NASA Release 92-218)
Astronaut Kathryn Thornton became the second woman to walk in space when she floated into the open cargo bay of Endeavour and tested techniques for building a Space Station. Thornton was accompanied by Thomas Akers, one of three men who had captured a wayward satellite the day before. (C Trib, May 15/92)
NASA and NPO-Energia, A Russian company, planned to meet during the next two weeks for a final review on the feasibility of using the Soyuz TM spacecraft as an Assured Crew Return Vehicle for astronauts aboard the Space Station. The Soyuz spacecraft was one of various concepts being considered for use as a return vehicle. (NASA Release 92-212)
Final preparations were made for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hoped to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain of the Earthwinds and a former crew member of both the trans-Atlantic balloon flight in 1978 and the trans-Pacific flight in 1981, predicted a successful voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. Included in the crew, was to be Maj. Gen. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, chief of astronaut training in the Russian air force. The balloon, which is higher than the Statue of Liberty, would carry scientific experiments built in the former Soviet Union and NASA. (NY Times, Jan 29/92)
NASA set a December 2d launch date for the year's eighth and last Shuttle flight, a military mission, designated STS-53. Five astronauts, all military men, will release a classified satellite, thought to be a Lacrosse radar-imaging satellite from the Shuttle Discovery. Crew members are David Walker, commander; Robert Cabana, co-pilot; James Voss, Guion Bluford, and Michael Richard Clifford. (W Times, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
Astronauts on the Shuttle Atlantis cleared a snag in the tether cord linking the Italian-built satellite to the Shuttle and safely reeled the satellite back into the Shuttle's cargo bay, averting the need for an emergency space walk. The satellite flew above Atlantis for 24 hours, never going higher than 850 feet on the tether, far short of the twelve-and-one-half mile target. Even though the experiment fell short of its goal of generating electricity with a tethered satellite, the exercise showed that tethered vehicles probably can be reliably controlled in space. (LA Times, Aug 6/92; P Inq, Aug 6/92; W Post, Aug 6/92; W Times, Aug 6/92; NY Times, Aug 6/92, Aug 9/92; USA Today, Aug 6/92; WSJ, Aug 6/92; APn, Aug 6/92, Aug 8/92; UPI, Aug 6/92, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 6/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
NASA-sponsored research into the biological effects of space flight at the University of Wisconsin suggested that astronauts may have to workout in space to protect their bones on long-duration flights. Dr. Arthur Vailas of the university's Biodynamics Laboratory based his conclusions on the metabolic processes in the bones of rats that had experienced days of weightlessness aboard the Space Shuttle. (UPI, Oct 21/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
Shuttle Columbia astronauts carried out experiments designed to ease reentry from space. They pedalled furiously on a stationary bicycle and floated in a depressurization sack to draw blood from the top of the body to the legs. They also grabbed an aluminum panel with the Shuttle's arm and swung it about the spacecraft's cargo bay to test a Canadian robotic vision system. A day earlier, they deployed the Lageos II geodynamics satellite. (NY Times, (Oct 25/92; W Post, Oct 25/92; P Inq Oct 24/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
James V. Correale, 69, a native of Philadelphia who figured out how to clean the air that Apollo 13 astronauts rapidly were running out of during their mission to the moon in 1970, died Saturday at a hospital in Nassau Bay, Texas. (P Inq, Mar 17/92)
NASA continued to prepare for what it called "the most aggressive" space-shuttle mission yet--its mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope, tentatively set for December 7, 1993. As conceived, it would require four astronauts working in two-person shifts several days to make the repairs. They would need three or possibly four space walks to complete the work. The main task was to install a new camera and a set of corrective mirrors to compensate for spherical aberration in the main 2.4-meter mirror. These and other repairs would, NASA hoped, restore 90 to 95 percent of Hubble's design capabilities. (CSM, Dec 16/92)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA officials had scheduled an unprecedented spacewalk by three Shuttle astronauts to rescue a satellite. The agency decided to undertake the third and final three-man rescue attempt upon the request of Shuttle Endeavour's commander. (WSJ, May 13/92; USA Today, May 13/92; W Post, May 13/92; W Times, May 13/92; NY Times, May 13/92; LA Times, May 13/92; P Inq, May 13/92; AP, May 13/92; UPI, May 13/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
On their first full day in space, two crew members of the Space Shuttle Endeavour conducted experiments involving motion sickness. Understanding motion sickness has high priority among space agencies around the world. It strikes most astronauts during their first few days in space, and it affects flight planning, such as space walks, which are never scheduled early in a mission. (W Post, Sept 14/92; NY Times, Sept 14/92; W Times, Sept 14/92; AP, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
NASA researchers said that tests on astronauts aboard a June 5-14, 1991, flight of the Space Shuttle Columbia found their hearts, lungs, immune systems, and nervous systems responded in unexpected ways. Involved were blood pressure, muscle mass, production of key cells, and proper balance and orientation. The results do not suggest any major obstacles to long-term space missions, according to Ronald White, NASA's chief of life sciences. Longer human space flights, however, might depend on developing artificial gravity or other measures to minimize the physical effects of spaceflight. (UPI, Jul 25/92; NY Times, Jul 25/92; W Post, Jul 25/92)
Three American astronauts took a historic spacewalk using their gloved hands to make a last-ditch rescue of a wayward satellite. It was the first time so many astronsuts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands. All previous salvage operations had mainly used some type of high-technology hardware. At 230 miles above the Earth, the three astronauts of the Space Shuttle Endeavour grabbed the wobbling 4.5 ton, 17 foot satellite and stopped its rotation, holding it motionless for about a minute while sloshing fuel settled down. (NY Times, May 14/92; B Sun, May 14/92; USA Today, May 14/92; W Times, May 14/92; W Post, May 14/92; P Inq, May 14/92; AP, May 14/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
Lending their expertise with long-duration exposure to microgravity, the Skylab IV astronaut crew was scheduled to participate in a series of underwater tests that would help in the development of Space Station Freedom. The tests will be monitored by engineers represented by NASA, the Boeing Defense and Space Group, and international partners from the European Space Agency and the Japanese Space Agency. (NASA Note N92-42)
It was announced that astronaut John O. Creighton (Capt., USN) would retire from the U.S. Navy and leave NASA to work in the Commercial Airplanee Group of the Boeing Co., Seattle, Washington, beginning September 1, 1992. He was to work as a production test pilot and as an instructor pilot in the customer support area. (NASA Release 92-96)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
Shuttle Atlantis' astronauts unreeled a tethered satellite in a risky electrical experiment never before tried in space, but the effort immediately ran into difficulties. Four hours and about a dozen tries were needed to free the satellite from the Shuttle. Then the unreeling tether line jammed twice, and the satellite ended the day about 850 feet instead of twelve and one-half miles from the Shuttle. NASA added an eighth day to Atlantis' mission because of problems with the Eureca and tethered satellite experiments. (W Post, Aug 5/92; The Sun, Aug 5/92; LA Times, Aug 5/92; WSJ, Aug 5/92; USA Today, Aug 5/92; NY Times, Aug 5/92; P Inq, Aug 5/92; W Times, Aug 5/92; APn, Aug 5/92; UPI, Aug 5/92; C Trib, Aug 5/92; Time Magazine, Aug 17/92)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his first hiring decisions, naming four men to senior management posts at NASA headquarters. The new appointments--Maj. Gen. Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Bryan D. O'Connor, Charles F. Bolden and Frederick D. Gregory--included three present or former astronauts and a Marine general who led forces during Operation Desert Storm. (W Post, Apr 29/92; NASA Release 92-54)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's international crew took time off from their scientific work to remember the seven astronauts who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger six years ago. "It being the 28th, we're all mindful of the sacrifices made along the way," Discovery crewman William Readdy said during a news conference from space. It was the first time that Americans had been in orbit on the anniversary of the Jan 28, 1986 explosion of Challenger 73 seconds after it took off from Cape Canaveral. (P Inq, Jan 29/92; USA Today, Jan 29/92)
A Russian-German crew docked with the Mir Space Station and was to relieve a Russian cosmonaut who had been orbiting over an extended period of time. The ITAR-Tass news agency reported that the TM-14 capsule docked on schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Alexander Volkov, who were scheduled to return to Earth on March 25. Germany paid $24 million to send its astronaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade into space. He was to spend six days studying the influence of zero gravity on the human body. (P Inq, Mar 20/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
On the second day of Discovery's mission, astronauts took turns being spun in a chair, strapped blindfolded onto a lurching sled, and jolted by electrodes high above the Earth in a study of space motion sickness. Between medical tests, the seven astronauts tended to organisms carried into orbit for research, including roundworms, fruit flies, stick insects, lentil roots, bacteria and billions of single cells. The mission was scheduled to end at Edwards Air Force Base in California. (NY Times, Jan 24/92)
NASA announced that congressionally imposed funding limits for Space Station Freedom would delay its full operation by about nine months. Under a revised schedule, NASA would begin launching parts of the Space Station in March 1996, a four-month delay. The station would be ready for limited astronaut use in June 1997 and for full astronaut use in June 2000, a nine-month delay. (Space News, Sept 28-October 4/92)
NASA announced the departure of Navy Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein, Chief of the Astronaut Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, since 1986 and a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, effective about October 1. Selected by NASA in 1978, Brandenstein first flew as a pilot aboard the Shuttle Challenger in 1978 and holds the record for time in space (789 hours) among Space Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 92-100)
President Bush held a scheduled meeting with NASA astronauts in the Oval Office, followed by an address to Young Astronauts Council in the Old Executive Office Building. (NASA Release 92-12)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour resumed science work after successful repairs Sunday night on a set of water-cooled furnaces critical to several of the 43 experiments aboard the shuttle. The crew observed irradiated fruit fly larvae, fertilized frog eggs, kept tabs on two fish with electrodes attached to their brains, and tested a new manufacturing method for electronic components. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Sept 15/92; W Post, Sept 15/92; The Sun, Sept 15/92)
Two astronauts at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that they had evidence of planets or other bodies around eight stars they had studied in a star-forming region of the Milky Way Galaxy, 450 light years from Earth. The scientists, Drs. Kenneth Marsh and Michael J. Mahoney, said their discovery of unseen companions around low-mass stars in the Taurus-Auriga region of the Milky Way had resulted from the study of data from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in 1983 and data from ground-based observations acquired mostly from 1981-1983. (NASA Release 92-87)
The flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, carrying seven astronauts from three countries, was the second Shuttle mission in a row to carry an array of life science experiments focusing on the effects of space travel on humans and other organisms, with an eye toward preparing to send astronauts on interplanetary flights, specifically, NASA's proposed manned mission to Mars. The astronauts were split 12-hour work shifts so experiments including a battery of medical tests could be conducted non-stop. Researchers hoped to learn more about space motion sickness and back pain, common ailments among astronauts in orbit. Experiments were also to be conducted in the cargo bay to measure effects of zero gravity, fertilization of eggs, and cartilage formation in various organisms. The Shuttle would also study the effect of bombardment by high-energy cosmic rays on living tissue. (B Sun, Jan 22/92; NY Times, Jan 23/92)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
The Space Shuttle Columbia blasted into space under control of a five-man, one-woman crew. In command was James Wetherbee of the Navy; his co-pilot was Capt. Michael Baker.  Mission specialists were Capt. William Shepherd of the Navy, flight engineer; Charles Lacy Veach; Tamara Jernigan; and Canadian researcher Steven MacLean. On board were commercially sponsored experiments that were to examine a potential treatment for osteoporosis, material crystals to increase the speed of computers, protein crystals to determine the molecular structure of "alfa-2b interferon" used in the treatment of some cancers, and experiments on microgravity effects on astronauts. (NASA Release 92-180; P Inq, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92; AP, Oct 22/92; P Inq, Oct 23/92; NY Times, Oct 23/92; Oct 25/92; W Times, Oct 23/92; USA Today, Oct 23/92; AP, Oct 23/92; CSM, Oct 23/92; LA Times, Oct 23/92; The Sun, Oct 23/92; C Trib, Oct 23/92)
The Association of Space Explorers 8th Planetary Congress opened at Georgetown University in Washington, D. C. It was attended by the largest group of astronauts and cosmonauts ever assembled, with over 100 international space flyers, representing 19 nations, in attendance. The congress opened with remarks by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and was concerned mainly with discussions about an international mission to Mars. Goldin also mentioned the practical applications of NASA's technology innovations since the 1960s. He identified CAT scans, laser surgery, and intensive care units as having had their genesis in the space program. "New products, new industries, and new jobs come through NASA research," Goldin said. (NASA Note to Editors: N92-75; W Times, Aug 31/92)
A space-for-rent company unveiled its first Shuttle module, which is scheduled to fly aboard Atlantis in the spring of 1993. The Spacehab module, which consists of up to 61 lockers for experiments, would be the first privately owned and operated space facility that can be tended by astronauts in orbit. (AP, Apr 3/92)
Discovery's astronauts dimmed the Shuttle lights to conserve energy as NASA considered extending the weeklong research mission by a day to collect extra scientific data. (P Inq, Jan 27/92; W Times, Jan 27/92)
A NASA "aquanaut" set an endurance record of 69 days, 20 minutes underwater after spending time in a scuba divers' lodge submerged in a Florida Keys Lagoon. Richard Presley began the habitation May 6 as part of an experiment by NASA on conditions astronauts would face during long space missions. (W Times, Jul 15/92; USA Today 15/92; AP, Jul 15/92)
On the fourth day of their mission, Shuttle Columbia's astronauts measured ozone in Earth's upper atmosphere and tested a new toilet. The flight was scheduled to last ten days. (W Post, Oct 26/92; P Inq, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 26/92; USA Today, Oct 26/92; W. Times, Oct 26/92; AP, Oct 25/92, Oct 26/92; UPI, Oct 26/92)
Astronauts aboard the Shuttle Columbia beamed down Fourth of July greetings on the 10th day of a planned 13-day mission, the longest in Shuttle history. The goal of Columbia's was  twofold: to study the effects of weightlessness on physical, chemical, medical, and biological processes, and to demonstrate the Shuttle's capability to remain in orbit at least 13 days. A wide range of experiments aimed at generating knowledge from microgravity science were underway in the long Spacelab module being flown on Columbia. (UPI, Jul 4/92; AP, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; W Post, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92; P Inq, Jul 5/92; W Times, Jul 5/92; Reuters, Jul 4/92; AvWk, Jul 6/92)
NASA announced that an exotic mix of materials and equipment would be exposed to the unique conditions of microgravity during Space Shuttle Columbia's 13-day mission scheduled for June 1992. The flight would be NASA's longest Shuttle mission and was the first of a series of missions leading to 90-day assignments aboard the planned Space Station Freedom. Astronaut Bonnie Dunbar and three scientists were scheduled spend most of their time in the pressurized Spacelab module in Columbia's cargo bay. (USA Today, May 27/92)
The countdown for the December 2 launch of the Shuttle Discovery began, the 10th and allegedly the last Shuttle mission dedicated to U. S. Department of Defense work. Aside from releasing a secret military satellite, astronauts were to conduct a number of military experiments, such as testing a Shuttle laser system and releasing of metal balls to be tracked by space debris researchers. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 28/92 and Nov 29/92; W Times, Nov 28/92; Nov 29/92, and Nov 30/92; CSM, Nov 27/92; P Inq, Nov 30/92; USA Today, Nov 30/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
Shuttle Endeavour's astronauts reported abnormal behavior for tadpoles hatched aboard the shuttle. Oriental hornets similarly displayed confused, disoriented behavior, seemingly unable to build nests in a weightless environment. The tadpoles and hornets were part of 43 experiments in weightless conditions being carried out on the Shuttle. (UPI, Sept 15/92; W Times, Sept 16/92; UPI, Sept 16/92; AP, Sept 16/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour began testing a system to deliver intravenous fluids in weightlessness, a step toward meeting the possible medical needs of astronauts who stay in space long-term. (AP Sept 18/92)
NASA set Sept. 12 as the launch date for the seven-day scientific mission of the Shuttle Endeavour. The 50th Shuttle mission was to include a number of Shuttle mission firsts: the first married couple, the first black woman, and the first Japanese astronaut on a U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release STS-47 Launch Advisory; USA Today, Sept. 2/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis photographed natural auroras and fired clouds of gas into space as they circled Earth for a fourth day. (NY Times, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 27/92; W Post, Mar 27/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis released the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, but it encountered immediate problems with its steering system and remained in too low an orbit. Engineers at the European Space Agency's control center in Darmstadt, Germany, struggled to understand the problem, hoping to boost the satellite into its proper orbit 320 miles above the Earth within  a day or two. (W Times, Aug 3/92; WSJ, Aug 3/92; The Sun, Aug 3/92; LA Times, Aug 3/92; NY Times, Aug 3/92; P Inq, Aug 3/92; APn, Aug 3/92; UPI, Aug 3/92)
After hearing complaints from employees across the nation, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin unexpectedly announced he was changing the agency's logo. Goldin killed the despised "worm," which displayed "NASA" in high-tech red lettering, and restored the insignia affectionately known as the "meatball." The meatball, which served the agency from 1959 to 1975, consists of the agency's name surrounding a starry blue background, a red wing shape and the flight path of a spaceship. It was worn by astronauts on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions. (W Post, May 26/92)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
Atlantis's astronauts reported the loss of a second scientific instrument, a telescope probing galaxies millions of light years away. Controllers spent hours trying to restore the telescope but to no avail. The telescope, the only astronomical instrument abroad, accomplished 19 observations before the fuse blew. More than 34 were planned for the nine-day mission. (W Post, Mar 31/92; USA Today, Mar 31/92; W Times, Mar 31/92; B Sun, Mar 31/92; NY Times, Mar 31/92)
Reacting to the recent failed attempt at tethered space flight by the crew of Shuttle Atlantis, Astronaut Jeffrey Hoffman, the payload commander, said NASA needed to improve the way equipment was tested on the ground before flight. "When we're doing fundamentally new things, we've really got to pay close attention to how we're doing the testing on the ground or else we're going to continue to get surprised," Hoffman said. (APn, Aug 14/92)
China reported that it would send astronauts into space by the year 2000 as the first step toward launching its own Space Station. "Before the year 2000 China will have completed its research into experimental manned spacecraft and carrier rockets," said the State Commission on Science and Technology. (UPI, Apr 7/92; LA Times, Apr 8/92)
NASA reported that astronaut Bruce E. Melnick, Commander USCG, will be leaving NASA in July 1992. Melnick, who flew on Space Shuttle missions STS-41 and STS-49, accepted the position of Director, Shuttle Processing Contract Process Improvement Technology with Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 92-68; USA Today, May 20/92; AP, May 19/92)
The seven astronauts who returned to Earth July 9 after spending 14 days on the Shuttle Columbia said that getting used to Earth again had been similar to adjusting after shorter flights. They also said that preliminary results indicated their experiments had been successful. The crew grew protein crystals for use in medical research, studied fire safety in space by lighting candles and igniting wiring insulation and polyurethane foam, jiggled drops of liquid with sound waves to see how fluids behave in space, and tested a new miniature space greenhouse. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 21/92)
Technicians searching for a leak in a Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket found a 1-inch hair pressed into a secondary seal, a NASA spokesman said. The leak was detected yesterday in a segment of a booster for the Shuttle Columbia, which was being prepared for a February launch date. It was a leak in an O-ring seal that was blamed for the 1986 Shuttle Challenger explosion in which seven astronauts were killed. (W Times, Dec 27/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 27/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Astronauts had to wait more than two hours before debarking because of toxic fumes from a leaking thruster. The main mission, the deployment of a secret Pentagon satellite, occurred soon after launch in what was the last Shuttle mission for the U. S. military. The day before, the Shuttle had to swerve in orbit to avoid a four-inch piece of space junk, the third such incident in two years. (The Sun, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; UPI, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; NY Times, Dec 10/92; WSJ, Dec 10/92; P Inq, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 13/92; USA Today, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 11/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia commander Richard N. Richards made a pitch today for the Space Station Freedom, saying that astronauts on the Columbia Shuttle flight needed more time in orbit to conduct scheduled experiments. Such time would be available on the Space Station, which had experienced funding difficulties in Congress. Two Shuttle astronauts worked though part of their breaks as they rushed to complete experiments, one dealing with the growth of crystals and the other with dust particles. (W Post, Jul 4/92)
U.S. Rep. Louis Stokes, who criticized NASA hiring policies as racially discriminatory during Congressional debate in July, said that he was encouraged by recent steps toward diversification discussed by the space agency at a gathering of top NASA officials at a mostly black elementary school in Cleveland. The gathering included a visit by black astronaut Charles Bolden. (The Plain Dealer, Oct 22/92)
NASA announced that it planned to launch Shuttle Endeavour and seven astronauts on December 1 on a  mission to repair the troubled Hubble Space Telescope. (UPI, Oct 21/93)
Donald K. Slayton, one of the original seven American astronauts, died June 13 at his home in League City, Texas, of brain cancer. He was 69.
In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station.
Astronaut Ellen Ochoa, scheduled to be aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery when it was launched in April, would be the first Hispanic female to fly in space. Ochoa, an expert with the shuttle's 50-foot-long robot arm, was scheduled to deploy and retrieve a $6 million spacecraft while on the mission. (FL Today, Apr 3/93)
NASA announced that astronaut James P. Bagian, M.D., P.E., was taking a leave of absence from NASA to work as Vice-President of Corporate Development and Medical Affairs at Somanetics Corporation, Troy, Michigan.  Bagian was scheduled to head up the company's clinical research activities. (NASA Release 93-139)
The European Space Agency in the Netherlands invented new shoes for astronauts to use in orbit. The new shoes, which look like ordinary sneakers, have small suction cups on the bottom of each shoe. The suction cups grip floor, wall, and ceiling and allow the astronauts to walk around in the weightless Shuttle. Up until now, in order to get around astronauts have had to stick their feet into loops placed around the Shuttle. (AP, Jan 22/93)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia left their medical and scientific studies on Tuesday, April 27, to work on repairing a malfunctioning toilet and waste-water system. Engineers believed that a device that squirts waste overboard from a storage tank got stuck and caused the tank to spring a small nitrogen leak. The astronauts rerouted the waste into two rubber-lined storage bags until the problem could be fixed. NASA said that the problem would not endanger the nine-day mission.	Earlier in the day, the astronauts carried out a series of medical and scientific experiments. (UPI, Apr 27/93; AP, Apr 28/93; RTw, Apr 27/93, Apr 28/93; NY Times, Apr 28/93; C Trib, Apr 28/93)
A European Space Agency official said that a re-usable science satellite scheduled to be rescued during Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission next week would be mothballed after astronauts returned it to earth and experiments were removed from it. The satellite was scheduled to be flown four more times, but there was no budget for additional flights. (RTw, June 16/93)
Bryan O'Connor, a former astronaut and deputy director of the redesign team and deputy associate administrator of the office of space flight at NASA, said that NASA engineers planned to have three new design options ready by June. O'Connor said that two plans could cut the cost of the project by 50 percent or more. The third plan, which would be based on the current Space Station Freedom concept, would cost more. Whether the redesign effort could be done quickly and cheaply was still in doubt, O'Connor said. (AP, Apr 6/93; W Post, Apr 6/93)
Space Shuttle Columbia, carrying seven astronauts, 48 rats, and a medical research lab, blasted into orbit for a record 14 days of experiments to learn more about keeping astronauts healthy during long voyages in weightlessness. The research was also expected to shed light on other health issues, including hypertension, anemia, and osteoporosis.  This mission was only the second mission in 58 Shuttle trips focused entirely on medical research.
NASA named Astronauts Tamara E. Jernigan, Thomas David Jones, James S. Voss, and Ellen Ochoa payload commanders on upcoming Space Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 93-140)
NASA ground crews began final preparations to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite delivery mission.  The liftoff was scheduled for August 12.  Discovery was to carry two satellites.  Five astronauts were scheduled to put one satellite in orbit to conduct advanced communications experiments.  The other, a telescope, was to be let out of the cargo bay for several days of celestial observations, then captured and returned to Earth.  (Rtw, Aug 9/93; AP, Aug 9/93, Aug 10/93; W Post, Aug 10/93; UPI, Aug 8/93)
The Space Shuttle Discovery, with five astronauts on board, was scheduled to lift off at 1:32 a.m. April 6 to study the condition of the Earth's ozone layer and sample 30 to 40 other gases. Three instruments in the Shuttle cargo bay would measure ozone, and four others would probe solar energy. A nighttime launch was necessary to put Discovery on the desired course for observing sunrises in the Northern Hemisphere. Meteorologists predicted an 80 percent chance of good weather. (W Post, Apr 5/93, Apr 6/93; W Times, Apr 5/93; LA Times, Apr 5/93; NY Times, Apr 4/93; AP, Apr 5/93; UPn, Apr 3/93; RTw, Apr 3/97)
Computers halted Shuttle Discovery's countdown only 19 seconds before launch when they sensed a problem with one of the spaceship's two booster rockets.  NASA said that the flight could not be rescheduled until sometime in the first week of August, after engineers had replaced a bad hydraulic power unit in the booster.  It was the second launch delay.  Five astronauts aimed to deploy an experimental communications satellite during the mission. (Rtw, Jul 24/93; AP, Jul 24/94; UPI, Jul 24/93; W Post, Jul 25/93; NY Times, Jul 25/93; W Times, Jul 25/93; USA Today, Jul 26/93)
NASA announced that Nasa technology developed to keep astronauts cool on the lunar surface and a NASA patient-monitoring device, originally designed for astronaut heart rate transmittal, were scheduled to be inducted into the U.S. Space Foundation's Technology Hall of Fame on April 16. (NASA Release 93-069)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched on a satellite-deployment mission after two months of delays.  The liftoff had been postponed five times for equipment failure, payload problems, and a meteor shower.  After a short delay caused by a minor communications problem, astronauts on board successfully deployed the $363 million Advanced Communication Technology Satellite (ACTS). The satellite could one day shrink the diameter of satellite dishes to one and one-half feet.
Reinhard Furrer, a former German astronaut, criticized the German government for planning to cut funds for manned space flights such as the U.S.-German Shuttle mission now orbiting the Earth. Furrer flew on a joint U.S.-German scientific mission in 1885. (RTw, Apr 27/93)
Intelsat and Martin Marietta reached a tentative settlement of lawsuits connected with a communications satellite that Space Shuttle astronauts rescued after it was stranded in low orbit. The lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 1990 launch of a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went into a low, useless orbit after a Martin Marietta rocket launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts attached a new rocket booster package to the satellite in May 1992, and the satellite then fired itself into its proper orbit. (W Times, June 12/93; W Post, June 12/93)
NASA announced that a study at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, might lead to a reduction in the lightheadness astronauts feel after returning to earth from space. A reduced level of plasma was believed to contribute to the tendency to feel faint. (NASA Release 93-030)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were measuring how the human body reacted to exercise done on Earth and comparing those measurements to the exercise measurements of astronauts working in the microgravity environment of space. The goal was to try to improve the productivity of astronauts involved in space walks. (NASA Release 93-93)
Senior astronaut Jerry Ross, payload commander for the Shuttle Columbia's February 25 mission, said that NASA should revamp globe-spanning training because such programs endangered fliers' family life and could lead to physical and mental exhaustion. Ross and another astronaut spent about 28 weeks in Germany preparing for the German spacelab mission aboard Columbia. (USA Today, Feb 5/93; W Times, Feb 5/93; AP, Feb 4/93; Space News, Feb 8-14)
NASA announced that Mae C. Jemison, M.D., the first woman of color in space, had resigned to pursue interests in "teaching, mentoring, health care issues, and increasing participation in science and technology of those who have traditionally been left out."  Jemison, who joined the astronaut program in 1987, was a science mission specialist on STS-47, Spacelab-J, in September 1992, a cooperative mission with the Japanese to study life sciences and materials processing. (NASA Release 93-043; P Inq, Mar 7/93; B Sun, Mar 7/93; W Post, Mar 8/93; W Times, Mar 7/93; AP, Mar 6/93; UPI, Mar 6/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; People Magazine, Apr/93)
A November Discovery flight, the second Spacehab flight of the year, was scheduled to carry the Wake Shield Facility (WSF), designed to be released from the payload bay to create an atomic oxygen wake as it circled the Earth. Discovery astronauts would conduct experiments to determine the effect the "space wake" had on them. The December flight of Endeavour was scheduled to be the first servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release 93-10)
NASA astronaut Bernard A. Harris Jr., M.D. was scheduled to present a National Urban League (NLU) banner, flown on the STS-55 Space Shuttle mission, to NLU president John Jacob during the organization's opening keynote ceremony on Sunday, August 1, in Washington, D.C. (NASA Media Advisory)
NASA rewarded the Columbia astronaut's energy-conservation efforts by adding a day to the Space Shuttle's mission. The extra day would allow scientists to meet and possibly exceed mission goals, which had been jeopardized by equipment problems.
Ellen Ochoa, the first Hispanic woman astronaut, was scheduled to be a mission specialist on the Shuttle Endeavour launch March 23. Her mission raised anticipation in the Hispanic community, and NASA invited several Hispanic educators and activists to be present at the launch. NASA planned to send Ochoa on a tour of several cities later in the year. (El Sol, Feb 4/93, Feb 10/93)
During Take Our Daughters to Work Day on April 26, daughters of Johnson Space Center employees got to see where astronauts prepare for space flights and were even able to test the pressurized spacesuit gloves worn by astronauts. Daughters were also welcomed at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, where they toured the control room, investigated an SE-71 cockpit, and crawled around inside a modified Boeing 747. (AP, Apr 27/93; W Times, Apr 29/93; Antelope Valley, Apr 29/93)
Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts released a spacecraft that was to study the solar wind and the sun's corona. The spacecraft would be picked up by Discovery after two days.
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it had picked two Germans, a Spaniard, and a Swede for its first joint missions with Russian astronauts to the Mir-1 Space Station in 1994 and 1995. The ESA had reserved one slot each for the two flights. A decision on which two men would participate would be made in the weeks before the flight. (RTw, May 7/93)
Shuttle astronaut Mae Jemison was scheduled to make a guest appearance on a "Star Trek: The Next Generation" episode during the week of May 31. Very much in demand as a speaker when she was with NASA, Jemison also has had a school named after her in Detroit. (Ap, Apr 4/93, Apr 19/93, May 24/93, May 26/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
People with temperature disorders have benefitted from suits developed by NASA for use by astronauts in very hot temperatures.  The suits have been modified for people who need help in keeping their body temperature down in hot weather.  The suits for children are vests stuffed with detachable "cold packs," much like those used to keep food cold in picnic coolers.  Other suits are powered by battery packs and fitted with tubes that circulate coolant. The suits are made of a material known as Thinsulate. (Fairfax County Journal, Aug 31/93)
The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.
Writing in the New York Times, Robert L. Park, professor of physics at the University of Maryland, suggested that now that the Cold War was over and there was no longer any need to demonstrate U.S. space superiority over the Soviet Union, the time had come to "put Space Station Freedom out of its misery." Parks noted that there was very little one could do in a Space Station; he added that the scientific accomplishments of the Russian cosmonauts in Russian Space Station Mir had been meager and that there was little expectation that U.S. astronauts would do any better. He noted, further, that the costs connected with the station were enormous. (NY Times, Apr 18/93)
Guy Bluford, the nation's first African American astronaut in space, was scheduled to retire later in the month.  Bluford, 50, who went on four Shuttle missions, planned to work for a Maryland aerospace company. (AP, Jul 13/93)
Belgian scientists, using research from outer space, invented a new detection system they hoped would prevent crib deaths. Physics professor Manuel Paiva monitored the breathing of astronauts during a Space Shuttle mission two months ago by using a custom-made space suit with special sensors built into the garment. Paiva said that he had used the same technique for babies by attaching the electronic sensors inside pajamas.  The sensors are able to detect a range of respiration problems. Paiva said research had so far been promising but another six months were needed to complete the studies. (RTw, Jul 28/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and astronaut Mae Jemison visited the Challengers Boys and Girls Club in South-Central Los Angeles and announced funding of a science room in the club's new facility. The club runs all-day education, social, and sports programs, six days a week.
The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)
Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)
NASA added a spacewalk to a U.S. Shuttle mission scheduled for July as part of a continuing program to give astronauts experience before start of Space Station construction in 1996. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
NASA announced that NASA and the Russian Space Agency had agreed to up to 10 Shuttle flights to Mir with a total of 24 months time on board Mir for U.S. astronauts, a program of scientific and technological research, and the upgrade and extension of the Mir lifetime during the period 1995-1997. (NASA Release 93-222)
The Washington Times reported that Space Shuttle Endeavour had to delay firing a jet to avoid possibly coming in contact with a piece of space trash, in this instance, a 27-year-old spent Russian rocket. This was the fourth time in two years that Shuttle astronauts had to take measures to avoid trash in space. There were hundreds of thousands of pieces of trash floating in space as a result of space missions. (AP, June 23/93; W Times, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93)
A first formal industrial test of a system that uses computer-set lights to adjust a person's sleep patterns got underway in January at a San Diego Gas and Electric Company plant. The system may prove useful in keeping astronauts and night workers alert, easing jet lag, helping older people sleep, and helping teens get out of bed. NASA started using the system in 1991 to adapt astronauts to night launches and shift work.
The media reported that Columbia's astronauts were attempting to find a slight air leak that NASA said posed no danger to the crew. The leak had been detected the previous evening. According to NASA sources, the leak would not affect the duration of the space mission. (AP, Apr 30/93)
Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)
NASA scientists were scheduled to test an "intelligent" computer on the 14-day Spacelab Life Sciences mission, scheduled for launch in early October. The computer, known as the Astronaut Science Advisor, was designed to help astronauts work more efficiently and improve the quality of science in space. (NASA Release 93-180)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of two astronauts, William M. Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, to senior management positions at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release June 24/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
The Houston Post reported that a faulty command from Mission Control during a Shuttle flight a month ago caused sparks aboard Endeavour and knocked out power to some of its equipment. The six astronauts aboard the Shuttle were in no danger, and power was restored in 10 minutes.  The incident, however, did lead NASA to convene a safety board meeting.  (AP, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 5/93; RTw, Aug 4/93; UPI, Aug 4/93)
NASA announced that 14 astronauts who orbited the Earth during Project Gemini were installed in the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame. The new inductees were John E. Young, James A. McDivit, the late Edward H. White II, Charles Conrad Jr., Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Thomas P. Stafford, Neil A. Armstrong, David R. Scott, Eugene A. Cernan, Michael Collins, Richard F. Gordon Jr, and Buzz Aldrin. (UPI, Mar 18/93, March 22/93; Reuters, March 22/93; AP, Mar 22/93; P Inq, Mar 21/93)
NASA announced that the agency was accepting applications for mission specialist and pilot astronaut positions effective immediately. The cut-off date for applications was July 1, 1993.
Responding to Alan Shepherd's June 19 letter on the DC-X (Delta Clipper), Charles Conrad Jr., a former astronaut and staff vice president at McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, defended the concept behind the vertical-takeoff, vertical-landing vehicle.  He also noted that by the time the vehicle would be operational it would not be a Shuttle replacement but would provide an adjunct to the space lift capacity in the 20,000-pound-payload category.  Conrad noted that the experimental vehicle was designed to be reusable, like aircraft.  (W Post, Jul 19/93)
Technical breakthroughs in space have helped launch clinical advances on earth. Space Shuttle experiments, which focus on determining how best to maintain the health of astronauts aboard a future Space Station, continue to provide spin-offs for clinical medicine on earth, from programmable pacemakers to a better understanding of vestibular disorders. The cost, however, is very high, and the question remains whether the Space Station project represents a potentially giant leap for medicine or a small step for a select few. (Medical World News, Aug 15/93)
Space School, a method of teaching math and science that uses spaceage technology to beam educational "adventures" into classrooms across America, was scheduled to open August 30. Space School lessons, which were to be carried on a delivery system called "distance learning," would be broadcast from a studio in Spokane, Washington, beamed up to a satellite, down to a receiver, and transmitted to a television in the classroom. Space school was to be operated and partially financed by the Young Astronaut Council, a nonprofit organization started by the White House in 1894. (Parade, June 27/93)
At a news conference during the annual Naval Aviation Symposium, astronauts Eugene Cerman, Alan Shepherd, Neil Armstrong, and James Lovell spoke of the importance of continued exploration of the moon. Cerman, the last man to walk on the moon, said, "We are going to go. It's man's intuitive spirit to go back and go on to Mars." (AP, May 7/93)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
Guion Bluford Jr., America's first African-American astronaut in space, was scheduled to leave NASA in July to join NYMA, Inc., a Greenbelt, Maryland, engineering and computer software company. (USA Today, June 16/93; NASA Release, 93-113)
The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Space & Rocket Center was operating two nonprofit Space Camps, one in Huntsville, Alabama, and the other in Florida, near the Kennedy Space Center. The programs at the camp were designed to encourage young people to think about careers in science, technology, and the aerospace industry when they grow up, or to encourage them to try to become astronauts. Since the program began in 1982, more than 150,000 students have graduated from the program. (W Post, June 1/93)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Columbus were to be injected with a saline solution and wired with catheters during next week's research mission in an attempt to help doctors understand the effects of weightlessness on the body. The two German astronauts on board would also have catheters in their veins during the launch in order to measure blood pressure.
NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)
The ITAR-Tass news agency announced that a cargo ship loaded with food, water, fuel and equipment had docked with the orbiting Space Station Mir. The cargo ship also delivered a landing capsule to the two Mir astronauts, who had been aboard the Mir for four months. (AP, May 24/93)
NASA reported that Space Shuttle Discovery's astronauts had retrieved the $6 million satellite, called the Spartan, that they had released into space two days previously. When the Shuttle came to within 35 of the satellite, astronaut Ellen Ochoa grabbed it with the arm of the Space Shuttle's robot and placed it in its cradle in the Shuttle bay. The Spartan spent about 50 hours as a free-flying satellite with two automated telescopes gathering data about the sun and the solar wind streaming from it. (AP, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 13/93; W Times, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93; W Post, Apr 14/93; B Sun, Apr 14/93; P Inq, Apr 14/93; UPI, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; USA Today, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93, Apr 15/93; C Trib, Apr 15/93)
Astronauts assigned to the Space Shuttle Columbia mission in the fall of 1993 were scheduled to conduct experiments on rats while in orbit. After beheading the rats, they were to dissect them. This would be the first dissection of an animal in space, to NASA's knowledge. The remaining rats aboard the Shuttle were scheduled for a similar fate once they returned to Earth.  NASA's Willy Hinds, a biologist and immunologist who is in charge of the project, said that "these tissues...are the biological equivalent of the moon rocks."  (AP, Aug 30/93; LA Times, Sept 5/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93)
The media reported that the crew aboard Shuttle Columbia had succeeded in flushing urine and other waste water into space from a backup storage system. This was the first time crew members had attempted to dump fluid overboard from contingency containers. Later in the day, the astronauts repaired a nitrogen gas line, restoring the shuttle's normal water pressure, which had dropped as a result of the Shuttle's plumbing problems. The mission's science experiments continued as planned.
NASA reported that an explosive designed to free a satellite aboard Space Shuttle Discovery accidentally detonated while the Shuttle was in orbit last month, hurling shrapnel though the cargo compartment.  The five astronauts were never in any danger, a NASA official said. The damage would not delay Discovery's next flight in January. (RTw, Oct 7/93; AP, Oct 8/93; Fla Today, Oct 11/93, Oct 14/93)
A feature article described repairs executed by NASA astronauts, and particularly board-certified surgeon Story Musgrave, to the Hubble Telescope. The Hubble now could spot the light of a firefly 8,500 miles away. James Crocker, an engineer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, proposed Hubble's "eyeglasses," called COSTAR (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement); other equipment also was added. Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, Apr 94)
NASA announced that astronaut Richard O. Covey would leave NASA as of July 11 and would retire from the Air Force on August 1. He was scheduled to become Director of Business Development at Calspan Services Contracts Division, a part of Space Industries, Inc. (NASA Release 94-110)
Bernadette Cardenas, an aerospace engineer at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, filed a civil suit against astronaut Lt. Col. Charles (Sam) Gemar and his wife Charlene, also a NASA employee. The suit claimed the Gemars had harassed her mentally and physically; Mrs. Cardenas wanted to force Col. Gemar to submit to blood tests to establish paternity for her two-year-old son. NASA said the lawsuit would not prevent Gemar's participation in the forthcoming shuttle mission. (AP, Feb 24/94; NY Times, Feb 25/94; B Sun, Feb 25/94; USA Today, Feb 25/94)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Readdy would replace Kenneth D. Cameron as NASA manager of operational activities at Star City, Russia. As Director of Operations, Russia, Readdy would work with Russian trainers, engineers, and flight controllers to support the training of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City, and to enhance continued cooperation between NASA and Russia's Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-115)
NASA announced that it would continue to study how the Earth's environment was changing and how human beings affected that change during the upcoming flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis. This, the third flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Also during the mission astronauts would deploy and retrieve a free-flying satellite designed to study the middle and lower thermospheres and would perform various experiments covering life sciences research and microgravity processing. The flight, commanded by Donald R. McMonagle, was scheduled for launch on November 3. (NASA Release 94-175)
NASA announced the selection of astronaut Kenneth D. Cameron to manage NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, and at the Russian control center at Kaliningrad. (NASA Release 94-27)
Former NASA astronaut and Space Shuttle commander Ronald J. Grabe assumed his new post as vice president of business development for the launch systems group of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC) in Sterling, Virginia. He explained that OSC's specialty was providing access to space for small satellites at reasonable cost. One of his priorities was to find new markets for OSC's Taurus and Pegasus rockets. OSC also was about to enter the communications field through its ORBCOMM satellite system. (W Post, May 23/94)
NASA announced that of the various devices left by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the moon 25 years ago, a laser ranging retroreflector continued to provide fundamental scientific data. From the data obtained and new observations scientists now believed that the moon might have a liquid core. Among other findings from the laser ranging experiments were a verification of Einstein's theory of relativity and the direct influence on the moon's orbit of ocean tides on Earth. (NASA Release 94-122)
"Destiny in Space," the latest IMAX space film, being shown in Langley Theater in the National Air and Space Museum, took viewers on a 40-minute hi-tech space ride that examines space exploration by astronauts and robots. (Journal, Jun 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
The University of Houston (UH) was scheduled to take over from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as home for a rocket laboratory researching the feasibility of charged plasma propulsion for future interplanetary flight. The facility was to be called the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory. Astronaut and plasma-physics expert Franklin Chang-Diaz was appointed the facility's director. Chang-Diaz hoped to create a small test rocket to release from a Shuttle. (H Post, Jan 21/94)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off on schedule, and the seven astronauts, including the first Japanese woman in space, began their experiments. The embryonic newts were thriving, and the adult female newts had produced additional eggs. The astronauts also began performing tests to determine how their bodies were adapting to weightlessness. One effect of the absence of gravity was that astronauts tended to grow two or more inches in space because of an elongated spine; they would revert to normal height on Earth. Findings could help in treating back pain on Earth. Among the animals carried for experimental purposes were four pregnant newts. By July 17 the second newt had died for an undetermined reason. The scientists also levitated a pea-sized drop of gold inside an electromagnetic field to investigate ways to exploit the absence of gravity in manufacturing. The astronauts worked in two shifts around the clock in order to complete all but one of the planned 82 experiments. A blown fuse in the French-built electrophoresis unit kept the astronauts from conducting their final experiment before preparing to return to Earth. On July 20 the astronauts marked the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. Because of heavy rainstorms, the projected landing on July 22 was postponed; because of the delay, the mission set a new Space Shuttle flight duration record. In the course of the flight, a number of the eggs hatched, and scores of eggs were laid by the various animals aboard. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; C Trib, Jul 9/94; NY Times, Jul 9/94; W Post, Jul 9/94; W Times, Jul 9/94; Reuters, Jul 9/94;B Sun, Jul 10/94; W Post, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; UP, Jul 10/94; Reuters, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Times, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94; Reuters, Jul 11/94; B Sun, Jul 12/94; W Post, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; AP, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; UP, Jul 18/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; NY Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; AP, Jul 19/94; UP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 22/94; UP, Jul 22/94; Reuters, Jul 22/94)
The crew for the STS-66 mission aboard Atlantis in the Fall of 1994 was selected. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Donald R. McMonagle was to command the mission, called ATLAS-03. This third Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) would continue Spacelab studies of solar energy effects on the Earth's climate and environment. USAF Major Curtis L. Brown, Jr, was named pilot; Scott E. Parazynski, M.D., Joseph R. Tanner, and ESA astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy, mission specialists; and Ellen Ochoa, PhD., Payload Commander. Tasks included the CRISTA-SPAS Cryogenic Infrared Spectrometer Telescope for Atmosphere on the Shuttle Pallet Satellite, jointly with Germany. (NASA Release 94-4; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
In preparation for commemorating the 25th anniversary of Neil A. Armstrong's walk on the moon on July 20, 1969, the media featured various articles, books, films, television specials, and high-level conferences on the meaning of the moon landing. One article commented on the significance of these publications and events, with particular reference to Moonshot, a memoir cowritten by Alan B. Shepard Jr. and the late astronaut Deke Slayton. (LA Times, Jun 28/94)
The publication of former astronaut Jim Lovell's new book, Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13, led to an article recounting the Apollo 13 flight 24 years previously. He stated his belief that NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin should do more to use NASA's past successes to show how NASA had progressed since. (W Times, Oct 21/94)
Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
On February 5 and 6, NASA astronauts tried unsuccessfully to put the Wake Shield Facility satellite in orbit. They encountered problems first with radio interference from the Shuttle and then with failures in the satellite's guidance and navigation system. (UPI, Feb 6/94; Reuters, Feb 6/94; NY Times, Feb 6/94; W Post, Feb 6/94; NY Times, Feb 7/94; W Post, Feb 7/94; USA Today, Feb 7/94; P Inq, Feb 7/94; B Sun, Feb 7/94; AP, Feb 7/94)
NASA's inspector general in a report published in February indicated that an audit showed that astronauts flew two-seater supersonic training jets, T-38 Talons, to Colorado Springs on weekends during ski season as well as to New Orleans and Fort Lauderdale, Florida. NASA required astronauts to log 15 hours of proficiency flying each month. Steve Holly, NASA Deputy Director for Flight Crew Operations, said although flying 10 to 12 hours a day was efficient in a time management sense, improved proficiency was gained through more shorter flights. (NY Times, Apr 24/94; B Sun, Apr 24/94; UP, Apr 25/94)
Jeffrey E. Carr, a spokesman at NASA's Johnson Space Center, confirmed that NASA had ordered a safety investigation of a medical experiment scheduled for spaceflight in 1995 after an astronaut collapsed and required emergency treatment during a test of a chemical used in the research. It was later revealed that the incident occurred to Bonnie J. Dunbar, while in Houston for training in October; a review board was to examine the incident. (AP, Nov 3/94; H Post, Nov 4/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94)
Of the 250 people who flew in orbit on U.S. spaceships since 1961, only six astronauts were black. This surprised J. Alphred Phelps, a retired Air Force master sergeant and author of a just published book: They Had a Dream: The Story of African-American Astronauts. The author described two black Americans who almost became astronauts in the 1960s, as well as the six who made it: Guion Bluford, Ronald McNair, Frederick Gregory, Mae Jemison, Charles Bolden, and Bernard Harris. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. was leaving NASA after 14 years to return to the Marine Corps to serve as Deputy Commandant of Midshipmen at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 94-97; W Times, Jun 19/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
NASA was preparing three rendezvous with Russian Space Station Mir to launch the new cooperative effort between Washington and Moscow. In the first, scheduled for February 1995, Shuttle Discovery would simulate docking with Mir but not in fact touch it. In June 1995, Shuttle Atlantis would actually dock with Mir and remain together for four days, ultimately taking aboard U.S. astronaut Norm Thagard who would have joined Mir in March. In October 1995 Atlantis would be outfitted with an Orbiter Docking System that would be installed on the Space Station to facilitate future rendezvous. (AFP, Dec 16/94)
On the 25th anniversary of the moon landing, President Clinton and Vice President Gore welcomed the three Apollo 11 astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, and Michael Collins, at a White House ceremony. The U.S. Post Office also issued a stamp commemorating the 1969 event. (UP, Jul 20/94; Reuters, Jul 20/94; W Post, Jul 21/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
In connection with the November 21 field hearing in Spokane, Washington, of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, the media featured articles on tests performed on 131 prison inmates in Oregon and Washington from 1963 to 1971. The tests were sponsored by the Atomic Energy Commission in order to help determine how much radiation U.S. astronauts could safely bear during spaceflights. The testicles of inmate volunteers were irradiated in return for a small stipend. Classified documents dealing with the project were only made available recently. (W Post, Nov 20/94; USA Today, Nov 21/94; AP, Dec 5/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Sidney M. Gutierrez would leave NASA effective August 8 and retire from the Air Force to become Manager for Strategic Planning and Development at Sandia National Laboratories in his hometown of Albuquerque, New Mexico. (NASA Release 94-129)
Astronaut Neil Armstrong made a rare public appearance at an airshow in New Knoxville, spoke briefly to reporters and signed autographs. He said he had accepted an invitation to the White House on the 25th anniversary of his moon walk. (Western Star, Jul 20/94)
Japanese Prime Minister Tustomu Hata's Space Activities Commission announced that Japan's first woman astronaut, Chiaki Mukai, a medical researcher, was to take part in NASA's Columbia flight set for launch July 8. The flight was to conduct some 80 experiments under the second International Microgravity Laboratory Project, of which Japan is a member. (UP, May 11/94)
Lieutenant Colonel Tom Akers, an astronaut, presented NASA's $500,000 check to the state of Arkansas's Aerospace Education Center. (Arkansas Democrat Gazette, Apr 6/94; Fla Today, Apr 17/94)
NASA budget cuts and various problems experienced in recent flights aroused concern for the safety of astronauts, according to NASA critics. Despite assurances by Daniel Mulville, Director of NASA's Engineering and Quality Management Division that standards were not compromised, fears of another Challenger type disaster persisted. (AP, Mar 13/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; LA Times, Mar 20/94; Fla Today, Mar 24/94)
NASA announced that the six astronauts who recently returned from Endeavour's mission would be available for interviews as time permits during their debriefing schedule. (NASA Release 94-67)
Kathryn Hire, who worked at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) for Lockheed Space Operations Company, became the first KSC worker to be selected as a future astronaut. (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
The media continued to give extensive coverage to the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour. One of the natural phenomena on which the radar photography concentrated was volcanoes. On October 1, it photographed Russia's Klyuchevsky Volcano on the Kamchatka Peninsula, which had erupted the previous day. Endeavour also scanned Hawaiian volcanoes and dormant Mt. Rainier and the Rwandan volcanoes where endangered gorillas lived. In addition, it sought traces of ancient river tributaries buried by the Sahara, forest fires and thunderstorms in various areas of the globe, and an earthquake that had occurred in Japan. Another goal was to map Earth's appearance in early autumn and note seasonal environmental changes between photographs taken in April and those in October. If the radar could determine small changes on Earth it could eventually be used to predict earthquakes or volcano eruptions. On October 6 German oceanographers dumped 106 gallons of diesel oil and 26 gallons of algae products into the North Sea to determine how well Endeavour's radar could detect oil slicks and differentiate them from algae. Workers on two oil-recovery ships started to clean up the mess as soon as Endeavour passed and expected to finish within two hours. To gather as much data as possible, the astronauts worked in two 12-hour shifts.
France's national space agency CNES launched a public relations campaign featuring its astronauts in order to improve strained relations between CNES and the inhabitants of French Guiana on South America's northeast coast, where the Ariane rocket series was launched. The Guiana space center gave France independent launch capacity for civilian and military satellites. (Reuters, Nov 19/94)
U.S. astronauts and Russian cosmonauts met at the 10th congress of the Association of Space Explorers that opened in Moscow. Participants stressed the importance of space cooperation now that the space race was over. The conference theme was devoted to protecting Earth's ecology. (AP, Aug 9/94)
NASA announced the death of Stuart Allen Roosa, one of six Apollo astronauts to fly solo around the moon. (NASA Release 94-210; UPI, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94)
Astronaut Tom Jones on Space Shuttle Endeavour answered questions about radar mapping and the Earth's ozone layer from students at his former school in Stemmers Run. Among the areas Endeavour radar was mapping were traces of ancient rivers beneath the Sahara Desert. Other areas being targeted for mapping were the Andes and the East Australian Current as well as fires in China south of the Yellow River and flooding in the Midwest. Astronauts assured C-span television questioners that the mapping radar was strictly for scientific not military purposes. At the halfway point of the mission, NASA said Endeavour already had collected 95 percent of the data it was to gather. The astronauts were divided into two shifts of three persons each in order to work round the clock monitoring radar performance, taking pictures of the Earth, and recording observations on tape. An air pollution monitor aboard Endeavour found surprisingly high level of carbon monoxide in the Northern Hemisphere, according to NASA. NASA scientists on the ground were delighted with the quality of pictures and other data beamed by radar.
An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)
Jon Linderman, a National Research Council fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, said that based on experiments with rats, exercise combined with growth hormone may help prevent muscle atrophy in astronauts, seniors, and patients confined to bed following illness or injury. Russian cosmonauts discovered that extensive exercise alone was insufficient to prevent muscle atrophy. (UP, May 27/94; UP, Jun 3/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronauts Norman E. Thagard and Bonnie J. Dunbar as prime and backup crew members for a three-month flight on Russian Space Station Mir in March 1995. Both astronauts flew on previous U.S. Shuttle flights and conducted various scientific experiments. (NASA Release 94-16)
A feature article described the training program in Russia of U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar. Thagard was scheduled to blast off to Russian Space Station Mir with two cosmonauts in March 1995; Dunbar was his backup. They were studying Russian intensively, both the spoken language and technical terminology. In addition, they practiced on a Soyuz simulator, conducted serious physical workouts, and engaged in Russian psychological training for long-haul space crews. (LA Times, Jul 12/94)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar, who are training in Russia, returned to Johnson Space Center with the four Russian cosmonauts with whom they will fly in March 1995. The six were in Houston for three weeks to learn about U.S. science experiments planned for their flights. (H Post, May 17/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
The projected testing of the SAFER (Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue) device during an Extravehicular Activity (EVA) by the astronauts in the September Discovery flight was discussed at some length. SAFER was developed by engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was designed to stabilize an astronaut, allowing the astronaut to fly back to safety should the astronaut drift too far from a structure during an untethered EVA. The 83-pound SAFER was intended to be attached to the bottom of an astronaut's spacesuit. Other objectives of the Discovery flight were to orbit the Langley Research Center's LITE (Lidar In-space Technology Experiment) payload, a laser-observation of the Earth, and to release and retrieve the Goddard Space Flight Center's Spartan 201 solar-wind research satellite. (AvWk, Sep 5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94)
A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)
Senator Howell Heflin, Democrat from Alabama, told a space conference at Auburn University that he owed his life to the space program. He referred to angioplasty, a pacemaker, and a steel artery expansion device, all of which were based on space-related research. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and several Auburn graduate astronauts also took part in the program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
An article about U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar and their training in Russia stressed their intensive Russian language lessons and their sense of Russia's space program accomplishments in the face of the country's serious economic problems. They believe both countries would benefit from space cooperation: the United States would gain from the experience and data Russia had collected from long stays in space and Russia would profit from U.S. technology and the use of the U.S. Shuttle to ferry large cargos to Mir. (C Trib, Jul 3/94)
Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency (ESA), announced at a news conference in Berlin that veteran German astronaut Ulf Merbold would join two Russian cosmonauts for the first joint European and Russian EUROMIR 94 space flight scheduled for October 3. During the 30-day flight, 30 experiments prepared by scientists from ESA states were to be performed on board Russian Space Station Mir. (Reuters, May 30/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin Chang-Diaz would be payload commander for the Space Shuttle mission scheduled for early 1996 in which the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) would be flown for the second time. Because of the preparation time required for this mission designed to orbit the TSS at the end of a 13-mile-long tether to test techniques for managing aircraft at great distances and to study the electrodynamic effects of moving a conductive tether through the Earth's magnetic field, the selection was made early. (NASA Release 94-142)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
Astronaut Jannice Voss Ford, training for a mission aboard Russian Space Station Mir, appeared in a two-hour electronic conference concerning the Mir flight, NASA, the Space Station, and her qualifications for being an astronaut. (Fla Today, Jun 12/94)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle astronaut William E. Thornton would retire from NASA on May 31. (NASA Release 94-87)
In discussing the training of two U.S. astronauts in Russia, William Saxe, NASA's representative in Moscow, was quoted as saying that when the astronauts arrived in February, they were refused maps or phone books of Star City, their training center, because these were considered top secret. However, the astronauts were not denied entrance to any of the buildings. The astronauts were not to begin training with Russian cosmonauts until the fall. (NY Times, Aug 21/94)
On the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the first moonlanding mission, the Italian newspaper La Repubblica published an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. In it he complimented Italy for its good space knowhow, saying Italians were magicians in the area of space communication. He also mentioned ways in which Italy was cooperating with NASA such as the Italian astronaut who was to help complete the testing of the tethered satellite system and the Italian Space Agency's work with NASA on the Cassini Space Mission. He pointed out that above all NASA counted on Italy for the construction of logistic pressurization modules and that this construction would give Italian firms a technological capacity that would have an impact on all Italian industries. (La Repubblica, Oct 11/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
NASA announced that astronauts John E. Blaha and Shannon W. Lucid had been selected to train for the second of at least four scheduled astronaut stays aboard Russian Space Station Mir. The two were to begin training in Star City, Russia, in February 1995. (NASA Release 94-183)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
As the astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia neared and passed the halfway point of their mission, they continued medical and metal research experiments, growth studies with protein crystals, and physical exercises. Lettuce and other seeds flown on Columbia were to be planted after the shuttle returned and then tested. Apart from the desire for a hot shower, the astronauts had no complaints and hoped they might break the U.S. record of time in space flight. The study of spacecraft glow on March 12 experienced difficulty when the ultraviolet light detector malfunctioned. On March 14, the astronauts began tests of a robot arm targeting system. On March 17, the astronauts started packing up experiments in preparation for landing the following day. Columbia landed uneventfully on March 18, having completed 223 orbits over 5.8 million miles. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 10/94; AP, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 10/94; Reuters, Mar 11/94; AP, Mar 11/94; UP, Mar 11/94; B Sun, Mar 12/94; W Post, Mar 12/94; NY Times, Mar 12/94; Reuters, Mar 12/94; W Times, Mar 12/94; LA Times, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 13/94; Reuters, Mar 13/94; UP, Mar 13/94; B Sun, Mar 14/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; USA Today, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 14/94; UP, Mar 14/94; AP, Mar 15/94; Reuters, Mar 15/94; UP, Mar 15/94; W Post, Mar 16/94; AP, Mar 16/94; C Trib, Mar 16/94; USA Today, Mar 17/94; W Times, Mar 17/94; AP, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 17/94; Reuters, Mar 17/94; UP, Mar 18/94; AP, Mar 18/94; Reuters, Mar 18/94; B Sun, Mar 19/94; NY Times, Mar 19/94; W Times, Mar 19/94; W Post, Mar 19/94; USA Today, Mar 21/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., announced the selection of a scientific investigation that included the development of a new camera for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). NASA was scheduled to work with Holland Ford of Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, to develop a new camera, called Hubble Advanced Camera for Exploration. The new camera would be installed on the HST by Shuttle astronauts during the third servicing mission scheduled for November 1999. (NASA Release C94-oo)
Preparations for the launch, the launch itself, and experiments conducted aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia received extensive media coverage. Fueling began the morning of March 4 prior to the crew's boarding. The mission commander and the pilot wore newly devised long johns with tubes that plugged into water pumps to keep them cool while awaiting takeoff and during reentry. Most of the major experiments were to be operated from the ground so that the astronauts could concern themselves with medical tests, some mechanical structures, and observation of the 12 rats used in a bone density study. On March 5, one of Columbia's three auxiliary power units registered an unusually high pressure reading, causing concern; the readings returned to normal when the crew switched to other heaters. It developed that the high pressure apparently resulted from an ice buildup in one of the auxiliary power units. Meanwhile, several articles expressed concern that budget cuts endangered the safety of NASA flights, but NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin denied this was true. As the space flight progressed, two crew members at a time took turns in taking four hours off duty in view of the lengthy nature of the mission. (W Post, Mar 4/94; AP, Mar 4/94; UP, Mar 4/94; Reuters, Mar 4/94; W Times, Mar 5/94; NY Times, Mar 5/94; W Post, Mar 5/94; B Sun, Mar 5/94; P Inq, Mar 5/94; W Times, Mar 6/94; W Post, Mar 6/94; P Inq, Mar 6/94; Daily News, Mar 6/94; UP, Mar 6/94; Reuters, Mar 6/94; NY Times, Mar 7/94; AP, Mar 7/94; UP, Mar 7/94; Reuters, Mar 7/94; NY Times, Mar 8/94; CSM, Mar 8/94; W Post, Mar 8/94; C Trib, Mar 8/94; Reuters, Mar 8/94; AP, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94)
NASA announced the names of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The 1995 group consisted of 10 pilots and nine mission specialists, including six civilians and 13 military officers, all chosen from among 2,962 applicants. International candidates were also to be included and these names would be announced later. (NASA Release 94-205)
A feature article on astronaut Eileen Collins, based at Ellington Field, indicated that she was scheduled to be the first woman to pilot a Space Shuttle when the flight occurred in February 1995. (Texas, Jun 12/94)
A feature article described three women engineers who worked at the Kennedy Space Center and were among the 120 finalists being interviewed by NASA's astronaut selection board for assignment as astronaut candidates. (Fla Today, Oct 7/94)
Guy Bluford, the first African-American astronaut in space, served as master of ceremonies of a celebration the week of June 13, honoring the 30th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act. The Tuskegee Airmen participated as NASA honored those known as the "Civil Rights Movement of the Armed Services of World War II." (Metro Herald, Jun 17/94; Washington Informer, Jun 23-29/94)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar arrived in Russia to begin their yearlong training. The training was to stress physical conditioning, essential for long-duration space flights in order to counter bone and muscle deterioration. The astronauts were to wear Russian space suits bearing both Russian and U.S. flags. (AP, Feb 24/94; AP, Feb 28/94; UP, Feb 28/94)
The seven astronauts who repaired the Hubble Space Telescope in December 1993 were designated recipients of the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award. In their names $250,000 was to be donated to a scholarship fund for dependents of NASA employees. The award ceremony occurred on March 28. (AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Mar 28/94; UP, Mar 28/94; USA Today, Mar 29/94)
Thomas D. Jones was one of the astronauts scheduled to fly on the Endeavour. Since boyhood he always wanted both to fly and to study science. (B Sun, Mar 30/94)
NASA announced the departure from NASA, effective April 11, of Space Shuttle astronaut Ronald J. Grabe. He was to become Vice President, Business Development, for Orbital Sciences Corporation's Launch Systems Group. (NASA Release 94-57)
NASA announced the appointment of astronaut Ronald M. Sega as Director of Operations, Russia in charge of NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, near Moscow. His assignment was to support training and preparations of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City. (NASA Release 94-182)
NASA and Loma Linda University in California announced that NASA planned to use the University's Proton Treatment Center to find ways to protect astronauts in space. The University had the nation's only hospital-based proton treatment center for cancer. The program did not involve experiments on human subjects. (NASA Release N94-83; Sun, Nov 30/94)
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) in its report faulted NASA's effort to fit a program projected in the late 1990s to cost more than $20 billion a year into an annual budget of $14 billion. The CBO said such effort risked delay and failure, and the CBO offered the alternative of grounding the astronauts and ending the Space Shuttle program. Specifically, the report proposed one of the following: ending costly piloted space flight, concentrating instead on robot aircraft and new technology for industry; emphasizing a roboting spacecraft and conducting only four instead of eight Space Shuttle flights a year; concentrating on piloted space flight, building the Space Station and planning for manned missions to the moon and Mars, limiting robot missions to pathfinder projects for the moon-Mars effort. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said NASA would not back away from the Administration's balanced aeronautics and space program. He added that any of the three CBO alternatives would destroy that balance and that NASA could accomplish daring and difficult missions on a tight budget. (NASA Editor's Note N94-27; B Sun, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; P Inq, Mar 25/94; NY Times, Mar 25/94; O Sen Star, Mar 25/94; W Post, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; LA Daily News, Mar 27/94; Federal Computer Week, Mar 28/94; O Sen Star, Mar 31/94)
Astronaut Tom Jones was featured in a telephone interview in which he described his thrill with the experience of weightlessness, the spectacular views from the air, especially of the oceans and the distinctiveness of the various continents, the beauty of the United States, and the difficulty of readjusting physically to Earth's atmosphere. (B Sun, May 2/94)
The nature of experiments scheduled to be performed by astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in its forthcoming flight was described. In the field of life sciences, the experiments were intended to reveal the role gravity played in the reproduction and early development of plants and animals. In the second area, materials science, in the absence of gravity, engineers hoped to show a potential for forging strong, new metal alloys, high-speed semiconductors, and other components for use in aerospace and electronics products. (H Chron, Jul 3/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and astronaut James D. Halsell gave a talk at California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA). Both men stressed the importance of education and discussed NASA's forthcoming projects. The talk ended with congratulations to CSLA electrical engineering professor Helen Boussalis, who won a $3.8 million grant for her project to design and build a model space segmented telescope. (University Times, Oct 27/94)
Shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral carrying for the first time a Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had spent 15 months aboard Mir Station, and five American astronauts. Discovery's eight-day research flight was to include deployment and retrieval of the Wake Shield Facility, designed for growing experimental semiconductor materials, and various microgravity and life science experiments. (AP, Feb 3/94; UPI, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Times, Feb 4/94; P Inq, Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY Times, Feb 4/94; USA Today, Feb 4/94; WSJ, Feb 4/94; C Trib, Feb 4/94; AP, Feb 4/94)
NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for September 1994, would include two firsts: atmospheric research using a laser, the Lidar In-Space Technology Experiment (LITE), and robotic processing of semiconductor materials. The mission would also feature the deployment and retrieval of a free-flying astronomical observer and the first untethered spacewalk by astronauts in more than 10 years. On August 31, NASA officials indicated there might be a delay in the contemplated September 9 launch because of problems with the craft's propulsion system. (NASA Release 94-135; AP, Aug 31/94; Reuters, Aug 31/94)
Six astronauts went through a countdown drill aboard Shuttle Endeavour, and NASA set the date of April 7 for the spaceship's launch on an environmental research mission. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)
Astronaut Bill Shepherd, deputy manager of the Space Station program office in Houston, said that NASA had contingency plans for building the International Space Station without Russian assistance, if necessary. However, NASA fully expected Russian participation. (Fla Today, May 17/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
President Clinton, who was in Houston, spoke to the Discovery astronauts. Mission Control earlier had instructed them to abandon efforts to launch the Wake Shield Facility satellite. (UP, Feb 7/94; W Times, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 8/94; LA Times, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94)
A feature article, including photographs, described the problems centering around adequate living room in space for astronauts in relation to the design of the Space Station. The main factor limiting space of the 28-by-14.5 foot habitat was the size of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay in which it would ride into orbit. (NY Times, Sep 8/94)
NASA announced the appointments of astronauts Kevin P. Chilton and William F. Readdy to command the third and fourth Space Shuttle/Mir docking missions respectively. The missions were scheduled for March and July 1996. (NASA Release 94-185)
NASA began a 110-hour countdown to the first of an unprecedented series of US missions to the Russian Space Station Mir. Launch of Discovery and its crew of six--including the first woman shuttle pilot and a famed cosmonaut--was set for February 2. The eight-day flight was to include a spacewalk by two astronauts, deployment and retrieval of an astronomy satellite, and science experiments in a commercial space laboratory. The primary goal of the mission was to be the rendezvous with Mir. (Reuters, Jan 29/95; APn, Jan 29/95; H Chron, Jan 31/95; H Post, Jan 31/95; H Chron, Jan 29/95)
Veteran Space Shuttle astronauts Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr., Richard N. (Dick) Richards and Pierre J. Thuot have left the Astronaut Office. Ken Reightler will join Lockheed Martin, Houston, as the Program Manager for Engineering, Test and Analysis. Dick Richards remains at NASA, moving to the Space Shuttle Program Office to serve as the mission director for the second servicing mission for the Hubble Space Telescope. After three Shuttle flights, Thuot will teach astronautics courses at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 95-104; AvWk, Jul 10/95)
A Soyuz TM-21 has launched the first U.S. astronaut to the Mir station. Astronaut Norman E. Thagard, M.D., lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on March 14, and the Soyuz docked with Mir on March 16. Thagard and the other Soyuz cosmonauts will spend three months on Mir, then return aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis. (NASA Release 95-25; NY Times, Mar 14/95, Mar 15/95 & Mar 17/95; W Post, Mar 14/95, Mar 15/95, Mar 17/95 & Apr 23/95; USA Today, Mar 14/95 & Jun 7/95; Fla Today, Apr 2/95 & Jun 7/95; Space News, May 1/95; Reuters, Mar 13/95; AP, Mar 13/95, Mar 3/14 & Apr 9/95; UPI, Mar 11/95; AvWk, Mar 20/95 & Apr 17/95)
A temporary government shutdown is being considered. Although the Space Shuttle would remain in orbit, NASA TV(the entity that provides footage of the astronauts during the mission(could be closed. (CSM, Nov 15/95)
Two-time Space Shuttle astronaut Dr. James P. Bagian has left the astronaut corps for a position with the Environmental Protection Agency�s National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory in Ann Arbor, Michigan. (NASA Release 95-142)
President Bill Clinton presented astronaut Jim Lovell with the Space Medal of Honor, 25 years after he brought his crippled Apollo 13 spacecraft home. Actor Tom Hanks, who played Jim Lovell in the film �Apollo 13,� was present at the ceremony. The president said that the �extraordinary mission� was made even more vivid by the recent �Apollo 13� film. (W Post, July 27/95; W Times, Jul 27/95; USA Today, Jul 27/95; AP, Jul 26/95 & Jul 27/95; Reuters, Jul 26/95; UPI, Jul 26/95)
Astronaut Richard J. Hieb will leave NASA to join Allied Signal Technical Services Corp.�s Civilian Space Business Enterprise as senior engineering advisor. (NASA Release 95-36)
The 1995 Astronaut Class, which begins in March, will include two international candidates. They are Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, Ph.D., and Canadian astronaut David S. Williams, M.D. Their selection as mission specialists brings the class size to 21. (NASA Release 95-3)
NASA announced that it planned a February 2 liftoff for the Shuttle Discovery, whose astronauts were to attempt the first rendezvous of a space shuttle with the Russian Space Station Mir. The planned eight-day flight was considered a rehearsal for a series of Shuttle-Mir docking missions set to begin in late May or early June. The STS-63 Mission was to be commanded by James D. Wetherbee, with Eileen M. Collins as pilot. (NASA Release, 95-5; H Chron, Jan 19/95; AFP, Jan 19/95; APn, Jan 18//95; NASA Note to Editors, N95-4)
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
NASA announced completion of the exterior of the U.S. modules constructed to house the astronauts aboard the ISS, as well as more than 80,000 pounds (36,000 kilograms) of flight hardware for the station. With the completion of the modules, the United States successfully attained the first benchmark in the long and expensive process to complete its part of the ISS. Boeing workers had completed the project at MSFC. NASA planned to launch the first node of the ISS in December 1997.(NASA, “Exterior of US Space Station Modules Completed; Flight Hardware on Track for Launch in 1997,” news release 96-17, 30 January 1996; NASA, “United States’ Space Station Modules Are Right on Track,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 3; The Boeing Company, “Exterior of U.S. Space Station Modules Completed Flight Hardware on Track; First Launch in 1997,” news release, 5 February 1996.)
At Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA announced that it had taken a major step forward in preparations for the International Space Station (ISS): the station’s air purification system had passed a month-long test. NASA scientists tested the ISS’s air pressure and the ability of its air system to regulate the mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen that the astronauts would breathe. In the simulation, scientists used a 6,200-cubic-foot (176-cubic-meter) module from which they had removed the oxygen. The air system not only proved it could maintain the proper levels of both oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also performed satisfactorily at a reduced power level. Engineers hoped to reduce the power level of the ISS during its nighttime orbit. The system, called the Atmosphere Revitalization Subsystem, demonstrated that it could provide healthy working and living conditions for the astronauts on board the ISS.(NASA, “Space Station Air Purification System Completes Major Test,” news release, 10 May 1996.)
For the first time in its history, NASA allowed a researcher to direct an experiment from his home university, rather than from Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Martin Glickman led a group of scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, taking control of a crystal experiment aboard Shuttle Columbia. Both NASA and the scientific community praised the experiment as a crucial step in the relationship between astronauts and academic scientists. Because they did not have to travel to NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, the scientists were able to use their own instruments and data systems. Using remote control, they repeatedly cooled and heated the crystal samples on the Shuttle. Scientists hoped that allowing universities to control experiments from their own institutions would facilitate greater student participation in experiments conducted in space.
The U.S. Space Walk of Fame, based in Titusville, Florida, recognized with a two-day celebration the 20,000 men and women who worked on the Gemini space program. NASA had launched 10 Gemini missions between 1965 and 1966, each spacecraft carrying two astronauts. Many staff members and astronauts involved in the Gemini program went on to work on the Apollo Moon program. Gemini astronauts included Neil A. Armstrong, Jim Lovell, and Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. The event organizers celebrated the achievements of the Gemini missions, in addition to raising funds to establish a permanent monument to the Gemini program.(Marilyn Meyer, “History-Making Gemini Team To Reunite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 June 1996.)
NASA announced its 1996 astronaut candidate class, which included the first set of identical twins ever selected⎯Mark E. Kelly and Scott J. Kelly. The sibling U.S. Navy pilots joined 33 other astronauts in the class. NASA selected 10 pilots and 25 mission specialists from an applicant pool of more than 2,400 candidates, including members of the U.S. Army, Air Force, Coast Guard, Marine Corps, and Navy. Six members of the class held PhDs in their respective fields, and one was an MD. NASA selected the astronaut class, the largest in nearly 20 years, from 16 different states; in addition, one astronaut candidate had been born in Argentina and another in the United Kingdom.(NASA, “NASA Selects Astronaut Class of 1996,” news release 96-84, 1 May 1996; Marcia Dunn, “In NASA First Identical Twins Selected for Astronaut Corps,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 May 1996.)
Horowitz, the first Shuttle pilot with a PhD, captained STS-75. NASA astronauts Andrew M.
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour tested new NASA spacesuits in extreme cold. In preparation for work on the ISS, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott stood nearly motionless in space for 35 minutes, in temperatures nearing 100° below 0°F (-73.33°C), to test the suit’s insulating capacity. In completing the exercise, Scott became the second African American man to walk in space. The newly improved suits, produced at a cost of US$10 million each, proved an effective barrier against the cold. The gloves and the boots of the suits contained heating elements. NASA made the thermal improvements to the spacesuits after the astronauts became cold during the February 1995 spacewalk, causing its early termination.(Michael Cabbage, “Staying Warm in Cosmic Cold,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 January 1996; Jet Magazine, “Navy Captain Winston Scott Becomes Second Black To Walk in Space,” 5 February 1996, 24. 11 Kathy Sawyer, “Two Planets Discovered that Might Sustain Life,” Washington Post, 18 January 1996.)
Columbia astronauts set a series of small fires inside the Shuttle to help NASA scientists improve their design of smoke detectors and fire extinguishers for use in a weightless environment. The fires spread quickly within the enclosed vehicle. Astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman marveled at the behavior of the flames, which was completely different in a weightless environment from that typically observed on Earth. The fires scattered quickly and burned much more intensely than on Earth. NASA had never before tested the fire-detection equipment in a space environment. The fire equipment worked properly, and the crew put out all fires without incident.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Set Fires To Check Safety Equipment,” 3 March 1996.)
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttle’s reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rocket’s three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, “Astronaut’s Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks,” New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
NASA selected astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence to replace Charles J. Precourt as Director of Operations, Russia, making Lawrence the primary contact between NASA and Russian Space Agency officials. As Director of Operations, Russia, Lawrence became responsible for overseeing the training and preparation of U.S. astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia, outside of Moscow. Lawrence was the sixth astronaut to serve in this position.(NASA, “Lawrence To Replace Precourt as NASA Manager in Russia,” news release 96-49, 13 March 1996.)
Receiving congratulations from the rest of the international space community, Russia celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the Russian space station Mir. The pathbreaking spacecraft had hosted a steady stream of astronauts for long-term stays in space throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, transcending many of the changes in the political structure of its home country. The Soviet space program had launched the first Mir module on 20 February 1986 from the desert of Kazakhstan, but because of Cold War tensions, the Soviets had not released specific information about the station as it entered orbit module by module. Rockets had transported the individual modules into space, where cosmonauts assembled them. The fully assembled space station weighed 130 tons (120,000 kilograms or 120 tonnes). As tensions between the United States and the former Soviet Union lessened, Shuttle missions to Mir had become frequent. During the 1990s, many countries, including the United States, had paid the fledgling Soviet space administration, which became the Russian Space Agency, hundreds of millions of dollars to send their astronauts to Mir. Thus, Mir had provided the USSR with a needed source of revenue. However, since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian space program had received only one-fifth of the government funding provided to the Soviet space program. In 1996, even with Mir in an advanced state of decline, Russian officials remained committed to preserving the aging craft’s lifespan. Marcia S. Smith, an aerospace expert with the Congressional Research Service, described Mir’s state as akin to “a car that has 200,000 miles [320,000 kilometers] on it.” Nevertheless, the space station had provided scientists with the only spacecraft in space consistently occupied by humans for a decade, a significant contribution that deserved commemoration.(European Space Agency, news release, 15 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 20 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russian Space Program Drifting Toward Disaster?” 19 February 1996.)
NASA named astronaut Michael Lopez-Alegria to replace astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as NASA’s Director of Operations at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia. The job of the director was to coordinate the training of U.S. astronauts headed for the Mir space station and to act as liaison between NASA and the Russian Space Agency.
Endeavour’s crew successfully tested a giant inflatable antenna, deploying the structure and gathering data during its orbit. Project Manager Steven Bard, a NASA scientist at JPL, called the successful test a giant step toward developing lightweight, cost-effective equipment for space research. The silver, inflatable antenna, about the size of a tennis court, cost US$14 million to develop. The Shuttle astronauts used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to launch the small satellite carrying the antenna. The crew situated Endeavour about 400 feet (122 meters) immediately above the antenna, to observe its behavior after deployment, but when the antenna made some unexpected tumbling rotations, the astronauts moved the Shuttle to a safer distance. After completing the test, the astronauts set off a series of small explosions to cut loose the antenna. Before the mission began, NASA officials had determined that deflating and recapturing the antenna would be too risky and costly to attempt.(William Harwood, “Inflatable Antenna Passes Test,” Washington Post, 21 May 1996; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Deploys Giant Antenna,” Washington Times, 21 May 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent Shuttle–Mir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-79—Press Kit,” news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Arrives for Astronaut’s Long-Awaited Pickup,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
Allen, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz; Swiss astronaut Claude Nicollier; and
NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russia’s withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, “Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd.” Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, “experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation.” The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, “Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew,” 18 November 1996.)
Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. O’Connor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. O’Connor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, O’Connor had voiced some concerns about NASA’s planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, O’Connor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, O’Connor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. O’Connor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, “O’Connor To Leave NASA,” news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns,” Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
Peter H. Diamandis, President of Angel Technologies Corporation, an aerospace firm located in St. Louis, Missouri, offered a US$10 million prize to the first private aviators to complete a suborbital flight into space. Diamandis stated that the object of the prize was to motivate private companies to invest in space exploration, someday making spaceflights open to the public. “We’re looking to spark a constructive competition,” Diamandis explained. To claim the prize, the privately financed and built aircraft would have to ascend to 62 miles (100 kilometers) high, twice within a period of two weeks, delivering three passengers safely to space and back. Diamandis claimed that creating an entirely reusable Space Shuttle would considerably decrease the cost of going to space, opening the space frontier to people who had not trained as professional astronauts. Diamandis intended to announce the winner of the “X Prize” on 18 May, beneath the St. Louis Gateway Arch. Creator of the Voyager and top contender for the prize Burt Rutan, as well as NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, planned to attend the award ceremony.
two Italian astronauts, Umberto Guidoni and Maurizio Cheli, made up the crew. One of the
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers’ funds on NASA’s research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies “are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy.” The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, “NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame,” news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The mission, lasting nearly 17 days, set a new space endurance record for the crew. The astronauts had bested their previous record by nearly 7 hours. Columbia had carried into space a torch for the 1996 Olympic relay, and upon landing, two members of the crew joined the Olympic torch relay team in a special ceremony. The astronauts had overcome several small malfunctions to conduct the successful mission and land the Shuttle on time. Less than 2 hours before the Shuttle’s scheduled arrival, the crew had discovered a clogged cooling line, but the astronauts were able to flush ice from the system to clear the line. In addition, the mission brought to light a potential ongoing problem for Columbia. In studying the launch, NASA officials had observed gas and flames issuing from the rocket boosters, probably through the O- ring joints used to connect the booster’s fuel segments. Although Columbia’s crew was not in danger, NASA officials decided that the Shuttle would not launch again until scientists had determined how well the new water-based adhesive would function under extreme heat. NASA had discontinued the adhesive used previously on the rocket boosters, because the adhesive was an ozone-depleting agent.(William Harwood, “Record Shuttle Flight Ends; Problem May Delay Next Launch,” Washington Post, 8 July 1996; Associated Press, “Columbia Ends 17-Day Mission,” 8 July 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking upon Mission STS-78. The Shuttle carried U.S. astronauts Terrence T. Henricks, Kevin R. Kregel, Richard M. Linnehan, Susan J. Helms, and Charles E. Brady Jr.; French astronaut Jean-Jacques Favier; and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thrisk. NASA planned to use an orbiting research laboratory to conduct a variety of experiments during the mission. In addition to its human cargo, the Shuttle transported the payload for the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences, used to conduct research on musculoskeletal physiology and on the responses of living organisms to a low- gravity environment.(NASA, “Life and Microgravity Science Research Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-78,” news release 96-116, June 1996; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 103.)
NASA and the scientific community celebrated the 15th anniversary of the Space Shuttle program. NASA had adopted the Shuttle as a means of controlling the costs of exploring space. However, NASA conceded that, since its deployment, the Shuttle had flown only nine times per year, compared with the 24 to 60 Shuttle flights per year anticipated. Furthermore, the cost of flying the Shuttle had reached almost US$500,000 more per mission than expected. During its first 15 years, the Shuttles had flown 76 missions, including 51 following the Challenger accident. The Shuttles had transported 545 tons (490,000 kilograms or 490 tonnes) of payloads to space, bringing back to Earth 18.5 tons (17,000 kilograms or 17 tonnes) of payloads. During the same period, 440 astronauts from 12 countries flew aboard the Shuttles. NASA experts predicted that the Shuttle would remain the primary vehicle of space exploration well into the 21st century.(Martin Burkey, “A Lean, Mean Teen: Shuttle Turns 15,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 April 1996; Seth Borenstein, “Costly History Dogs Shuttle on Anniversary,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 12 April 1996.)
Preparing to take over the administration of the Shuttle program from NASA, the Rockwell- Lockheed Martin joint venture, United Space Alliance (USA), named James C. Adamson as its chief operating officer. Adamson came to USA from Lockheed Martin, where he had served since 1994 as a group vice president and general manager of Lockheed’s Engineering and Science Services. Adamson had served as an astronaut at NASA from 1984 to 1992, spending more than 334 hours in space as a part of Missions STS-28 and STS-43.
NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russia’s Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-François Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, “Crew Named to Sixth Shuttle–Mir Docking Mission,” news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASA’s budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former President’s call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the “faster, better, cheaper” mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, “White House Releasing New National Space Policy,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, “Space Policy,” 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, “Fact Sheet: National Space Policy,” 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
During a top-level meeting between officials of the United States and Russia, NASA made public a shift in its policy, announcing that U.S. astronauts would not always have command aboard the ISS. In a compromise meant to encourage Russia to build its portion of the station, NASA conceded that astronauts from other countries would have the opportunity to command the ISS for significant periods.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Command of Space Station Will Be Shared by Other Nations,” 28 September 1996.)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttle’s appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, “Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans,” 21 October 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nation’s oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASA’s Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASA’s final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbia’s launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttle’s mission.(Reuters, “Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly,” 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites,” New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-80—Press Kit,” news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, “Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope,” 20 November 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a “glove box,” allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, “Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component,” Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
With funding from NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, researchers at Utah State University successfully developed a strain of wheat suitable for growth in space. The space wheat, called USU-Apogee, produced a yield equivalent to 600 bushels of grain per acre (21,000 liters of grain per 4,100 square meters), a rate three times more than the rate achieved in previous experiments. Researchers had worked for more than a decade developing the wheat. During the tests, USU- Apogee had thrived under the difficult conditions of artificial sunlight and high levels of carbon dioxide. In conditions approximating the environment in space, the wheat grew on short stalks, produced an unusually large number of seeds, and maintained green leaf tips (reflecting proper calcium levels). Scientists hoped that astronauts would be able to grow the wheat in the future International Space Station, as a more economical means of providing food for long-term space residents than frequent Shuttle supply missions.(NASA, “Utah State University Develops Space Crop,” news release 96-75, 15 April 1996.)
NASA announced the retirement of Jay F. Honeycutt, Director of KSC. A search for Honeycutt’s successor began immediately following the announcement. Honeycutt had joined NASA in 1966 after working as an engineer for Redstone Arsenal. He had begun as an engineer in flight operations and had worked at JSC, later training Apollo astronauts for the lunar landings, and had moved to NASA Headquarters in 1981. Honeycutt had transferred to KSC in 1989 as Director of Shuttle Management and Operations and had become Director of KSC in 1995. Honeycutt had won two Exceptional Service Medals, the Special Achievement Award, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, NASA’s Equal Employment Opportunity Award, and the Meritorious Executive Presidential Rank Award.(NASA, “KSC Director Jay Honeycutt To Retire,” news release 96-215, 22 October 1996.)
China announced it would participate in an international collaborative space research project for the first time in its history. Chinese scientists planned to assist their colleagues from Russia and the United States in the future Discovery mission. Although China had no plans to send an astronaut on the Shuttle, Chinese aerospace engineers volunteered to construct the sophisticated magnets needed to build a magnetic spectrometer. The project was the first time the usually secretive Chinese space science program had opened itself to outside scrutiny.(United Press International, “China To Assist U.S. Space Program,” 3 October 1996.)
NASA canceled a spacewalk for the astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia when the astronauts could not open the outer air lock. After communicating for more than 2 hours with Mission Control in Houston, with officials instructing them to “put as much force as you feel comfortable applying to the handle,” Columbia’s crew ended preparations for the spacewalk. During the spacewalk, the astronauts had intended to test a large crane and various power tools planned for the ISS.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Called Off as Air Lock Hatch Won’t Open,” Washington Post, 28 November 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia conducted an overnight experiment on the effects of space travel on the body’s biological clock. Four astronauts slept with special caps equipped with electrodes to monitor their brain and muscle activity. Astronauts in space have no exposure to the once-daily rising and setting Sun, which helps trigger a regular sleep pattern on Earth. In space the Sun rises and sets more than a dozen times each “day.” NASA administrators planned the experiment because they recognized the value of restful sleep for astronauts working in space and were concerned that sleep loss would become a greater disadvantage the longer an astronaut stayed in space. With the ISS on the horizon, NASA researchers considered the possible effects on astronauts of record-setting stays in space a significant issue. “Sleep disruption is something that has to be taken seriously,” said Timothy H. Monk, the lead researcher on the project.(Reuters, “Shuttle Mission Probes Body Clock,” 24 June 1996.)
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASA’s Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as “the first day of a new space program in America.” Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve “very good” safety ratings.(Associated Press, “NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry,” 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, “NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 30 September 1996; United Press International, “NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 1 October 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying France’s first female astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. André-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of André-Deshays at Mir, the head of France’s space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, “French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, “Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station,” 19 August 1996; Associated Press, “Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says,” 19 August 1996.)
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-24 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri and the first female French astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. The crew of Soyuz planned to resupply Mir’s long-term crew.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 514, 25 August 1996, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx514.html (accessed 29 July 2008); Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI), “Russian Spaceship Heads for Space Station,” 18 August 1996.)
NASA announced that the tethered satellite experiment had failed. The 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, attaching the 0.5-ton (450-kilogram or 0.45-tonne) satellite to Shuttle Columbia, broke unexpectedly just as the tether had nearly reached its full extension. Before the tether broke, the experiment to use an orbiting satellite to produce electricity had been proceeding smoothly. The astronauts had been in the process of extending the satellite from the Space Shuttle for more than 5 hours, when they noted a decrease in tension and realized that the tether and satellite had broken away. NASA Commander Andrew M. Allen responded to the break immediately, directing the Shuttle away from the satellite to prevent a collision. However, the satellite never came close to the Shuttle; it was more than 18 miles (29 kilometers) away only a few minutes after breaking free. NASA officials could not immediately identify the cause of the break. The astronauts aboard the Shuttle managed to record images of the satellite trailing away from the Shuttle. This footage, a black and white rendering of the tether disappearing into space, reached Flight Command Center in Houston, Texas, shortly after the event. “Those are some tether dynamics we did not want to see,” stated one Mission Control operative. NASA dismissed the idea of attempting to retrieve the satellite, explaining that, although it was technically possible, such a mission would be too dangerous and too costly in consumption of fuel.(NASA, “STS-75 Mission Control Status Report No. 10,” 26 February 1996; Steve Marshall, “Satellite Tether Snaps; Shuttle Safe,” USA Today, 26 February 1996; William Harwood, “Science Satellite Is Lost as Shuttle Tether Breaks,” Washington Post, 26 February 1996.)
In a postflight inspection, NASA engineers discovered that one loose screw had caused the hatch on Shuttle Columbia to jam, preventing the astronauts from taking their scheduled spacewalks. The screw had probably dislodged during takeoff, falling into the gears of the hatch. NASA had decided to cancel the spacewalks, rather than force the hatch open and risk damaging it permanently. With the Shuttle scheduled to launch again in one month, NASA faced the question of whether to remove and replace the gearboxes on all the hatches inside the Shuttle as a precautionary measure.(Associated Press, “Loose Screw Caused Stuck Hatch on Shuttle,” 12 December 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Hatching Up Plan in Case Emergency Spacewalk Is Needed,” 2 December 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavour’s launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavour’s flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay,” Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, “Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs,” 16 January 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
Former NASA astronaut Robert F. Overmyer died while test piloting the experimental Cirrus VK-30 aircraft near Duluth, Minnesota. Overmyer was performing a series of stalls at an altitude of more than 8,000 feet (2,400 meters) when the aircraft “departed from controlled flight.” Overmyer had served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1959 to 1986, becoming a NASA astronaut in 1969, and piloting Shuttle Mission STS-5 in 1982. After leaving NASA and the Marine Corps in 1986, Overmyer worked for McDonnell Douglas Aerospace.(Edward H. Phillips, “Overmyer Dies in Crash,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 144, no. 14 (1 April 1996): 29.)
In Marshall Space Flight Center’s (MSFC’s) underwater weightless simulator, NASA began testing a remotely controlled robot created by a team of researchers from the University of Maryland. Team leaders nicknamed the robot Ranger, predicting that it would one day assist astronauts aboard the Shuttle or the ISS. Project Manager Joseph Parrish pointed out that astronauts often use valuable spacewalk time completing mundane tasks, such as collecting tools, establishing footholds, and cleaning up. Scientists hoped Ranger could perform such tasks under the command of an operator located in space or even that of an operator at NASA’s command center. The 8-foot-long (2.4-meter-long), 1,700-pound (770-kilogram) robot used gas thrusters, robotic arms, lights, and cameras. The academic project filled a void in experimental robot design, a program affected by NASA’s budget cuts. Allowing university researchers and professors to design and test the robot cost NASA about US$8 million, far less than NASA would pay for similar projects contracted through an aerospace firm. During the tests, the University of Maryland’s team operated Ranger remotely from its campus hundreds of miles away from MSFC’s facility in Huntsville, Alabama.(Martin Burkey, “Ranger Gets a Workout,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 September 1996.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. “Rich” Clifford and Linda M. Godwin made an historic spacewalk outside the orbiting Mir space station. For the first time, astronauts exited Mir with the Shuttle docked at the station. Clifford and Godwin, wearing jet packs as a precaution, scaled the passageway connecting Shuttle Atlantis with the Mir complex, installing several experiment boxes on the outside of the space station. Some of these boxes were “cosmic dust catchers,” meant to gather samples of the materials that might smash into orbiting space stations. The spacewalk and associated experiments were part of ongoing research in preparation for the construction of the new International Space Station. NASA regarded the spacewalk as more dangerous than usual, because the Shuttle was docked with Mir and, thus, unable to give chase quickly if one of the astronauts broke away from the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Spacewalking Astronauts Venture Outside Atlantis-Mir Complex,” 27 March 1996; Todd Halverson, “Walkers Prepare for Historic Trek Outside Mir Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 March 1996. 50 Houston Chronicle, “United Space Alliance Taps New Top Officers,” 27 March 1996.)
NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Graham’s design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes,” news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger surprised onlookers at KSC when he bounded off Shuttle Atlantis only minutes after its landing. Physicians credited Linenger’s excellent condition after spending more than four months aboard the Mir space station to his regimen of orbital exercise. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was on hand to greet Linenger and the other astronauts returning home on Atlantis. The Shuttle’s safe landing returned Linenger to Earth after 132 days in space⎯the second longest stint by an American.(Los Angeles Times, “Returning Astronaut Surprises Even Himself; Shuttle: Four Months on Mir Sap Less Strength than Traveler Jerry Linenger Expected. He Credits the Exercising He Did in Orbit,” 25 May 1997.)
NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linenger’s first spacewalk and Tsibliyev’s third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, “U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk,” news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, “American, Russian Take a Spacewalk,” 30 April 1997; Associated Press, “Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk,” 29 April 1997.)
NASA marked the one-year anniversary of the United States’ continuous presence in space, a tenure that began with the mission of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard the Mir space station. Astronauts John E. Blaha and Jerry M. Linenger had followed Lucid’s stay. NASA planned to maintain a continuous presence aboard Mir until 1998.
Frank L. Culbertson Jr., NASA’s Manager for the Space Shuttle–Mir research program, announced that in the future NASA would likely require astronauts to have training in spacewalking. The announcement coincided with reports in the New York Times and other U.S. newspapers that David A. Wolf had replaced astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as the next NASA representative aboard Mir. NASA had replaced Lawrence because of her small stature. At 5 feet, 3 inches (1.6 meters) tall, she was too small to fit into the bulky Russian Orlan spacesuits worn on Mir. In addition, she had received no training in spacewalking. Previously, NASA had planned for Wolf to replace Lawrence aboard Mir following her research stint. NASA and the Russian Space Agency addressed the sensitive issue of replacing Lawrence because of her size, explaining the need for flexibility aboard Mir during significant repairs to the station. Lawrence reacted professionally, despite the disappointment of her replacement less than two months before her planned once-in-a-career mission.(Warren E. Leary, “Future Astronauts Must Walk Before They Fly,” New York Times, 1 August 1997; Todd Halverson, “Mir Prerequisite: Spacewalking,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 August 1997; United Press International, “U.S., Russia Cite Logic of Replacing Female Astronaut,” 1 August 1997; Associated Press, “NASA: Decision To Replace Astronaut Difficult but Necessary,” 31 July 1997.)
U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, NASA’s temporary resident aboard Russia’s Mir space station, became the second American to ride aboard the three-person Soyuz capsule that had delivered the cosmonauts to Mir. Cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri, Linenger’s Russian partners aboard Mir, took Linenger for a short ride around Mir, to free a docking station for the new Soyuz vehicle that Russia would soon launch. In allowing an American astronaut aboard the Russian craft, Russia took another step with the United States to foster a cooperative postcommunist relationship between the two countries.(Association Press, “Astronaut Rides Soyuz,” 8 February 1997.)
Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, “Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station,” New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
A small fire broke out aboard the Mir space station, raising new questions about the fitness of the aging station for occupation and research. The six crew members on board quickly extinguished the fire, the result of a faulty air purification unit. The astronauts and cosmonauts estimated that the fire had burned for about 90 seconds, forcing the crew to don respirator masks. Mir continued to function normally after the fire, although the heat had melted several cables.(NASA, “Small Fire Extinguished on Mir,” news release 97-30, 24 February 1997; Associated Press, “Fire on Russian Space Station Doused, but Raises Concern,” 25 February 1997.)
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
The Clipper Graham (DC-XA) Incident Investigation Board released its final report concerning the explosion of the vehicle at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The Board, chaired by former astronaut Vance Brand, determined that a disconnected brake line on the secondary landing gear had prevented the gear from fully extending. The DC-XA, a prototype developed by McDonnell Douglas for NASA, had flown successfully in its fourth test flight on 31 July 1996, before failing on landing. NASA’s director of space transportation noted that the failure, which occurred as part of ongoing research into reusable launch vehicles, had strengthened NASA’s resolve to reduce costs and to achieve efficient reusability, safety, and reliability, ideally using a combination of automation and human control.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Report Release,” news release 97-3, 7 January 1997.)
Astronaut F. Story Musgrave retired from NASA after 30 years of service and six Shuttle flights. During his more than 1,200 hours in space, Musgrave had flown on the first voyage of Challenger and had been a member of the first crew to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Flying aboard STS-80 in 1996, Musgrave became the oldest person to fly in space. NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations David C. Leestma said of Musgrave, “throughout the Shuttle program, from its earliest stages to the present, Story has been instrumental in developing the techniques crew members use to perform spacewalks.”(NASA, “Astronaut Story Musgrave Retires from NASA,” news release 97-188, 2 September 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, just after sunrise, returning its seven-person crew to Earth. The landing marked the conclusion of a successful, 16- day mission, during which the astronauts completed 33 laboratory experiments. The low-cost mission was the first reflight in NASA’s history, concluding the research agenda planned for the April 1997 mission that NASA had terminated as a safety precaution. Although the press coverage of events on Mars and Mir had overshadowed the Columbia crew’s efforts, NASA Mission Manager Teresa B. Vanhooser stated confidently that scientific journals would give the mission due respect.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Returns Full of Research Information,” 17 July 1997.)
300Associated Press, “Astronauts Aboard Discovery Test New Japanese Robot Arm,” 9 August 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests a Robot Built To Spacewalk,” 11 August 1997. between the Progress cargo craft and Mir had occurred during the two men’s tenure, and shortly thereafter, doctors had diagnosed Tsibliyev’s irregular heartbeat. Space officials planned extensive debriefings for the two men. Meanwhile, President Boris N. Yeltsin congratulated the cosmonauts for their “persistence, courage, and heroism,” in spite of his having claimed only days earlier that the recent problems with Mir were solely the result of human error.(Daniel Williams, “Cosmonauts Return Safely from Space,” Washington Post, 15 August 1997; Michael Spencer, “Troubled Mir’s Crew Leaves, Landing Safely in Kazakhstan,” New York Times, 15 August 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Returns to Earth Safely, but to Many Questions,” 14 August 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency celebrated the 36th anniversary of sending the first Russian, Yuri Gagarin, into space. At the same time, two cosmonauts and U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, who were on board Mir, reported that they had almost had to abandon the Russian space station twice over the past few months. Russia’s successful history of space exploration contrasted with the current struggles of the Russian Space Agency to obtain adequate funding for Mir and other space initiatives. When Russia launched its first piloted mission in 1961, the Cold War was driving an intense space competition between the Soviet Union and United States. In the days leading up to the anniversary, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed his support for increased funding to the Russian Space Agency in the future.
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
John E. Blaha became the first astronaut to leave the U.S. Space Shuttle carried by medical personnel. Blaha was experiencing weakness upon his return to Earth’s gravitational conditions, and NASA’s doctors wanted to gauge immediately the effects of long-term weightlessness on his body. Blaha remarked upon landing that he could hardly move, saying that he was “absolutely stunned” at the difficulty of returning to a gravity-controlled environment. NASA’s doctors focused specifically on Blaha’s dizziness and on his weakened bones and muscles, hoping to learn how to improve health plans for astronauts living aboard the ISS. Blaha had maintained an arduous schedule of exercise aboard Mir, to mitigate the weakening effects of the weightless environment. In addition, he had made the return flight aboard Atlantis lying down in a Shuttle seat, to minimize the crush of gravity.(William Harwood, “Atlantis Astronaut Wobbly on His Return to Gravity,” Washington Post, 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Carried off Shuttle, a First for NASA,” 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Returning Astronaut Sheds Right Stuff Image, Is Carried off Shuttle,” 22 January 1997.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Columbia, consulting with NASA ground support, decided to cut short their planned 16-day mission because of the potential for an explosion in the Shuttle’s electronic generator. NASA decided to abort the mission after the crew had attempted for two days to fix the balky generator. Despite the fact that the Shuttle’s two other generators could provide enough power for the Shuttle, NASA’s procedure required the Shuttle’s return, to prevent subsequent problems. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway clarified that the astronauts faced no imminent danger and that terminating the mission was a precaution rather than an emergency. “The conservative thing to do is land on Tuesday,” Holloway said at a news conference. Columbia’s early return to Earth in Mission STS-83 was only the third time in the history of the Shuttle program that NASA had ended a mission early. The astronauts had time to complete only a few of the planned 33 experiments on the mission, which cost nearly US$500 million.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Flight Cut Short as Risk Persists,” Washington Post, 7 April 1997; Warren Leary, “Power Problem on Shuttle Forces a Tuesday Landing,” New York Times, 7 April 1997; Associated Press, “Deteriorating Generator Cuts Short Mission,” 6 April 1997.)
Reaffirming their commitment to the international consortium’s expensive and increasingly complicated task of constructing Mir’s replacement, NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced appointments to the first four crews that would live and work aboard the ISS. NASA chose astronaut William M. Shepherd as the first expedition commander. Russia selected cosmonauts Yuri P. Gidzenko and Sergei K. Krikalev to accompany Shepherd on the first increment crew. The second crew would have a Russian commander, Yury V. Usachev, accompanied by a crew of American astronauts, James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms. Each member of the first two crews possessed significant space experience. Moreover, the selection of the crews represented careful diplomatic choices meant to support the strong, but still strained, space partnership of the United States and Russia.(NASA, “U.S., Russia Name International Space Station Crews,” news release 97-269, 17 November 1997. 351 George Lardner Jr. and Walter Pincus, “Military Had Plan To Blame Cuba if Glenn’s Space Mission Failed,” Washington Post, 19 November 1997.)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a German astronaut returned safely to Russia after tenures aboard the Russian space station Mir. The cosmonauts had spent more than six months in space, and Reinhold Ewald of Germany had spent two weeks aboard Mir as a paying guest of the Russian Space Agency. Ewald conducted geophysical, astrophysical, and medical experiments during his stay. The German Space Agency paid about US$60 million for Ewald’s trip, providing a much- needed infusion of capital for Russia’s space program.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 2 March 1997.)
In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery, carrying a crew of seven astronauts, launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a mission to service the HST. NASA planned the 10-day Shuttle Mission STS-82 to upgrade significantly the scientific capabilities of HST, as well as to perform standard maintenance on the US$2 billion instrument. The spaceflight was the second servicing mission for HST since its deployment in April 1990 aboard Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-31. The astronauts planned to conduct at least four spacewalks to install new components, such as the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer. A NASA scientist described the improvements as “replacing 1970’s technology with 1990’s technology.” In addition to the work conducted on the HST, Discovery’s crew planned to move the telescope a few miles farther into the atmosphere, improving its chances for a longer operating life. Astronomers hypothesized that the potential gains from refurbishing the HST outweighed the risks of tampering with its already spectacular abilities, justifying the US$800 million cost of the mission. The head of the HarvardSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics speculated that the refurbished HST could lead to “a whole different kind of science.”(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-82—Press Kit,” news release 97-18, February 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Starts Space Telescope Mission,” New York Times, 12 February 1997; Associated Press, “Improved Hubble Telescope To Give Astronomers New View of the Universe,” 8 February 1997.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia lit more than 200 small fires, testing the flammability of dozens of gases and materials. The experiments took place under the direction of Paul D. Ronney, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Southern California. Ronney explained that the experiments had as much application for Earth as for space. According to Ronney, the weaker the flame in space’s weightless environment, the cleaner its fuel would burn on Earth. The astronauts found that, without the effect of gravity, the flames often formed the shape of a ball and heat did not rise. The experiments created some attention for Mission STS- 94, largely overshadowed by the success of the Pathfinder mission to Mars.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests of Tiny Fires Spur Delight,” 9 July 1997; Wayne Tompkins, “Columbia Crew Ready for Hot Time in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 July 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earth’s ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASA’s trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, “one word for our mission would be diversity.” With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, “August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch,” news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study,” USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, “Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to “serve as a bridge to America’s future in space.” In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttle’s launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, “Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83,” news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire,” 5 April 1997.)
Crew aboard Shuttle Columbia successfully released and operated the Autonomous Extra- vehicular Robotic Camera Sprint (AERCam Sprint). The 35-pound (16-kilogram), spherical camera propelled itself around the Shuttle after astronaut Winston E. Scott had released it during a spacewalk. The camera used periodic jet thrusts to maneuver, responding to control commands made from inside Columbia. The US$3 million camera transmitted images of Columbia and its crew back to Earth, providing unique vantage points for observation. The astronauts, who retrieved the small robotic device without any complications, concluded that it would be a helpful technology for future Shuttle missions and the ISS.(Seth Borenstein, “Robot Set for 1st Space Walk in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 1997; Associated Press, “Free-Flying Camera Flits High Above Columbia, Sends Down Video,” 3 December 1997.)
The U.S. Capitol’s Statuary Hall installed a bronze statue of Apollo 13 astronaut John L. Swigert Jr., a native of Denver, to represent the state of Colorado. Each state chooses two statues for the hall to honor its most prominent citizens. Swigert was, perhaps, most famous for uttering the words, “Houston, we’ve had a problem.” Colorado had elected Swigert to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982, but he had died of cancer before his swearing-in. Swigert’s statue took its place alongside that of fellow Coloradoan Florence Rena Sabin, who led the crusade for women’s admission to medical schools. Astronaut Thomas Kenneth Mattingly II, whom Swigert replaced only three days before the Apollo 13 launch, attended the statue dedication, along with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and other dignitaries.(Paul Leavitt, “New Statue,” USA Today, 23 May 1997; Associated Press, “Newest Congressional Statue: Apollo 13 Astronaut John Swigert,” 22 May 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his “cardiovascular system.” The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt “irregularities” while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyev’s test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyev’s place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mir’s exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mir’s challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, “Latest Mir Trouble: Commander’s Heart,” USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task,” New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, “Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities,” 14 July 1997; Reuters, “Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem,” 14 July 1997; Associated Press, “Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut,” 15 July 1997; Reuters, “NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale,” 17 July 1997; New York Times, “A Rescue Assignment for NASA,” editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs,” 19 July 1997.)
NASA announced that new smart software, with more realistic landing simulations for Shuttle pilots, would become an integral part of astronaut flight training. Hamid Berenji, Ping-Wei Chang, and Steven R. Swanson of JSC engineered the software, which used “adaptive fuzzy logic,” allowing the program to learn from experience and to function in a manner closer to human thinking than that of previous software. The software team predicted that the program would help not only Shuttle pilots, but also commercial pilots and even people learning to use machinery unrelated to aviation. Berenji predicted that, because the new training system would be easier to use than previous programs, new pilots would feel much more confident than before.(H. R. Berenji et al., “Refining the Shuttle Training Aircraft Controller,” Fuzzy Systems, 1997: Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International Conference 2 (1−5 July 1997): pp. 677−682; NASA, “Shuttle Landing Simulations To Improve with Smart Software,” news release 97-229, 14 October 1997.)
NASA announced the retirement of veteran astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman, who had flown on five Shuttle missions. Hoffman planned to continue his NASA service, becoming NASA’s European representative in Paris. Hoffman was one of the four astronauts to take part in the spacewalking mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) in 1993. In total, Hoffman had spent more than 1,200 hours in space and traveled more than 21.5 million miles (35 million kilometers).(NASA, “Jeff Hoffman Retires from Astronaut Corps,” new release 97-151, 9 July 1997.)
NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: “It doesn’t matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best.” NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenko’s participation.(Todd Halverson, “American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in ’99,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
NASA dedicated a plaque in memory of Ellison S. Onizuka, celebrating his record of achieving the highest altitude for propeller-driven aircraft. Onizuka had been Hawaii’s first astronaut and a member of the Shuttle crew aboard Challenger when it exploded in 1986. NASA’s recognition of Onizuka’s achievement, more than a decade later, occurred during the same year that the remotely controlled AeroVironment Pathfinder broke a distance record for unpiloted space travel, topping 71,000 miles (114,000 kilometers) during its 7 July 1997 flight. NASA honored Onizuka for his part in “reaching for the heavens and striving for excellence,” noting that his achievement had contributed to that of Pathfinder. NASA dedicated the plaque honoring Onizuka at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, where the record-setting Pathfinder plane had set flight on its historic mission.(NASA, “NASA Solar-Powered Altitude Record To Be Dedicated to Challenger Astronaut,” news release N97- 087, 3 December 1997.)
Astronaut and lawmaker U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), on the 35th anniversary of his journey as the first American to orbit Earth, announced that he would retire from the U.S. Senate at the conclusion of his fourth term. On 20 February 1962, Glenn had orbited Earth three times, symbolizing a hard-fought achievement in the United States’ effort to catch up with the Soviet Union in the space race. Glenn, first elected to the Senate from Ohio in 1974, made the announcement at Muskingum College in New Concord, Ohio, joking that since “there is still no cure for the common birthday,” he intended to retire at age 75.(Paul Souhrada, “Glenn, 75, Will Retire, Citing ‘No Cure for Common Birthday’,” Washington Times, 21 February 1997; NASA, “Glenn Orbits the Earth 35 Years Ago Today,” video advisory V97-12, 20 February 1997. 207 NASA, “Next Generation Internet a Million Times Faster than Home Computer Modems,” news release 97-29, 21 February 1997.)
President William J. Clinton awarded Congressional Space Medals of Honor to Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chafee, who died in the Apollo 1 fire. Clinton presented the medals to members of the men’s families in a ceremony in the Oval Office. White and Chafee were part of the three-man crew involved in the tragedy, which had occurred more than 30 years earlier. On 27 January 1967, the Apollo 1 space capsule had caught fire on the launchpad, killing the three men on board the spacecraft. The third member of the crew, Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978. The accident had caused NASA to institute aggressive safety procedures, placing a premium on the well-being of its astronauts. Clinton noted the contributions of the fallen astronauts, “though they never got there, astronauts Chaffee, White, and Grissom’s footprints are on the moon.” Besides Apollo 1’s crew, only nine other astronauts had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.(Associated Press, “Apollo 1 Astronauts Honored: 3 Killed in 1967 Fire on Launch Pad,” 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Congressional Space Medal,” 17 December 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
Discovery’s crew released the HST from the Shuttle’s cargo bay after nearly a week of maintenance and refurbishing work. The astronauts had conducted a fifth spacewalk, one more than NASA had originally planned, to place a makeshift patch on the HST’s peeling insulation. “It’s not the Hubble Space Telescope. It’s really Hubble Space Telescope II,” remarked NASA’s chief Hubble scientist upon releasing the telescope. NASA deemed the mission a complete success.(Associated Press, “Hubble Released To Search Universe,” 20 February 1997; Associated Press, “Looking for Answers,” 19 February 1997.)
The Assignation Records Review Board made public more than 1,500 pages of classified records, including a memorandum detailing a plan to blame Prime Minister Fidel Castro and the government of the Republic of Cuba if astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s attempt to orbit Earth in the Mercury capsule was unsuccessful. The 2 February 1962 document stated, “by manufacturing various pieces of evidence which would prove electronic interference on the part of the Cubans,” the United States could shift the blame to Castro. Glenn’s safe return to Earth rendered any such plans unnecessary.
Mir cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov engaged in a 6-hour spacewalk, successfully dismantling a damaged solar panel so that Mir’s crew could install a replacement panel. The Russian Space Agency nearly called off the spacewalk when Solovyev discovered a problem with the radio-monitoring system on his spacesuit, just as the men prepared to leave the station. Although the crew’s attempts to repair the monitoring system were unsuccessful, Russian Mission Control eventually decided to proceed with the spacewalk. The cosmonauts worked effectively, communicating with Russian space officials only periodically. This was Solovyev’s fourth spacewalk during his tenure on Mir, confirming his status as the world’s most experienced spacewalker, with more than a dozen spacewalks to his credit. While the cosmonauts worked outside Mir, U.S. astronaut David A. Wolf monitored their progress from inside.(Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 November 1997.)
Astronauts aboard Shuttle Discovery successfully tested a new robotic arm, considerably smaller than Discovery’s massive 50-foot (15-meter) crane, intended for tasks of higher precision. Discovery’s crew used the arm to unlock a cargo bay door and lift a small box. NASA had engineered the Japanese-made robotic arm for US$100 million, expecting that it would eventually serve astronauts aboard the ISS. Of the robotic arm’s test performance, astronaut Stephen K. Robinson stated simply, “it operated beautifully.”
The Astronauts Memorial Foundation recognized Major Robert H. Lawrence Jr. as the first black astronaut in NASA history, exactly 30 years after his death during a U.S. Air Force training mission. A ceremony adding Lawrence’s name to the Astronauts Memorial Foundation’s Space Mirror at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) ended a long bureaucratic debate over whether Lawrence qualified as an astronaut. Lawrence had never met the Air Force requisite that an astronaut must have flown at an altitude of least 50 miles (80 kilometers) above Earth, because, although he had received his appointment to the U.S. Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program, he had died before flying in space. Therefore, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation had repeatedly refused to include his name on the Space Mirror at KSC. However, in 1996 U.S. Representative Bobby L. Rush (D-IL) had persuaded the Air Force to verify Lawrence’s status as an astronaut. Thereafter, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation’s board of directors voted, immediately and unanimously, to include Lawrence’s name on the Space Mirror.(Associated Press, “Crash Victim Recognized as 1st Black Astronaut,” 8 December 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Roy D. Bridges Jr., retired U.S. Air Force Major General and Shuttle astronaut, as Director of KSC. Goldin called Bridges “the right person to take KSC into the next century.” As Director of KSC, Bridges assumed responsibility for the only site for launches of the Shuttle. At the time of Bridges’s appointment, about 2,000 employees worked at KSC, along with 14,000 contractors. Bridges’s appointment followed years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Air Force and NASA. Graduating with distinction from the U.S. Air Force Academy, he had served in several leadership positions in the Air Force and had received recognition as a distinguished graduate of the U.S. Air Force Pilot Training and Test Pilot Schools. Among other awards, he had received the Distinguished Service Medal, the Defense Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, the Legion of Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, the Meritorious Service Medal, the U.S. Air Force Commendation Medal, and NASA’s Flight Space Medal.(NASA, “Roy Bridges Selected as KSC’s New Center Director,” news release 97-17, 24 January 1997.)
Two members of Columbia’s crew, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott and Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, conducted a spacewalk, successfully recapturing the unresponsive Spartan satellite released on 21 November. After the 3,000-pound (1,400-kilogram) satellite had failed to turn toward the Sun, Columbia’s robotic arm had bumped it away from the Shuttle. NASA officials had cancelled the mission’s originally planned spacewalk to rescue the US$10 million spacecraft. Astronauts Scott and Doi later received a telephone call from President William J. Clinton congratulating them on grabbing the satellite.(William Harwood, “Satellite Designed To Study Sun Fails,” Washington Post, 22 November 1997; Associated Press, “Columbia Crew Prepares Plan To Recover Spinning Satellite,” 24 November 1997; William Harwood, “Space Walkers Grab Satellite, Wrestle It Back onto Shuttle,” 25 November 1997; Reuters, “Spacewalking Astronauts Grab Errant Satellite,” 25 November 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Calls Shuttle Crew with Thanks,” 28 November 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Earth on Mission STS-87 with great fanfare, executing an unusual 180° roll 6 minutes into the 81⁄2-minute flight, a maneuver planned to put the Shuttle in radio contact with communication satellites. The launch itself took place at the “exact moment on the exact day as planned” for the sixth consecutive mission. The six-person crew included Takao Doi, a Japanese astronaut who planned to make his country’s first spacewalk; Kalpana Chawla, the first Indian-born woman to travel into space; Leonid K. Kadenyuk, the first Ukrainian to fly on a U.S. Shuttle; and U.S. astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Steven W. Lindsey, and Winston E. Scott. The crew planned to conduct a spacewalk to test instruments and procedures for the ISS. The Shuttle also carried the U.S. Microgravity Payload-4, which the astronauts planned to use to test the responses to conditions in space of a variety of materials and liquids.(NASA, “Solar and Microgravity Research Highlight Final Shuttle Mission of 1997,” news release J97037, November 1997; William Harwood, “Columbia Corkscrews into Orbit,” Washington Post, 20 November 1997; Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Blasts Off with Multinational Crew,” 19 November 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Executes Flip on Its Way into Orbit,” 16 November 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency launched Soyuz TM-25, carrying a crew of two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, and German astronaut Reinhold Ewald to the Mir space station, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The cosmonauts would become Mir’s new, long-term crew, and the German astronaut would return with the retiring crew in two weeks. Germany had paid the Russian Space Agency millions of dollars to carry Reinhold Ewald aboard the Shuttle to Mir.(Reuters, “Russians Launch 3 into Space,” 11 February 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, who had spent more than six months aboard Mir in 1996, received the Order of Friendship Medal from Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin in a ceremony at the Kremlin. The medal was the highest honor available to a non-Russian citizen.(NASA, “Astronaut Shannon Lucid Receives Russian Order of Friendship Medal,” news release 97-103, 19 May 1997.)
NASA researchers, astronauts, and scholars gathered in Washington, DC, for a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, disclosing and discussing details of experiments conducted aboard the Shuttle during two 1996 missions. The event commemorated the one-year anniversaries of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory and the third U.S. Microgravity Payload. Scientists predicted that discoveries made aboard the Shuttle flights in 1996 would eventually lead to technological advances. Research on numerous topics, from the climate of the universe to human biology, could lead to production of cheaper metals and alloys or new synthetic drugs. Highlights from the research presentations included the announcement of the discovery that space-grown crystals are of much higher quality than those grown on Earth; the description of experiments intended to uncover the effect of space on the production of metal and alloys; and the presentation of evidence that the microgravity environment of space had enabled scientists to make more precise measurements of the physical properties of elemental gas.(NASA, “Significant Discoveries from Space Shuttle Experiments To Be Presented at Conference,” news release 97-23, 5 February 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
A Russian Space Agency official insisted that there had been no problem with Andrew S. W. Thomas’s spacesuit, describing the U.S. astronaut as bad tempered and expressing concern about the implications of Thomas’s attitude for the remainder of the mission. Deputy Flight Commander Viktor Blagov indicated that, since major work would take place on Mir, “any fuss about the space suit is out of place.” Blagov explained that Thomas would keep both David Wolf’s spacesuit and his own.(Reuters, “Balky Suit.”)
Astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas was unable to fit into his Russian-made emergency spacesuit before boarding Mir, but after initial orders that Thomas spend the first night in the Space Shuttle, Mission Control granted him permission to board. The suit was necessary only in case of emergency evacuation aboard Soyuz. Once aboard Mir, Thomas altered his spacesuit, adjusting and removing some straps in the armpit and torso areas. After the alterations, the suit fit exactly as it should, ensuring that Thomas would not have to return to Earth with Endeavour on Thursday.(Steve Marshall, “Mir Spacesuit, Astronaut Prove To Be a Poor Fit,” USA Today, 26 January 1998; Washington Post, “Astronaut Moves into Mir Despite Spacesuit Problem,” 26 January 1998; Washington Times, “Thomas Finally Fits in on Mir: Crucial Alterations Made to Space Suit,” 27 January 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery attempted, but failed, to fix the spacecraft’s high- speed data-transmission system. NASA believed the source of the problem was in an electronics box in the cargo bay, but stated that only a spacewalk would enable the crew to reach the box. NASA Mission Operations representative Robert E. Castle Jr. remarked that, even with a spacewalk, the astronauts would probably not be able to repair the malfunction. Because of the lack of the high-speed data transmission system, scientists could not view the data that the AMS had collected. Although the Shuttle had stored the data on board, NASA was unable to determine whether the data was useful, or whether the instrument’s adjustment was correct.(Marcia Dunn, “Discover Astronauts Unable To Fix Communications Link,” Buffalo News (NY), 6 June 1998. 505 Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Unable To Spot Mir Hull Breach,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Test Fails To Find Leaks in Mir,” Seattle Times (WA), 7 June 1998.)
Astronauts and physicians Jay C. Buckey Jr. and Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams performed the first surgeries ever conducted on living specimens while in orbit. The two doctors injected chemical markers into the hind legs of six of the surviving baby rats to determine the role of gravity in the development of muscles. The crew anesthetized the baby rats before injecting them with the pink florescent chemical, the first time scientists had performed such a procedure in zero-gravity conditions. In addition to studying how muscles and nerves develop in space, the crew studied whether anesthesia really works without the help of gravity, whether patients have more difficulty recovering from anesthesia in space, and how wounds heal in space. Two other astronauts successfully completed “the most difficult medical procedure ever attempted on someone in space.” The astronauts guided tiny needles into the nerves behind their knees, in an experiment aimed at understanding and easing the blood pressure problems and dizziness that astronauts suffer after returning to Earth. An estimated 500,000 Americans experience the same symptoms every day when they stand up. The needle enabled the astronauts to “listen” to electrical impulses, as the brain sent messages to the nerve.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Surgeons Hope Rats Will Survive,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 April 1998; Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Crew Performs First Space Surgery,” 29 April 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 April 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Astronauts Listen to Brain-Nerve Chatter,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 1998.)
NASA dedicated as a U.S. Air Force conference center the newly renovated, historic control center, Complex 14 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, the site of the Mercury program launches. The domed blockhouse with 10-foot-thick (3-meter-thick), reinforced concrete walls had protected launch controllers from possible explosions of Atlas rockets launched only 1,000 feet (305 meters) away. The renovation preserved the periscopes that controllers had used to safely view launches. The control center was at the launch site of the first piloted orbital flight of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.(USA Today, “Cape Canaveral Restores Piece of Space Age History,” 11 May 1998.)
Shuttle Endeavour docked with Mir at an altitude of 214 nautical miles (2,467 miles or 3,970 kilometers), bringing the seventh American astronaut to work on board Mir since the program began in 1995. Andrew S. W. Thomas, a mechanical engineer, replaced David A. Wolf, a physician, who had been on board Mir since September. The hatches opened at 5:25 p.m. (EST), and Thomas's transfer occurred at 6:35 p.m. (EST).(New York Times, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station with Astronaut and Supplies,” 25 January 1998; NASA, “STS- 89.”)
Returning from the Neurolab mission, Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly, despite a malfunctioning hydraulic unit. Most of Columbia’s 1-hour-long descent relied on two hydraulic units, because the cooling system for the third unit had failed. To prevent the third unit from overheating, the crew turned it on just minutes before landing. After the landing, Mission Control congratulated the Neurolab astronauts on “a historic mission that elevated neuroscience research to record heights.” During the 16-day Neurolab flight, the team had accomplished a number of experiments never before performed in space, including the first direct nerve recordings, the first joint recording of sleep and breathing, the first embalming of animals, and the first surgery on animals. Because only the rodents aboard Columbia were accessible during the flight, astronauts and scientists did not immediately know how the other animals, including fish, snails, and crickets, had fared. A quick inspection after landing, however, “revealed that only 25 of 225 baby swordtail fish survived the mission, a much higher mortality rate than expected.” The baby rats also had a higher mortality rate than expected; 52 of the 96 baby rats had died in orbit after their mothers refused to nurse them. NASA veterinarians had expected a dozen deaths from natural causes. Animal rights groups criticized the experiments.(USA Today, “Scientists To Study Effects on Critters,” 4 May 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Mission’s Data Has Scientists Feeling Antsy: Neurolab Analysis Begins Today,” USA Today, 4 May 1998.)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discovery’s drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, “Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery,” Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-95,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
The newly developed Delta III rocket exploded during liftoff, destroying the Galaxy X communications satellite it was carrying into orbit. The launch was the maiden flight of Boeing’s newest version of the Delta rocket, designed to carry 8,400 pounds (3,800 kilograms), twice the payload of the previous version.(Seth Schiesel, “New Type of Rocket To Carry Satellites Explodes in Liftoff,” New York Times, 27 August 1998. 574 NASA, “International Candidates Join 1998 Astronaut Class,” news release 98-155, 27 August 1998.)
Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook a 41⁄2-hour-long spacewalk, to install 40 electrical and data connectors linking the U.S.-built connecting module Unity with the Russian-built power module Zarya. The pair also bolted handrails to the side of Unity and photographed two of Zarya’s backup docking antennas, which had failed to deploy. Russian ground controllers sent commands to power up Zarya, jump-starting Unity’s electrical systems. Ross and Newman then removed thermal covers from Unity’s outside computers to prevent overheating.(Paul Hoversten, “Spacewalkers Complete a Tricky Wiring Job,” USA Today, 8 December 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, “Orbital’s Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecraft’s First Signals Indicate Early Success,” 2 April 1998.)
Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman made their final spacewalk to free the second Russian docking antenna on Zarya, which had failed to unfurl. The pair also finished outfitting the station. The astronauts had required a total of 21 hours over three spacewalks to complete the work.(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup.”)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
At 7:15 a.m. (EST), Lunar Prospector executed the first of three engine bursts needed to settle into orbit. In a flawlessly executed maneuver, Prospector fired its engines for 30 minutes to slow down, permitting the Moon’s gravity to capture it. The small robotic spacecraft was NASA’s first visitor to the Moon since the astronauts from Apollo 17 had walked on its surface in 1972. The Lunar Prospector project had cost about US$63 million.(Washington Times, “After 25 Years, NASA Shoots for the Moon,” 12 January 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Prospector Slides into Lunar Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 12 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery undocked from Mir, carrying back to Earth Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, the last of seven U.S. astronauts to live aboard the station, and marking the completion of Phase I of the ISS program. Before closing the hatches, Mir Commander Talgat A. Musabayev presented Shuttle Commander Charles J. Precourt with a huge wrench that had been used in spacewalks and would be flown to the future ISS.(Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Discovery Undocks from Mir, Completes Historic Last Linkup,” 8 June 1998.)
Research scientists working on a US$33 million experiment to search for antimatter in space, spoke at a news conference, announcing that the communication-system breakdown on Space Shuttle Discovery had ruined their tests. The astronauts had been unable to repair Discovery’s main antenna system, which had broken shortly after launch, rendering the Shuttle unable to transmit high-speed data or video back to Earth. Scientists working on the project needed continuous, high-speed data to calibrate the AMS, which was searching space for rare subatomic particles known as antimatter. However, using a patchwork system, they had only been able to receive a few minutes of data each hour, which meant that, although they could see that the AMS was working, the spectrometer was not providing them with enough data to fine tune the magnet. According to Project Manager James Bates, the scientists had failed to accomplish their objectives because of the malfunction.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Physics Testing Thwarted; A Glitch Has Undermined an Antimatter Experiment,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 June 1998.)
An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena II’s first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, “Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, “Late Flagstaff Astronomer’s Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute,” Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, “NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers,” 7 January 1998.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was “a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula,” the site of a gas cloud generating enough water “to fill the Earth’s oceans 60 times a day.” The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting “large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula.” The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time “the vital role that water plays in star formation,” may “provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Michael Werner of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, “that water is prevalent in space” and “plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth,” 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, “Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, “Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
The crew closed the hatches used to transfer equipment between Endeavour and Mir at 5:34 p.m. (EST) in preparation for Endeavour’s return flight to Earth. The closure of the hatches concluded five days of Endeavour’s continuous link-up with Mir, during which time the astronauts and cosmonauts had transferred 9,600 pounds (4,350 kilograms) of materials. In addition to equipment exchanges, the crew exchanged American astronaut David A. Wolf for Andrew S. W. Thomas, a U.S. astronaut born in Australia, who was to remain aboard Mir for a planned four- and-one-half-month mission.
This date marked Mir’s 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Mir,” 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion,” 20 February 1998.)
Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being “one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon.” A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepard’s spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, “Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard,” news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, “Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74,” news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard,” government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shepard’s Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age,” USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, “Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: ‘Pioneer’s Pioneer’ also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon,” Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
Raytheon Systems Company’s training unit, formerly known as Hughes Training, appointed former astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield Jr. as Managing Director for the company’s NASA support business. In this position, Hartsfield was to manage the development of simulators for the ISS program.(David Welch for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Raytheon Systems Names Chief of NASA Deals,” 30 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2 p.m. (EDT), returning the U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, to Earth after four and one- half months in space. Thomas, unlike some of his predecessors, took the medical advice typically given to astronauts returning from a lengthy stay in space and allowed medical personnel to carry him off the Shuttle, rather than attempting to walk on his own.(Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Space Shuttle Returns with Last Mir Astronaut,” 12 June 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery successfully retrieved the Spartan spacecraft, thus completing a priority project of the nine-day mission. The crew had deployed the satellite on 1 November, to record observations of the Sun’s outer atmosphere and the solar wind. Spartan had lagged 40 miles (64 kilometers) behind the Shuttle, in free flight, as it recorded the data. The flight was the last in a series of four flights begun in 1993 to “gather observations at different points in the [S]un’s 11-year cycle of magnetic activity.” NASA had originally scheduled the mission for November 1997, but astronauts had “failed to send a crucial command” before releasing the satellite, so Spartan had gathered no data. The crew had also tested an experimental laser range-finding device mounted in the Shuttle, aiming at targets on Spartan.(Washington Times, “Glenn Reports No Space Sickness as Discovery Releases Sun Gazer,” 2 November 1998; Washington Times, “Astronauts Snag Sun Observer To Complete a Primary Mission: Glenn, 77, Undergoes More Tests of His Response to Space,” 4 November 1998; New York Times, “Shuttle Easily Regains Satellite, and Photos,” 4 November 1998.)
American astronaut David A. Wolf made his first spacewalk, accompanied by veteran spacewalker Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Commander of the Mir space station. Solovyev, making his 18th spacewalk, set the world’s record for the highest number of spacewalks by one individual.382 The spacewalk began 20 minutes later than scheduled, because of problems opening locks on the malfunctioning outer hatch. The scheduled task had been to assess wear and tear on the exterior of the station using a photoreflectometer designed in the United States. David A. Wolf worked for 2 hours trying to verify whether the device was working properly, but only succeeded in taking readings on the shell of the nine-year-old Kvant-2 module, one of the station’s oldest compartments. Engineers planned to use the data to help make selections for materials and protective coatings for the new ISS. Flight Director Vladimir A. Solovyov explained in a news conference at Mission Control outside Moscow, “the device proved to be far from mature, so it was decided to skip the examination of the core module.” Instead, the two men studied the holes in the Spektr module, which had suffered punctures during a collision with a cargo craft on 25 June 1997.(USA Today, “American Looks at Mir from Outside,” 15 January 1998; Oleg Shchedrov for Reuters, “Hitches Marred Mir Crew Space Walk, Says Official,” 15 January 1998; Houston Chronicle, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Take Short Spacewalk: Excursion Marked by a Few Small Difficulties,” 15 January 1998.)
The Soyuz landing capsule, carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a French astronaut returning from Mir, landed safely in the snow and bitter cold (-22°F or -30°C) about 20 miles (32 kilometers) from the northern Kazakhstan village of Arkalyk. Only one of eight rescue helicopters was able to meet the crew because of wind, clouds, and thick snow, limiting visibility to less than 160 feet (49 meters). Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov returned to Earth after a six-month mission on Mir. During their stay on Mir, the cosmonauts had focused on repairing the aging space station. Léopold Eyharts returned to Earth with six salamanders. The two cosmonauts who had replaced Solovyev and Vinogradov had flown the salamanders to Mir, carrying them on board the space station in January. While in space, Eyharts had conducted experiments on the salamanders, including monitoring the effects of antigravity on the reptiles’ egg-laying capabilities.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Focus: Russia-France Space Crew Returns to Deep Cold,” 20 February 1998.)
After problems with one of two network-signal processors caused a 24-hour delay, Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-90) blasted off on the Shuttle program’s final Neurolab mission, carrying 26 experiments for basic research in neurosciences to “expand understanding of how the nervous system develops and functions in space.” Test subjects aboard the Shuttle included crew members, rats, mice, crickets, snails, and two kinds of fish. The Neurolab mission was the joint effort of NASA, several U.S. partners, the space agencies of Canada, France, and Germany, the ESA, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan. Crew members included Commander Richard A. Searfoss; Pilot Scott D. Altman; Mission Specialists Richard M. Linnehan, Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams, and Kathryn P. Hire; and Payload Specialists Jay C. Buckey Jr. and James A. Pawelczyk. Mission Specialist Hire was the first KSC employee that NASA had selected as an astronaut candidate. Mission STS-90 was Columbia’s 25th flight.(NASA, “Neurolab Shuttle Mission To Launch April 16,” news release N98-25, 3 April 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-90,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-90.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
NASA named astronaut Terrence W. Wilcutt to replace James D. Halsell Jr. as NASA’s Manager of Operational Activities at Star City, Russia. Wilcutt was the 10th astronaut to serve in the rotational position, supporting the training and preparation of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center and acting as a liaison between NASA and Russian management. Wilcutt had flown on three missions: the first, in 1994, as the pilot on Mission STS-68, to study the Earth’s surface; the second, in 1996, as the pilot for the fourth Shuttle–Mir docking mission, STS-79; and the third, in 1998, as the commander of Mission STS-89, the eighth docking mission.(NASA, “Astronaut Wilcutt Replaces Halsell in Star City, Russia,” news release 98-127, 22 July 1998.)
Endeavour’s Commander Robert D. Cabana and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev, leading the four other crew members, entered the Unity module for the first time, via an airlock attached to the Shuttle. The crew checked air pressure and quality, turned on lights and systems, detached components that were stored in the modules, and set up a communications system, connecting internal components with the two antennas outside Unity. Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman had installed the two antennas on 9 December. The Shuttle crew spent 28 hours inside the modules before turning off the lights and closing the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Enter International Space Station,” New York Times, 11 December 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup with Space Station,” USA Today, 14 December 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-95 launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr.; Pilot Steven W. Lindsey; Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Stephen K. Robinson, and Pedro Duque; and Payload Specialists Chiaki Mukai and John H. Glenn Jr. The primary objectives of STS-95 included conveying a variety of science experiments inside the SPACEHAB module; deploying and retrieving the Spartan free-flyer payload; performing operations with the HST Orbiting Systems Test; and transporting the International Extreme Ultraviolet Hitchhiker payloads. The historic mission also returned veteran astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. to space. Thirty-six years after Glenn had first orbited Earth, the seventy-seven-year-old astronaut became the oldest person to fly in orbit. As a veteran of NASA’s early Mercury program, Glenn had been the first American to orbit Earth. On 20 February 1962, in a flight lasting 5 hours, Glenn had orbited Earth three times in a tiny capsule. After he had passed a battery of medical tests and participated in astronaut training, NASA had selected U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. as a crew member of STS-95, so that scientists could study “how space travel affects an aging astronaut’s body.”(Bill Sammon, “Senator Upholds Status as Hero with His Return to Orbit,” Washington Times, 30 October 1998; John Noble Wilford, “Pioneer Returns as Crewman in the Shuttle,” New York Times, 29 October 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-95, John Glenn’s Flight; SPACEHAB,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-95.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook their second spacewalk, lasting 7 hours, to install two 100-pound (45.4-kilogram) communications antennas on each side of the Unity module. They hooked one of the antennas to a video cable running from the Zarya module. Then the two astronauts erected a folding sunshade over a computer outside of Unity, bundling loose cables that ran along the exterior of the module. Ross and Newman also removed the restraints that had stabilized the four Unity hatchways during the launch. Finally, Newman successfully tapped free one of Zarya’s stuck antennas, using a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long), extendable grappling hook.(Warren E. Leary, “2 Astronauts Make 2d Space Walk To Install Antennas on Station,” New York Times, 10 December 1998.)
Dr. William K. Douglas, the physician who had overseen the care of the seven Mercury astronauts, died of a viral infection at the age of 76. As part of his assignment to NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, Dr. Douglas had been “personally responsible for the medical care and flight preparation of the seven Mercury astronauts.” He had cared for Alan B. Shepard Jr., Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, John H. Glenn Jr., and M. Scott Carpenter when they undertook the nation’s first four human spaceflights. After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 1977, Dr. Douglas had joined the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, where he had helped design an orbiting space station before retiring in 1988. In 1992 Douglas was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico.(Wolfgang Saxon, “William Douglas, 76, the Doctor for the Seven Early Astronauts,” New York Times, 24 November 1998.)
NASA astronauts presented four employees of Boeing Reusable Space Systems with the Silver Snoopy, one of the most prestigious honors available to people working on NASA’s Space Shuttle program. Mark Brewer of the orbiter electrical-avionics team, Jeffrey Lewis of the mid- module-major assembly team, Michael Argent of the external-tank, umbilical and payload latch- assembly programs, and Larry Echaves of the configuration-management team each received a letter of commendation, a poster, a certificate, and a Silver Snoopy pin that had flown in space.(Romy Jacobson, “Hailing the Right Stuff; NASA Honors Boeing Workers,” Los Angeles Daily News, 20 May 1998.)
NASA announced the astronaut candidate class of 1998, including 8 pilot candidates and 17 mission specialist candidates, and composed of 21 male and 4 female candidates. Among the candidate class was teacher Barbara R. Morgan, the former understudy to Christa McAuliffe. NASA had designated Morgan as Educator Mission Specialist in January 1998.(NASA, “NASA Names Astronaut Class of 1998,” news release 98-97, 4 June 1998. 142)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
NASA announced the arrival of international astronaut candidates at Johnson Space Center, where they began training as members of the 1998 astronaut class. The international candidates, from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, and Italy, were Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, Hans W. Schlegel, and Roberto Vittori of the European Space Agency; Bjarni V. Tryggvason of the Canadian Space Agency; and Marco C. Pontes of the Brazilian Space Agency.
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
Discovery astronauts placed the HST back in orbit using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Astronaut Jean-François Clervoy operated the arm, grabbing a handle on the telescope’s side. After releasing the latches securing the observatory inside the Shuttle’s bay, the robotic arm lifted the telescope above the spacecraft, and ground controllers opened the door covering HST’s telescopic eye. Once ground controllers gave the command, Discovery’s robotic arm released the telescope. Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and Pilot Scott J. Kelly fired the Shuttle’s thrusters to move away from the telescope slowly.(Robyn Suriano, “Hubble Set Free: Discovery’s Crew Ready for Monday Landing at KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 December 1999.)
The salvage team lifted astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom’s Mercury capsule to the surface of the Atlantic Ocean just one day before the 38th anniversary of the astronaut’s historic suborbital flight. The second American in space, Grissom had flown in his Liberty Bell 7 Mercury capsule on 21 July 1961. After its ocean landing, the capsule’s hatch had blown open prematurely, nearly drowning him. Both the location of the capsule and the cause of the accident had remained a mystery until 1 May 1999, when a salvage team led by Curt Newport and funded by the Discovery Channel had discovered the spacecraft 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the ocean. Even after the team had retrieved the capsule, the cause of the accident remained a mystery. The salvage team had yet to locate the capsule’s hatch, which Newport believed had the greatest potential for determining what had caused the malfunction at the end of Grissom’s flight.(Los Angeles Times, “Grissom’s Mercury Capsule Recovered,” 21 July 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Expedition Begins To Recover Mercury Capsule from Ocean,” 2 July 1999.)
Astronaut Charles P. “Pete” Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who “combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet.” As an example of Conrad’s wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” Conrad had been a member of NASA’s second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident,” news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
New York Governor George E. Pataki awarded NASA astronaut Eileen M. Collins of Elmira, New York, the state’s highest award, the Jackie Robinson Empire State Freedom Medal, for her achievement as the first female Space Shuttle Commander. Collins had been Commander of the historic Mission STS-93. During that mission, she and her crew had deployed the Chandra X- ray Observatory, the heaviest, largest, and most powerful x-ray telescope ever launched into space. Governor Pataki described Collins as “a bold pioneer of the reaches of space” and remarked that “her talent, intelligence and courage set an example that every woman and every man can hope to duplicate in their lives.” Every year New York presents the Empire State Freedom Medal, established in 1997, to “those who best demonstrate the qualities of determination, dignity, fairness, and honor that were exemplified by Jackie Robinson, who broke major league baseball’s color barrier.”(NASA, “First Female Shuttle Commander Eileen Collins Receives Jackie Robinson Medal,” news release 99- 125, 27 October 1999.)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robot’s components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASA’s ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiment’s success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts’ hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine “housekeeping chores,” such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions,” news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, “Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails,” news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Hubble Trouble,” 15 November 1999.)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing “development of crucial parts of the ISS,” such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team “responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory.” She had also served as “lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring” before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, “Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive,” Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts captured the HST using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Discovery had to alter its approach to the space telescope, because the telescope’s failed gyroscopes had “left the telescope a little shaky,” but Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and his crew had prepared for such a scenario. A fully operational HST would have had its aft pointed at the center of Earth; Brown would have carried out a straightforward approach, rising up from below until the robotic arm simply locked on. Without its gyroscopes functioning, the HST slowly rotated at one revolution per hour. Therefore, controllers activated backup gyroscopes to eliminate the rotation as much as possible, permitting Brown to fly around the HST and properly position the Shuttle’s robotic arm. As both spacecraft traveled around the Earth at 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour with Brown at the controls, Discovery moved closer to the HST until French astronaut Jean-François Clervoy had removed the 43-foot (13-meter), 25,000-pound (11,300-kilogram) telescope from orbit and anchored it in the Shuttle cargo bay.(Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Capture Hubble Telescope for Repairs,” Washington Times, 22 December 1999; William Harwood, “Discovery Catches Up with Hubble for a Service Call in Space,” Washington Post, 22 December 1999.)
After a search of nearly two weeks, a team of salvagers funded by the Discovery Channel located the Liberty Bell 7, the Mercury space capsule flown by astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, which had been lost at sea on 21 July 1961. Grissom had survived the splashdown and had been rescued from the Atlantic Ocean. He had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo I launchpad fire that he had done nothing that could have caused the hatch to blow out following the splashdown. The cause of the accident remained a mystery and “forever marred” Grissom’s otherwise successful 15-minute suborbital flight, the nation’s second piloted spaceflight. The salvagers’ remotely operated submersible had located and recorded video of the capsule about 300 miles (480 kilometers) southeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the surface of the ocean. Expedition leader Curt Newport said the video showed that the capsule was in “amazingly good condition.” It was “still shiny in spots,” the window and parachute liner were intact, its periscope was extended, and the words “United States” and “Liberty Bell” were “plainly visible.” Newport explained the difficulty of locating the capsule, comparing the attempt to find it to searching for the Titanic⎯the Liberty Bell’s capsule, smaller than one of the Titanic’s boilers, was hidden in water 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) deeper than the doomed ocean liner. Although the submersible located two cameras and a tape recorder with the capsule, which might possibly help to explain why the hatch blew open prematurely, it was doubtful that the film from those items would be salvageable after 38 years underwater. Although the discovery of the hatch itself would more likely provide an answer, Newport estimated that the hatch could be a mile from the capsule. The capsule remained in the ocean, for recovery at a later unspecified date.(Washington Times, “Salvagers Able To Locate Grissom’s Space Capsule,” 3 May 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Sunken Spacecraft,” 3 May 1999.)
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbia’s launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety “stand down.” NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted “full responsibility for wiring damage” found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch team’s skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, “Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, “NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panel’s Attention,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Swiss astronaut Claude Nicollier installed a new central computer on HST, 20 times faster than the telescope’s previous one, and a refurbished, 550-pound (250-kilogram), fine guidance sensor. At 8 hours and 10 minutes, the pair’s spacewalk was the third longest in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-103,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts- 103.html (accessed 25 March 2008).)
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the “spacecraft ground and flight control at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland].” In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASA’s four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a “long-overdue tune-up.” The orbiter’s overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbia’s fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tuneup,” 25 September 1999.)
The National Research Council (NRC) published a NASA-funded study, which found that NASA needed more safeguards to protect astronauts from potentially cancer-causing radiation during spacewalks they would make while building the International Space Station (ISS). The study recommended that NASA change flight rules, improve space-weather forecasting, and install a radiation-monitoring device outside the ISS. The NRC recommended the extra precautions because the station’s assembly schedule, consisting of more than three dozen flights and 1,500 hours of spacewalks over four years, would coincide with the most active part of the 11-year solar cycle. Moreover, the report estimated a nearly 100 percent chance that at least two assembly missions would overlap with a serious solar storm and a 50 percent chance that five flights would overlap with such a storm. Additionally, the NRC predicted that a change in the station’s planned orbit, which the Russian Space Agency had requested to accommodate Russian launches to help build and resupply the station, would increase the level of radiation exposure. George L. Siscoe, a Boston University physics professor and chairperson of the study, remarked that, although the radiation levels were not life threatening, they exceeded the 30-day and 60-day limits set to protect the skin and eyes. To safeguard crew from exposure to the increased risk of developing cancer later in life, countries participating in the ISS program would have to pay careful attention to flight schedules and crew rotation. Furthermore, the amount of radiation exposure sustained during ISS missions might affect an astronaut’s chances of assignment to additional spacewalks and their selection for future missions.(Michael Cabbage for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Study Urges NASA To Increase Radiation Safeguards,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1999.)
Astronauts Steven L. Smith and John M. Grunsfeld completed the HST servicing mission, replacing a nonfunctioning radio transmitter and an outdated tape recorder. The spacewalk again exceeded 8 hours and, for the third time, ran behind schedule. As the pair prepared to begin their spacewalk, Grunsfeld encountered a mechanical problem with his suit and had to exchange it before exiting Discovery’s airlock. Grunsfeld also faced the most difficult task, replacing the transmitter, which was not easy to service in space. The job required him to disconnect and reconnect a series of thin coaxial cables while wearing bulky pressurized gloves. NASA had designed a special tool for the job, but even so, the task required more than an hour, and Grunsfeld needed to stop to rest his hands. The eight-day repair flight had accomplished all of the mission’s major objectives, although NASA cancelled a fourth spacewalk, preventing the astronauts from installing all six steel sunshades that protect HST from solar damage.(Michael Cabbage, “Good Job: Hubble Looks Fit as Fiddle at the End of a Happy Day in Space, the Astronauts Sent Holiday Greetings to Earth,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 25 December 1999; Reuters, “Astronauts Wrap Up Work on Hubble: Christmas Eve Mission Replaces Bad Transmitter,” Washington Times, 25 December 1999; Associated Press, “Repairs Done, Shuttle Crew Makes Plans for Landing,” New York Times, 27 December 1999.)
NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, “Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit,” news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, “Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission,” 9 February 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to “John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field.” George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewis’s death in 1948, NACA had named the facility “Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory” to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to “Lewis Research Center” in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to “two of Ohio’s famous names⎯one an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.”(NASA, “NASA Announces Field Center Name Change,” news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASA’s special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Voss’s mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the class’s trip to NASA to watch Endeavour’s launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.”(Billy Cox, “Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
Sally K. Ride, the first female astronaut from the United States to travel into space, resigned her position as President of Space.com to concentrate on her education career. She had worked with Space.com founder Lou Dobbs, former host of CNN’s Moneyline, since the company’s start-up in June 1999 and had been the company’s president for the past year. Ride would continue her leave of absence from the University of California at San Diego where she is a physics professor throughout the remainder of the fall academic term.(Bloomberg News, “Ride Leaves Space.com Top Post⎯For 1st U.S. Female Astronaut in Space, It’s Back to Education,” 27 September 2000.)
Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASA’s exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commission’s report and Collins’s response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, “NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America,” news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
Engineers completed a weeklong series of tests on the U.S.-built Destiny laboratory, planned to launch to the ISS in 2001, ensuring that the module had no leaks and would provide a safe, vacuum-sealed environment in which the ISS astronauts could conduct research. NASA and the Boeing Company had worked together to test the 32,000-pound (14,500-kilogram) research laboratory. Placing Destiny in a pressurized chamber, engineers had monitored gas levels inside the module over the course of the week. Tip Talone, Director of the ISS Payload Process at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), characterized the results as “a large step in meeting the lab’s ‘Destiny’,” stating that the laboratory had “exceeded expectations.”(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space State Laboratory Exceeds Expectations in Vacuum Chamber Test,” 7 July 2000.)
By conserving fuel throughout their mission, the astronauts aboard Shuttle Endeavour were able to prolong their time in space by one extra day, allowing the crew to map the Earth’s terrain, covering several million square miles more than they had originally estimated possible. The extra 9 hours and 10 minutes of mapping allowed the radar flown from Endeavour to survey Australia in detail, making up for time lost when a Shuttle thruster had failed.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Squeezes in Extra Mapping Day,” 21 February 2000.)
Members of the astronaut crew who had flown aboard NASA’s historic 100th Space Shuttle flight, Mission STS-92, visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility to present Silver Snoopy awards, “the highest accolade that the astronauts corps gives to people who build flight hardware,” to the Lockheed Martin employees who had built the Shuttle’s super-lightweight tank and liquid-oxygen tank. NASA had named the Silver Snoopy award after the Peanuts character, the dog that imagined he was a fighter pilot.(New Orleans Time-Picayune, “Astronauts Thank Lockheed Workers: Company Makes Shuttle Components,” 17 December 2000.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off in Mission STS-99, planning to use new radar technology to map Earth’s terrain. Crew included astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Dominic L. P. Gorie, Janet L. Kavandi, Janice E. Voss, Mamoru Mohri, and Gerhard P. J. Thiele. The astronauts planned to extend the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission antenna from Endeavour’s cargo bay. The 197- foot (60-meter) antenna would gather mapping data necessary to create the most comprehensive map of Earth ever drawn. NASA collaborated with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency in planning the mission and hoped to cover more than 70 percent of Earth’s surface during the 11-day mission.(Associated Press, “Endeavour on Mission To Get Best Map of Earth,” 12 February 2000.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko installed three new batteries in the Russian service module Zvezda, which had launched with only five of its eight batteries to reduce its launch weight. Meanwhile, astronaut Daniel C. Burbank and cosmonaut Boris V. Morukov installed one of six batteries on the Russian-built control module Zarya. Burbank and Morukov needed a hammer and chisel to remove four small nut plates, which were obstructing a pair of bolts; the astronauts needed to loosen the bolts so that they could replace a voltage converter.(NASA, “STS-106”; C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Astronauts Installing Fresh Batteries in Space Station,” 13 September 2000.)
NASA released the first HST images taken after the Shuttle’s Mission STS-103, in which the crew of Discovery realigned and refurbished the telescope. The stunning clarity of the new images suggested that the mission specialists had succeeded in their sensitive work. According to Steven Beckwith, Director of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the work returned HST to “a condition that was better than it was even before the fourth gyroscope failed.” Astronomers had focused on targets more than 5,000 light-years away to test the upgraded telescope. During the servicing mission, astronauts had also installed a Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 and a Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, new instruments that would contribute to the already formidable strength of the HST.(NASA, “Hubble Reopens Eye on the Universe,” news release 00-16, 24 January 2000.)
Russian police announced that cosmonaut German S. Titov, the Soviet Union’s second man in space and the first person to spend more than one day in orbit, had been found dead at home at the age of 65. Although the police had not reported an official cause of death, the media speculated that the cause was either carbon monoxide poisoning or a heart attack. Titov had spent 25 hours and 18 minutes aboard the tiny Soviet Vostok-2 spacecraft on 6 and 7 August 1961. Fellow Soviet Yuri Gagarin had made the first flight on Vostok-1 on 12 April, flying for less than 2 hours, and U.S. astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. had followed Gagarin’s mission with a 15-minute, suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. Titov worked on the Buran program during the 1980s, attempting to create a Russian space shuttle, but the Soviet Union abandoned the project after the Russian shuttle had made one unpiloted flight. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Titov had entered politics, representing the Communist Party on the defense committee of the State Duma lower house.(Reuters, “Russia’s 2nd Cosmonaut, German Titov, Dies in Sauna,” 21 September 2000. 285)
NASA released the research results of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic 1998 voyage aboard Shuttle Discovery. The report detailed the 88 experiments conducted on Mission STS-95, the most of any Shuttle mission. NASA responded to some critics, who called the mission a publicity-driven flight with little scientific value, disclosing that Glenn himself had participated in 10 experiments during the mission. After becoming the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962, Glenn had returned to space 36 years later to achieve another record⎯the oldest man to fly in space.(Associated Press, “Scientific Results of Glenn’s Mission Released by NASA,” 28 January 2000.)
Astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega were able to tighten the slack solar panel on the ISS within minutes, using only a hook to place two tension cables back on their pulleys. Although the wing functioned well even though it was slack, if the astronauts had not adjusted its tension, the solar cells might have torn or the support rods might have bent or broken. After repairing the wing, the two astronauts installed a camera cable and a static-electricity monitor on the outside of the ISS. The monitor would help NASA learn how to protect spacewalking astronauts from electrical shocks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Breeze Through Wing Repair: ‘All Finished’,” 7 December 2000.)
The Carrier Test Pilot Hall of Honor, aboard the USS Yorktown, inducted U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr., honoring him for his distinguished aviation career before becoming an astronaut. Before Glenn became the first man to orbit Earth, he had already achieved a long record of flight exploits. Glenn’s fellow test pilot Neil A. Armstrong, the first astronaut to walk on the Moon, attended the induction. Upon receiving the award, Glenn expressed his gratitude at joining the distinguished ranks of the Hall of Honor and spoke of his lifetime of flight experiences.
An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezda’s living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crew’s radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, “Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
The National Aviation Hall of Fame inducted four new members at a black-tie dinner and formal enshrinement ceremony at the Dayton Convention Center in Dayton, Ohio. Apollo astronaut Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. joined fellow Apollo 11 astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in the Hall of Fame. Aviators previously inducted to the Hall of Fame included Eugene A. Cernan, the last Apollo astronaut to walk on the Moon; Laurence C. “Bill” Craigie, the first U.S. military aviator to fly a jet aircraft; and Thomas B. McGuire Jr., the second-leading fighter ace in U.S. Air Force history. The National Aviation Hall of Fame’s Class of 2000 joined 166 award-winning aviators already chosen for the honor.(Dayton Daily News (OH), “Astronaut Meets a Fan; Aviation Hall of Fame Enshrines 4 More,” 16 July 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery arrived at the ISS. Shuttle Commander Brian Duffy successfully executed the rendezvous without the Shuttle’s radar, relying on a star-tracking system and on handheld lasers operated by his crew. The Ku-band antenna had failed after launch, disrupting the radar and television link. The Shuttle docking was NASA’s first conducted without radar.(Associated Press, “Bad Antenna Blacks Out Shuttle’s Television,” Charleston Gazette (SC), 13 October 2000; New York Times, “Astronauts Rendezvous with Space Station,” 14 October 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Discovery Docks Safely with Space Station,” 14 October 2000.)
Three astronauts attached a new docking port to the ISS, with two of the crew spacewalking and one operating Discovery’s robotic arm from inside the Shuttle. Astronauts Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff and Michael Lopez-Alegria, assigned to work outside the ISS, had difficulty loosening the latches securing the docking port inside Discovery’s cargo bay. However, once they had freed it, Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata lifted the 2,700-pound (1,200-kilogram) port using the Shuttle’s robotic arm and positioned it on the space station. When the port was within 1 foot (0.3 meters) of its position, the astronauts outside gave Wakata “invaluable” instructions, necessary because the crew was working without the assistance of the camera at the end of the robotic arm. The camera had been out of commission since the short circuit on 14 October.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Docking Port Nudged Carefully into Place,” Sun-Sentinel (Ft. Lauderdale, FL), 17 October 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts attempted to deploy the new solar array at the ISS, but only one of the two panels unfurled as planned. Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega conducted a spacewalk to assist in attaching a 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) power assembly, while Marc Garneau maneuvered the Shuttle’s robotic arm from inside Endeavour. The spacewalkers were unable to open the latches on the storage boxes containing the folded solar panels, delaying their attempts to unfurl the array. They began to unfurl the first panel 1 hour behind schedule, but although it reached its full length in 14 minutes, the panel did not appear to have the correct tension. NASA officials decided to delay expanding the second panel for a full day, to give them time to determine the cause of the inadequate tension of the first panel. The ISS crew did not witness the deployment of the solar array, because the Shuttle crew carried out their work during the ISS crew’s sleep period.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Gets Its Wings, but Only One Is Deployed,” New York Times, 4 December 2000.)
SkyCorp signed a commercial Space Act agreement with NASA providing that SkyCorp deploy into orbit, either from the Space Shuttle or from the ISS, a satellite containing an Internet server. NASA and SkyCorp planned to test the idea as a “proof of concept” for a Low Earth Orbit 544 satellite constellation, offering Internet access on a global scale. SkyCorp chose to launch an Apache server on a small satellite containing an Apple 500 MHz Power Mac G4. The agreement with NASA outlined SkyCorp’s novel idea of launching a partially assembled satellite aboard a Space Shuttle. Astronauts would assemble the craft in space before tossing it from a Shuttle or ISS airlock into an independent orbit. SkyCorp named its concept Gossamer. Typically, engineers assemble a satellite fully on Earth, and it must withstand the stress of launch. A satellite built according to the Gossamer concept would only need to retain structural integrity in microgravity, greatly simplifying guidance, navigation, and control requirements.(SkyCorp, “SkyCorp Announces Space Act Agreement with NASA To Fly First Internet Webserver in Space,” news release, 20 October 2000; Keith Cowing, “SkyCorp Signs Agreement with NASA To Fly the First Webserver in Space⎯and It Will Be a Mac G4,” SpaceRef.com, 23 October 2000.)
Emergency rescue personnel from Canada, Russia, and the United States participated in training exercises near St. Petersburg in Russia, where they practiced maneuvers for rescuing astronauts returning to Earth from the ISS. The rescuers practiced searching in water and on land for a module carrying three astronauts, as well as practicing first-aid techniques.(Associated Press, “Russian, U.S. Rescuers Practice Space Rescue,” 16 August 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. successfully unfurled the second panel of the solar array (colloquially referred to as a solar wing) that the crew had deployed on the ISS on 3 December. Jett used computer commands to unfold the panel a few feet at a time, a process that took nearly 2 hours. No problems occurred until the crew had extended the panel almost fully, when it became clear that a panel on each blanket was stuck to a neighboring section. Endeavour’s crew turned the Shuttle to allow the Sun to warm the blankets and fired thrusters to shake the array, snapping the wing into place. The panel began generating electricity before it reached its full 115 feet (35 meters). To NASA’s relief, the panel was stretched tight. Once the crew had completed the process, Commander Jett radioed to Mission Control that they had two tensioned blankets, and Mission Control replied, “Great work, gentlemen. We think you’ve earned your solar wings.”(Associated Press, “Astronaut Manages To Spread Station’s 2nd Wing,” USA Today, 5 April 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Finnish Adding Solar Wing to Station,” New York Times, 5 December 2000.)
In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellor’s Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that “in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years,” U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASA’s next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, “Red Planet Is Next Frontier,” 2 May 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega worked outside the ISS to connect power lines, correcting an electrical shortage that had restricted the station’s first crew to two of three habitable modules. The two astronauts also inspected the first solar panel that they had unfurled, to determine whether the crew could correct its tension. Wearing a small TV camera on his helmet, Noriega beamed down to Mission Control images of the loose tension cables on the array’s right wing. The cables had slipped off their pulleys during the solar panel’s deployment on 3 December. Tanner remarked that an astronaut could place one tension cable back on its pulley without too much trouble, but that the other cable would require more work. Mission Control instructed the spacewalkers to try to fix the cables on their third and final spacewalk the following day.(Chicago Tribune, “Space Station Gets an Electrical Boost from Solar Wings,” 6 December 2000; Associated Press, “Live from Space, ‘Carlos Cam’,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 6 December 2000.)
Engineers at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) successfully tested a prototype for the “flying lifeboat” that would transport astronauts to and from the ISS. DFRC officials launched a robotic X-38 from under the wing of a B-52 flying at 39,000 feet (12,000 meters). It free fell for more than 40 seconds before deploying a 5,500-square-foot (511-square-meter) parachute, which provided a soft landing for the spacecraft. The test was a significant step in evaluating the technology planned for the crew return vehicle, a low-cost ISS initiative.(Associated Press, “Space Station ‘Lifeboat’ Prototype Successfully Tested,” 30 March 2000.)
Despite unexpected problems, astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery installed a 9-ton (8,200-kilogram or 8.2-tonne) structural truss on the Unity module of the ISS, completing one of the major objectives of the mission. The Z1 truss held four mass gyroscopes and the station’s main Ku-band and S-band communications antennas. In addition, the truss provided a temporary attachment point for a set of solar arrays scheduled to arrive during a December Shuttle mission. The astronauts faced several obstacles during the installation process. A short in the Shuttle’s payload circuitry disabled the computerized camera system needed to orient the truss for attachment, causing a 21⁄2-hour delay. However, the astronauts were able to wire a backup computer into an alternate power source, restoring power to the Space Vision System, which NASA had programmed to “determine the truss’s precise location and orientation with respect to the station by measuring the locations of the targets on its surface as viewed from different payload bay cameras.” The astronauts had to delay their work again when the Space Vision System failed to generate reliable data during certain orbital lighting conditions, requiring astronaut William S. McArthur to recalibrate the system.(William Harwood, “Structural Truss Added to Spine of Space Station: Shuttle Astronauts Overcome Camera System’s Short Circuit,” Washington Post, 16 October 2000.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko conducted a spacewalk outside the ISS, connecting nine power, data, and communications cables between the Russian-built Zvezda and Zarya modules. Lu and Malenchenko also assembled and installed a 6-foot-long (1.8-meter- long) magnetometer boom on the Zvezda module, to serve as a compass showing the relation of the ISS to Earth.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts- 106.html (accessed 30 April 2008); NASA, “STS-106 Extravehicular Activities,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-106/eva/index.html (accessed 2 May 2008).)
In preparation for the December arrival of a pair of solar panels, astronauts Michael Lopez- Alegria and Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff cleaned up the top of the newly installed truss on the ISS. The two men also deployed a tray on the truss, which would hold the connections between the station’s central structure and the Destiny laboratory module built by the United States and scheduled for installation in January. Next, the spacewalkers tested “mini-jetpacks,” known as Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue or SAFER. NASA intended the nitrogen-powered jetpacks for use only in emergencies, such as rescuing an injured or incapacitated spacewalker. With only limited fuel supplies in the jetpacks, each of the astronauts’ moves had to be deliberate; each test maneuver lasted approximately 3 minutes, while the astronaut traveled a distance of about 50 feet (15 meters). The astronauts remained tethered to the Shuttle’s robotic arm throughout the tests.(C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Head Out for Final Day of Spacewalks,” 18 October 2000; Associated Press, “Discovery’s Crew Zips Around Bay on New Jetpacks,” USA Today, 19 October 2000.)
Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASA’s second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatch’s failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissom’s claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Grissom’s Capsule Back at Space Center,” 14 June 2000.)
As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
Laurence Vico released a study on astronauts’ loss of bone density because of time spent in space. Vico and his team of researchers had examined the bone-mineral density of 15 cosmonauts who had spent from one to six months aboard the Mir space station. They had found a “striking” loss of bone density, in some cases as serious as that experienced by paraplegic patients. The team of doctors suggested that physicians should examine astronauts more closely for susceptibility to bone-weakening conditions such as osteoporosis, before they traveled into space, and that postflight recovery periods should be much longer than previous standards dictated. The sample study found that astronauts experienced an average bone-density loss of more than 5 percent, and that the lost bone did not immediately regenerate after postflight recovery periods. Scientists had long been aware of the physical challenges posed by the lack of gravity in the space environment. Therefore, NASA and the space agencies of other countries had carefully dictated diet and exercise programs for astronauts. The study had special relevance, however, because the international space community was continuing work on the ISS and anticipating even longer stays in space.
Astronauts Jeffrey N. Williams and James S. Voss conducted a 6-hour spacewalk to make repairs to the ISS. The pair successfully repaired the station’s construction crane, replaced a failed antenna, and began installing a much larger, Russian-built crane, designed to aid workers in adding the final modules to the ISS. NASA officials highlighted the exercise as a precursor of the maintenance schedule to come: “This spacewalk was a good example of what future spacewalks are going to look like, where we will need to perform maintenance on the space station.” The spacewalk occurred after Atlantis had docked at the space station, but while the hatch doors between the two spacecraft remained shut.(Washington Post, “Spacewalkers Begin Repairs on Orbiting Station; Wobbly Crane Is Secured; Another Awaits Completion,” 22 May 2000; Associated Press, “Outside Repairs Finished, Astronauts Ready To Head Inside Space Station,” 22 May 2000.)
NASA announced that it had renamed the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft, already orbiting asteroid 433 (Eros), after Eugene M. Shoemaker, an expert in the study of asteroid craters and their origins who died in 1997. Shoemaker’s work on Meteor Crater in Arizona, during the 1960s, had set the standard for crater investigation. Shoemaker had worked for NASA teaching astronauts about meteors and craters. He died in the Australian outback while researching asteroid-impact craters.(NASA, “NASA Renames NEAR Spacecraft for Planetary Science Pioneer Gene Shoemaker,” news release 14, March 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
Astronauts Leroy Chiao and William S. McArthur made a spacewalk outside the ISS to link electrical cables to the station’s new truss and to deploy the main antenna. The pair routed six power- and data-cables between the truss and the station, as well as four backup cables. Tests indicated that all connections worked. The astronauts moved one of the truss’s two antennas to a temporary location out of the way of future construction work; mounted the main antenna, a 78- inch-wide (2-meter-wide) dish, to a 12-foot (3.7-meter) boom; and extended the main antenna. According to NASA’s schedule, the ISS crew would turn on the antenna during an April 2001 Shuttle mission.(Michael Cabbage, “Discovery Spacewalk Goes Off Without a Hitch: Crew Members Finished a Six-Hour Task that Included Hooking Up a Truss and an Antenna,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 October 2000.)
Endeavour crew members Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani completed a 4-hour spacewalk to repair the rotating mechanisms on the solar arrays attached to the outside of the ISS. The solar-powered module provided electrical power for the space station’s communications, life- support, and steering systems, as well as for scientific experiments conducted aboard the ISS. However, flight-control personnel had found that the solar arrays were consuming more electrical power than expected. Project engineers attributed this to temperature-induced contraction and expansion in the bearings within the motors that rotated the solar arrays. Contraction and expansion was occurring because of the temperatures outside of the ISS, which ranged from 200oF to 200o below 0oF (93.3oC to -128.9oC), during each orbit of Earth. Therefore, Godwin and Tani were installing insulation around the motors in an effort to stop the bearings from undergoing contraction and expansion.(Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Make Breathtaking Repair Trip,” Houston Chronicle, 11 December 2001.)
NASA announced that it would delay Shuttle Missions STS-104 and STS-105 for several weeks because of a series of computer problems on the ISS. The computer difficulties had limited the control of the new robotic arm delivered to the ISS in April 2001. Despite the efforts of the astronauts aboard the ISS and of hundreds of experts on the ground, the malfunctions had continued to render control of the Canadian-built robotic arm impossible. NASA officials had determined that, until the situation was resolved, NASA would have to delay an Atlantis mission, scheduled for 20 June, and a Discovery mission, scheduled for 12 July, both carrying cargo that the arm must move. The delay also meant that the ISS crewYury V. Usachev, James S. Voss, and Susan J. Helmswould remain aboard ISS longer than originally planned.(Warren E. Leary, “Problems with Space Station’s Robotic Arm Delay Shuttle Visits,” New York Times, 1 June 2001; Mark Carreau, “Glitch Postpones 2 Space Station Missions,” Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2001.)
Astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms conducted the longest spacewalk in NASA historynearly 9 hours. After working to install hardware and equipment, the pair had to remain outside the ISS until NASA flight controllers had determined that the Italian module filled with supplies had found an ISS docking port. Voss and Helms spent 8 hours and 56 minutes on their spacewalk, eclipsing the record of 8 hours and 29 minutes set in 1992. The U.S astronauts conducted complex work, involving a series of slow, deliberate maneuvers. NASA’s flight director commented that the lengthy endeavor required stamina, remarking that the spacewalk pushed the two astronauts “right to the edge” of what they could handle. Early in the spacewalk, Voss and Helms each mishandled pieces of equipment, causing one device to float off into space and slowing the process by about 1 hour.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “A Record Job, with Some Butterfingers,” 13 March 2001; CNN.com, “Astronauts Set Out-of-This-World Record,” http://archives.cnn.com/2001/TECH/space/03/11/ space.shuttle.02/ (accessed 18 July 2008); Associated Press, “2 Astronauts Walk in Space Almost 9 Hours,” 12 March 2001; Agence France-Presse, “Discovery Astronauts End Marathon Spacewalk To Add Leonardo to ISS Canvas,” 12 March 2001. 32 NASA, “Deepest X-rays Ever Reveal Universe Teeming with Black Holes,” news release 01-37, 13 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Young Cosmos Was Full of Black Holes,” Washington Post, 14 March 2001; Associated Press, “X- ray Telescope Finds Heavens Brimming with Black Holes,” 14 March 2001.)
NASA collaborated with George Washington University’s Space Policy Institute to host a symposium commemorating 40 years of human spaceflight, an era that had dawned with Alan B. Shepard Jr.’s 15-minute suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin opened the conference, followed at the speaker’s podium by astronauts and space experts. The conference, “Looking Backward, Looking Forward,” provided a valuable forum, not only for discussing the accomplishments of the United States’ space program, but also for considering space exploration’s possible future evolution.(NASA, “NASA Conference To Commemorate 40 Years of Human Space Flight,” news release N01-28, 1 May 2001; NASA and Space Policy Institute, “Looking Backward, Looking Forward: Forty Years of U.S. Human Spaceflight,” (program, symposium organized by Space Policy Institute, Elliott School of International Affairs, George Washington University, in collaboration with NASA History Office, NASA Office of Policy and Plans, American Astronautical Society, and National Space Society, Washington, DC, 8 May 2001), http://history.nasa.gov/40hsconf.pdf (accessed 29 July 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and President of the Italian Space Agency Sergio DeJulio signed a framework for cooperation agreement for the construction of the habitation module for the ISS. The ISS partners planned the module to house the ISS crew, providing a galley and a Treadmill Vibration Isolation System among other features. In exchange for designing and manufacturing the habitation module, the Italian Space Agency received a commitment from NASA to provide Italian astronauts with access to the Shuttle and the ISS, as well as to help train Italian astronauts for their time in space. The bilateral agreement continued the trend of cooperation among nations, making the ISS a truly international endeavor.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Goldin and ASI President Dejulio To Sign Framework for Cooperation,” news release N01-24, 19 April 2001; NASA Watch, “NASA/ASI International Space Station Habitation Module Project Framework for Cooperation,” http://www.nasawatch.com/iss/04.19.01.nasa.asi.hab.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canada’s contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISS’s exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crew―Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakov―included astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttle’s fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, “Endeavour’s International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand,” news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, “Endeavour’s Mission Will Extend Space Station’s Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19,” news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 572, 1 July 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx572.html (accessed 4 August 2008). The mission called for the astronauts to attach the new American-made Joint Airlock to the ISS and to conduct important repairs to the station during three separate spacewalks. The design of the new airlock permitted the ISS crew access to and from space, wearing either Russian or American spacesuits. During the days leading up to the launch, Mission Specialist Michael L. Gernhardt explained: “The term Joint Airlock means that it’s applicable to both the U.S. [space]suit, the EMU [Extravehicular Mobility Unit], and to the Russian suit, the Orlan suit. The main objectives of our flight are to install four High Pressure Gas Tanksthat would be two oxygen, two nitrogento activate and check out the airlock and then to make the first spacewalk from the Joint Airlock and demonstrate the viability of the whole process and sort of usher in the space station era of EVA.”(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573, 1 August 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx573.html (accessed 11 August 2008); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Crew To Install Airlock, Expanding Capabilities,” Washington Post, 13 July 2001; NASA, “NASA Prepares To Open a New Doorway to Space,” news release 01-138, 9 July 2001.)
The government of France named NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin as Officer of the Legion of Honor, the country’s highest award. Napoleon had created the Legion of Honor in 1802 to honor civil and military service to France. The award honored Goldin for his contribution to the cooperation of France and the United States in space endeavors. NASA and the French space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales, had collaborated on Earth observation and Mars exploration, and French astronauts had flown on the Space Shuttle. Ambassador François Bujon de l’Éstang presented the award to Goldin at the residence of the French Ambassador.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Receives French Legion of Honor Award,” news release 01-202, 31 October 2001.)
NASA announced the selection of crew members for three missions to the ISS scheduled for 2002. Mission STS-112, scheduled for launch in July 2002, would comprise Commander Jeffrey S. Ashby and crew members Sandra H. Magnus, Pamela A. Melroy, Piers J. Sellers, David A. Wolf, and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. The crew for STS-113, scheduled to depart in August 2002, would consist of Commander James D. Wetherbee and crew members John Bennett Herrington, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Christopher J. Loria. The mission would also transport Expedition 6 crew members Valery G. Korzun, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson to the ISS, returning to Earth Expedition 5 crew members Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, and Donald A. Thomas. Finally, the crew of STS-114 would include Commander Eileen M. Collins and crew members James M. Kelly, Soichi Noguchi, and Stephen K. Robinson. STS-114, scheduled to leave for the ISS in November 2002, would transport Expedition 7 crew members Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, and Sergei I. Moschenko.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names 23 Astronauts and Cosmonauts to Shuttle Flights in 2002,” news release H01-167, 17 August 2001.)
Spain’s Prince of Asturias Foundation granted the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation to the ISS partnership, in recognition of the cooperation among the partnering space agencies that had created the orbiting space station. The Prince of Asturias Felipe de Borbón was the heir to the throne of Spain. The foundation granted the Award for International Cooperation to recognize the cultural, humanitarian, scientific, social, and technical efforts of individuals, groups, and institutions. The prince presented the award to officials representing the space agencies participating in the ISS, namely the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. Earlier in the day, the prince had called the astronauts at the ISS to congratulate them on their efforts.(NASA, “International Space Station Receives 2001 Prince of Asturias Award,” news release 01-206, 26 October 2001; Fundación Príncipe de Asturias, “The Aims of the Foundation,” http://www.fundacionprincipedeasturias.org/ing/00/objetivos.html (accessed 28 November 2008).)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency agreed to allow the transport of space tourists to the ISS. Although the two agencies did not sign a formal agreement on the matter, media reported that they had agreed to the procedures and standards that spaceflight participantsindividuals who are not professional astronauts or cosmonautsmust satisfy when they visit the space station. NASA and the Russian Space Agency agreed that such visitors must demonstrate foreign language ability, undergo specified physical training, and pass a personal suitability test. The issue of spaceflight participants had become a source of contention between NASA and the Russian Space Agency after American businessman Dennis A. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency to transport him to the ISS in April 2001.(Peter Baker, “U.S., Russia Agree To Allow ‘Space Tourists’,” Washington Post, 10 August 2001; ESA, Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers” (statement of criteria, Paris, November 2001), http://esamultimedia.esa.int/docs/isscrewcriteria.pdf (accessed 5 November 2008).)
Russian cosmonauts training at NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, staged a one-day walkout to protest NASA’s rejection of millionaire Dennis A. Tito as a member of the Russian crew that would travel aboard the Soyuz to the ISS on 30 April. Space enthusiast Dennis Tito had paid the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency a reported US$20 million to make the trip. Russia’s agreement with the untrained Tito had sparked debate over the proper use of the ISS and over so-called space tourism. Talgat A. Musabayev, the Kazakh cosmonaut who was to command Tito’s crew, removed his men from the training program in Houston after learning that NASA would not allow Tito to participate in the exercises. NASA argued that allowing a person who had not trained as an astronaut to travel to space would pose safety risks, especially since the ISS remained a work-in-progress. Russian officials contended that they had the right to transport aboard their spacecraft any person they deemed fit for the mission. Both sides pledged to find a resolution to the disagreement.(Kathy Sawyer, “Space Tourism Sparks U.S.-Russian Standoff,” Washington Post, 20 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Opposing Russian Plan for Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 March 2001; Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts to NASA: Millionaire Comrade Trains with Us or Nobody Trains,” 20 March 2001.)
The ISS Partnership agreed to allow space tourist Dennis A. Tito to travel to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TM-32, scheduled to launch at the end of April. The agreement among the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States followed months of disagreement regarding the safety and propriety of allowing the wealthy American businessman to purchase passage into space for US$20 million. Without conferring with NASA or with other members of the ISS Partnership, the Russian Space Agency had made an agreement with Tito permitting him to take a place on Russia’s Soyuz spacecraft. NASA had protested against including an individual who was not a trained astronaut on the spaceflight at such an early point in the ISS’s development. After Russia had reached the agreement with Tito, he had undergone months of training. The ISS Partnership required Tito to sign a waiver absolving NASA of any liability for his safety and required him to promise that he would pay for anything he damaged. The ISS Partnership also announced plans to formalize the criteria for future visits to the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Deal Reported in Long-Running Dispute on Putting Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 April 2000; NASA, “International Space Station Partnership Grants Flight Exemption for Dennis Tito,” news release 01-83, 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Continues To Resist Visit by First Tourist,” 15 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Financier’s Spaceflight Gets Final Clearance,” Washington Post, 25 April 2001.)
Astronauts Thomas D. Jones and Robert L. Curbeam Jr. made their third and final spacewalk from Space Shuttle Atlantis, finishing the installation of the ISS’s science laboratory Destiny. The spacewalk was the 100th in the history of U.S. space exploration. Two days earlier, Jones and Curbeam had conducted a spacewalk to install a window shutter for Destiny, allowing the astronauts residing inside the ISS an unparalleled view of Earth. Overall, the mission to install the vital and expensive Destiny module went smoothly. Atlantis’s crew worked quickly to connect the necessary cables, hatches, and wires to equip the new research center. The successful installation also allowed NASA to accept a transfer of leadership from the Russian Space Agency. Using the newly installed computers in the Destiny module, U.S. flight controllers took control of the ISS on 13 February 2001.
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:23 p.m. (CDT), marking the end of Mission STS-105. During the mission, the Shuttle crew had delivered supplies and equipment to the ISS, carried Expedition 3 crew members to the ISS, and transported the Expedition 2 crew back to Earth. In addition, astronauts Daniel T. Barry and Patrick G. Forrester had each performed two spacewalks to attach equipment to the exterior of the ISS, spending a total of 11 hours and 45 minutes outside the space station. STS-105’s total duration was 11 days, 21 hours, and 13 minutes.(NASA, “STS-105: A New Crew Arrives at the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-105/ (accessed 10 November 2008).)
Two members of the ISS crew performed a spacewalk to complete installation of the Russian Pirs docking compartment. During the 5-hour spacewalk, American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir N. Dezhurov connected communications cables between the Pirs module and the adjoining crew-habitation and command module. The pair also tested an external construction crane and photographed an askew solar array attached to the crew-habitation module, so that ground-based experts in Russia could determine whether the array would require repair in the future.
Russian cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS, the first time ISS crew had walked in space without a Shuttle present. Two tethers attached each cosmonaut to the ISS as the pair departed and reentered the station through the 16- foot (4.9-meter) Russian module Pirs, added to the ISS in September 2001. During the 5-hour spacewalk, the two cosmonauts hooked up a 40-foot (12.2-meter) crane, a ladder, handrails, and other equipment to the exterior of the ISS. American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. monitored the two cosmonauts’ work from inside the station, and Mission Control Center in Moscow supervised the spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts Work Outside on Station; Spacewalk from New Module Is First Without Shuttle Present,” Washington Post, 9 October 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 12:55 p.m. (EST), bringing to an end Mission STS-108. During the mission, Endeavour had transported crew members of Expedition 4 to the ISS to begin their residency on the orbiting space station and had returned to Earth the Expedition 3 crew members, ending their 117-day stay aboard the ISS. In addition, astronauts Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani had completed numerous tasks during a 4-hour spacewalk, including installation of insulation on mechanisms that rotated the station’s main solar arrays. The crews of Endeavour and the ISS had collectively transferred more than 5,000 pounds (2,270 kilograms) of crew provisions, experiments, and other supplies to the ISS from Endeavour’s mid-deck and from the Raffaello MPLM. The mission’s total duration had been 11 days, 19 hours, and 55 minutes.(NASA KSC, “Space Shuttle, Mission Archives: STS-108,” http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
During the first spacewalk for Mission STS-105, astronauts Daniel T. Barry and Patrick F. Forrester affixed an ammonia coolant canister and two boxes containing hundreds of samples of prospective spacecraft materials to the exterior of the ISS. The ammonia canister would function as a backup coolant system in the event of a problem with the ISS’s primary coolant system. The samples, part of the MISSE experiment, would remain attached to the ISS for almost two years, so that scientists could examine how the materials performed during prolonged exposure to solar storms, cosmic radiation, and other aspects of the space environment. The experiment was a cooperative research effort of Boeing Phantom Works, the Materials Laboratory at the U.S. Air Force Research Library, and several NASA centers.(Marcia Dunn, “Spacewalking Astronauts Attach Ammonia Canister, Science Experiments to Space Station,” Associated Press, 16 August 2001; NASA, “Materials International Space Station Experiment: Introduction,” http://misseone.larc.nasa.gov/ (accessed 13 November 2008).)
During the second spacewalk for Mission STS-105, astronauts Daniel T. Barry and Patrick G. Forrester attached two 45-foot (13.7-meter) power cables and two handrails to the exterior of the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. The cables would provide a secondary power supply for a 44- foot (13.4-meter) external truss, scheduled for installation in 2002. The truss, which would contain a satellite navigation system and other electronic components, would be the first of several parts of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, which would support new components, such as solar arrays.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-105,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-105.html (accessed 13 November 2008); Mark Carreau, “Discovery Astronauts Connect Power Flow During Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1―comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richards―launched from NASA’s KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2―Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms―would replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttle’s 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a “moving van” for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, “Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew,” news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station,” New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew,” 8 March 2001; Reuters, “USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission,” 8 March 2001.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis accomplished the primary objective of Mission STS- 104, successfully installing the Joint Airlock on the ISS. The crew used the space station’s massive, Canadian-made robotic arm, which had not operated properly for several months, to hoist the enormous entryway out of the Shuttle’s cargo bay and to move it into position for installation. Astronaut Susan J. Helms commanded the robotic arm, while spacewalking astronauts Michael L. Gernhardt and James F. Reilly helped line up the hatch for its final installation. The robotic arm successfully accomplished its first construction task, drawing applause from NASA’s Mission Control, as did the opening of the US$164 million Joint Airlock. Although the ISS Partnership planned improvements and additions to the space station far into the future, the mission marked the end of a major stage of assembly for the ISS.(New York Times, “2nd Entry Installed on Space Station,” 16 July 2001.)
The first changing of the guard took place aboard the ISS Discovery when the crew of Expedition 2, which included astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, replaced the first ISS research team, Expedition 1. The new crew planned to spend four and one-half months aboard the space station, with Usachev serving as the outpost’s Commander. With the official beginning of her mission on the ISS, Helms became the first long- term female occupant of the space station. The new crew anticipated working well together, having trained as a unit for nearly four years. Because the first crew had completed many of the ISS’s final construction tasks, crew of Expedition 2 looked forward to having more research time than their predecessors had enjoyed.(Todd Halvorson, “Space Crews Ceremoniously Switch Places,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 March 2001; NASA, “Space Station ShiftChange Set with Next Shuttle Launch,” news release, 01-30, 28 February 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Alpha About To Get Its First Female Resident,” 5 March 2001; Juan A. Lozano for Associated Press, “New Space Station Crew Moves into Orbiting Outpost,” 14 March 2001.)
With resident astronaut James S. Voss performing most of the work, the ISS crew completed repairs on the space station’s computers and installed a replacement for the most damaged of the three command and control machines. With the repairs completed, the ISS regained the unfettered ability to steer, regulate, and communicate for the first time since the computer breakdown had occurred during the installation of the Canadian robotic arm in April 2001. NASA experts believed that the complex computer problems had stemmed from a failed hard drive but could not rule out software problems as the root cause. The computer outages had delayed testing of the new 57-foot (17-meter) arm; NASA resumed the testing only after officials had determined that they had corrected the computer malfunctions.(Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Complete Repairs to Computers/ Station Equipment Back at Full Force,” Houston Chronicle, 12 May 2001.)
The crew of Space Shuttle Atlantis successfully installed the Destiny laboratory on the ISS. Using the Shuttle’s robotic arm, astronaut Marsha S. Ivins moved the module from the Shuttle’s payload area to its place on the side of the ISS. After patching up a small leak from one of the module’s coolant lines, two spacewalking astronauts connected electrical, fluid, and data lines between the ISS and the Destiny laboratory. After carefully completing the installation, astronauts opened a hatch connecting the new module to the rest of the ISS. The additional 3,750 cubic feet (106 cubic meters) of space made the ISS the largest spacecraft ever. Astronaut Kenneth D. Cockrellalong with William M. Shepherd, the first to enter the Destiny modulereported, “The lab looks and feels and smells great, and looks like all the hard work has really paid off. It’s a beautiful piece of hardware in here.”(William Harwood, “Spacewalking Astronauts Attach Lab Module to Space Station,” Washington Post, 11 February 2001; USA Today, “Space Station Module Gives Crew More Space,” 12 February 2001; Washington Post, “Astronauts Open Hatch to Destiny Laboratory; Alpha Now Largest Orbiting Outpost,” 12 February 2001; Associated Press, “Astronauts Install Lab on Station,” 12 February 2001.)
The crews of Shuttle Endeavour and the ISS conducted the first successful test of the massive Canadarm2. Because of the size and weight of the robotic arm, the crew had never moved the completely assembled Canadarm2 until its arrival at the ISS. However, they installed the arm, composed of high-strength metals and weighing 3,618 pounds (1,640 kilograms), without any problems. Astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms, both in the middle of a four-month stay aboard the ISS, led the test of the new instrument. Voss explained that the robotic arm was vital to the station: “This was one of those linchpins that had to work, and it looks like it’s going to work. We’re looking forward to using it to keep building the station.” As testing continued, the ISS crew was troubled with some computer malfunctions. However, cooperating with NASA’s engineers, the astronauts eventually solved the problems.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Robot Comes to Life: With ‘Inchworm’ Moves, 58-Foot Arm Passes Test,” 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Get Robot Arm Going After 4 Days,” 29 April 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TM-33 to the ISS on a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4 a.m. (CDT). The mission’s crew members consisted of Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyez and Konstantin M. Kozeev and French astronaut Claudie André-Deshays Haigneré; Afanasyez was also Mission Commander. The spacecraft carried supplies and equipment for the ISS. The crew members planned to conduct joint operations and scientific research with the crew of Expedition 3. In addition, one of the main purposes of the mission, designated Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight, was to deliver the Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS, so that the ISS crew could use it as an emergency escape vehicle. The new Soyuz would remain at the ISS, and the spacecraft’s crew would return to Earth in the older Soyuz TM-32, which was already docked at the station.(NASA, “Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp3/taxi3/index.html (accessed 26 November 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 576, 1 November 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx576.html (accessed 26 November 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:44 a.m. (CDT), marking the end of STS-112. During the mission, Atlantis’s crew had conducted joint operations with the ISS Expedition 5 crew, including the installation of the S1 Truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Astronauts Piers J. Sellers and David A. Wolf had performed three spacewalks to install the truss. In addition, the Shuttle’s crew members had transferred cargo to the ISS and had used the Shuttle’s thruster jets to raise the station’s orbit. The mission’s total duration was 10 days, 19 hours, and 58 minutes.
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 attached a 44-foot (13-meter) truss, containing computers, coolant lines, electrical cables, and other components to the ISS. The 27,000-pound (12,250-kilogram) beam, dubbed Starboard Zero or S0, was the first of nine truss segments that would form a 356-foot (110-meter) exterior spine, supporting new solar arrays, heat radiators, and laboratory modules. The installation, involving the first use of the 58-foot (18-meter), Canadian-built robotic arm designed for the station, required two separate spacewalks, performed by two different pairs of astronauts.(Warren E. Leary, “Major Component of Space Station Is Attached,” New York Times, 12 April 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:50 p.m. Central Standard Time (CST). The Shuttle’s crew members comprised Commander James D. Wetherbee and astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, John Bennett Herrington, Paul S. Lockhart, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Donald R. Pettit. The primary objective of STS-113, also designated as Station Assembly Flight 11A, was to transport the crew of Expedition 6―Bowersox, Budarin, and Pettit―to the ISS and return the crew of Expedition 5 to Earth. Another major objective was to install the Port 1 (P1) Truss segment on the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. The structure would eventually house the ISS’s solar arrays and would carry power, data, and temperature controls for the station’s electronics. In addition, STS113 would transport several experiments to the ISS, returning to Earth with several experiments that the crew of Expedition 5 had conducted.(NASA, “STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 29 October 2008); NASA, “STS-113 Shuttle Press Kit” press kit, 25 October 2002, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-113/SPK_sts-113.pdf (accessed 29 October 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of TRW Inc. to lead the team to build the HST’s successor, a new space-based observatory planned to launch in 2010. NASA planned to call the new satellite the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), in honor of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Under the US$824.8 million contract, TRW and its partner organizations would build an observatory capable of viewing deeper into space than the HST. The telescope’s main mirror would unfold to a diameter of at least 20 feet (6.1 meters), thereby providing six times more light-gathering area than the HST, which had an 8-foot (2.4-meter) primary mirror. The telescope would also have instruments highly sensitive to infrared light, which would help astronomers understand the universe’s creation and evolution. In addition, NASA planned for the new telescope to orbit 940,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth, within the second Lagrange point or L2, where a spacecraft maintains a balance between the gravity of the Sun and of Earth. Although the L2 orbit would be too far from Earth to allow astronauts to service the observatory, it would enable the observatory to cool to very low temperatures without the use of complex refrigeration equipment.(NASA, “NASA Announces Contract for Next-Generation Space Telescope Named After Space Pioneer,” news release 02-171, 10 September 2002.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TMA-1 from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 8:11 a.m., local time10:11 p.m. (EST). The launch was officially designated ISS Mission 5S. Soyuz TMA-1 was the first of a newly modified version of the Soyuz spacecraft, offering improved safety features and accommodation for crew members of a larger range of sizes. In addition, Soyuz TMA-1 was an automatic passenger craft intended to replace Soyuz TM- 34 as the ISS’s escape craft. The Russian Space Agency had been sending Soyuz vehicles to the ISS every six months as CRVs for scientists residing on the ISS. Soyuz TMA-1’s crew consisted of Commander Sergei V. Zalyotin and two crew members, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov and Belgian ESA astronaut Frank De Winne. The mission’s primary purpose was to provide a CRV for the ISS; however, Soyuz TMA-1’s crew also planned to conduct scientific experiments with the ISS Expedition 5 members. ISS crew would conduct most of these experiments under a commercial contract between Russia and ESA.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; NASA Mission Control Center, “Report #48,” http://quest.nasa.gov/ news/space/2002/10-29a.txt (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Crew members of STS-113 completed the installation of the P1 Truss segment, attaching it to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. The installation entailed the use of the Shuttle’s and the ISS’s robotic arms, as well as three spacewalks, which astronauts John Bennett Herrington and Michael Lopez-Alegria performed. STS-113’s crew attached the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long), 14-ton (12,700-kilogram or 12.7-tonne) P1 Truss to the port side of the Starboard Zero (S0) Truss, the centerpiece of the Integrated Truss Structure. The P1 was the third segment of planned ISS equipment that would eventually include 11 contiguous truss structures. This particular truss segment contained the ISS’s Active Thermal Control System, scheduled for activation in 2003; one of two Ultra High Frequency Communications systems on the ISS; and a Thermal Radiator Rotary Joint intended to provide mechanical and electrical energy to rotate the ISS’s heat- rejecting radiators.(NASA, “STS-113 Overview,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-113/mm-sts-113.pdf (accessed 29 October 2008); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA announced the backup crew members for ISS Expedition 10, including Jeffrey N. Williams, acting as backup for the ISS station commander, Russian cosmonaut Konstantin M. Kozeev, and U.S. astronaut Sunita L. Williams. The primary crew members for Expedition 10 were ISS Commander Leroy Chiao, U.S. astronaut John L. Phillips, and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov.(NASA, “Space Station Expedition Backup Crew Named,” news release 02-258, 23 December 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that Peggy A. Whitson would be NASA’s first ISS Science Officer. In the future, NASA planned to assign one of its astronauts to the post for each ISS expedition crew. The objective of the assignment was to increase the ISS’s emphasis on research. According to NASA, the ISS Science Officer would focus initially on U.S. research conducted on the ISS. As the station’s research capabilities expanded in the future, NASA would discuss with the ISS’s international partners the possibility of expanding the ISS Science Officer’s role. NASA’s ISS Science Officer would be responsible for working with the U.S. research community on the requirements and objectives of ISS experiments, acting as the point- of-contact between ISS crew and NASA-sponsored principal investigators, payload developers, and other ISS stakeholders. As a crew member of Expedition 5 in June 2002, Whitson, who had a PhD in biochemistry, would become the first resident scientist on the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names Whitson First NASA ISS Science Officer,” news release 02-175, 16 September 2002.)
Thomas J. Kelly, designated by NASA as father of the lunar module, died at the age of 72 in Cutchogue, New York. Kelly had led a team of engineers at Grumman Aircraft Corporation in designing and building the Lunar Excursion Module known as the Eagle. Apollo 11 astronauts had used the Eagle to land on the Moon and to return to the orbiting command module for the trip back to Earth. In 1972 NASA had awarded Kelly with its Distinguished Public Service Medal for his work on the Apollo program. Kelly’s wife, six children, and 10 grandchildren survived him.(Warren E. Leary, “T. J. Kelly, 72, Dies; Father of Lunar Module,” New York Times, 27 March 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of crew members for three ISS missions scheduled for 2003 and 2004. The crew of STS-118 would include Mission Commander Scott J. Kelly and crew members Charles O. Hobaugh, Barbara R. Morgan, Lisa M. Nowak, Scott E. Parazynski, and Dafydd Rhys Williams. Morgan, who had trained as Christa McAuliffe’s backup for the ill-fated Challenger Shuttle, would be the first teacher in space under NASA’s new Educator Astronaut Program. NASA hoped that the program would inspire students to become space explorers. The second mission, STS-119, would comprise Commander Steven W. Lindsey and U.S. astronauts Michael L. Gernhardt, Mark E. Kelly, and Carlos I. Noriega. STS-119 would also include ISS Expedition 9’s Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. Crew for STS-120 would be Commander James D. Halsell and astronauts Michael J. Foremen, Wendy B. Lawrence, Alan G. Poindexter, Piers J. Sellers, and Stephanie D. Wilson.(NASA, “Astronauts Named for Future Space Station Missions,” news release 02-249, 12 December 2002; NASA, “NASA’s Educator Astronaut Assigned First Flight,” news release 02-250, 12 December 2002; William Harwood, “Teacher Ready To Fulfill Space Legacy,” Washington Post, 13 December 2002.)
The General Services Administration (GSA) presented the Federal Aviation Award to the Aircraft Operations Division (AOD) of NASA’s JSC. The AOD, which provided astronauts with spaceflight training, had an exemplary safety record. In addition, GSA gave Chief of AOD Robert J. Naughton an Honorable Mention for the Federal Aviation Professional Award. GSA’s awards recognized effectiveness, efficiency, and safety in federal aviation operations, in the hope that honoring outstanding federal aviation programs and professionals would promote excellence in government aviation.(NASA JSC, “JSC’s Aircraft Operations Division Wins Top Federal Aviation Award,” news release J02-93, 19 September 2002.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-34 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:27 a.m. Greenwich Mean Time (GMT)1:27 a.m. (EST). The mission, designated Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight, carried three crew membersCommander Yuri P. Gidzenko of Russia, Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, and South African businessman Mark Shuttleworth. The mission’s main purpose was to deliver a new Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS for use as an emergency lifeboat for the ISS’s permanent three-member crew. In addition, major media noted that Shuttleworth had paid the Russian Space Agency a fee of approximately US$20 million to fly on Soyuz to the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp4/taxi4/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); Houston Chronicle, “Space Tourist No. 2,” 25 April 2002.)
NASA announced the assignment of three crew members to begin training for the ninth expedition to the ISS. The three were Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. NASA assigned American astronaut Daniel M. Tani to serve as backup for his fellow compatriot Fincke and selected cosmonauts Alexander F. Poleschuk and Roman Y. Romanenko to serve as backups for fellow Russians Kononenko and Padalka.(NASA, “Astronauts Assigned for Space Station Expedition Training,” news release 02-55, 18 March 2002.)
NASA released the first four images taken by the HST’s newly installed Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS). During Mission STS-109 in March 2002, astronauts had installed the ACS, capable of providing images with double the area and resolution of those provided by the Wide Field Planetary Camera 2, which the ACS had replaced. The ACS had captured images of a turbulent galaxy, which scientists called Tadpole because of its long tail of stars; of two colliding spiral galaxies known as the Mice; of the Cone Nebula, which looks like a red volcano; and of the M17 Swan Nebula, a richly colored, cloudy-looking nebula containing newly forming planetary systems.(NASA, “Hubble’s New Camera Delivers Breathtaking Views of the Universe,” news release 02-74, 30 April 2002; Warren E. Leary, “Telescope Opens Window on Dawn of the Universe,” New York Times, 1 May 2002.)
Two astronauts from Space Shuttle Endeavour undertook an extravehicular activity (EVA) to repair the ISS’s robotic arm, Canadarm2. American astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz and French astronaut Philippe Perrin replaced one of seven joints on the US$600 million, Canadian- built robotic arm, which was critical to the continued construction of the ISS. To repair Canadarm2, the astronauts first removed its 450-pound (205-kilogram), hand-like, latching-end effector (LEE); loosened six bolts connecting the problematic “wrist roll” joint to the arm; and disconnected power, data, and video lines. They then installed the replacement joint, tightened the bolts to secure the new joint to the arm, restored the power and other lines, and reaffixed the LEE. Subsequent tests of the Canadarm2 confirmed the success of the repairs. The EVA, lasting 7 hours and 17 minutes, was the third for Mission STS-111.(William Harwood, “Spacewalkers Continue Space Station Repairs; Joint on Robotic Arm Is Replaced,” Washington Post, 14 June 2002; NASA JSC, “STS-111, Mission Control Center Status Report no. 18,” 13 June 2002, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts111/STS-111-18.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:46 p.m. (CDT). The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Jeffrey S. Ashby, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and crew members Sandra H. Magnus, Piers J. Sellers, David A. Wolf, and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. STS-112’s major objective was to deliver and install the Starboard One (S1) Truss, the second segment of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Astronauts Sellers and Wolf planned to make three spacewalks during the installation missiondesignated ISS Assembly Mission 9Ato install and activate the truss. Other mission objectives included transferring experiments and payloads from Atlantis to the ISS, deploying the station’s second S-Band communications system, and installing external camera systems.(NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008); NASA, “STS-112 Overview,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/mm-sts-112.pdf (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA awarded SLI contracts to Boeing and Lockheed Martin for flight-demonstrator technologies. The flight-demonstrator contracts would support development of the future OSP, which would serve as both the transport vehicle and the escape vehicle for astronauts assigned to the ISS. NASA awarded a contract valued at US$301 million (including options through 2006) to Boeing’s Phantom Works Division, to continue developing its X-37 test vehicle. The purpose of the X-37 was to test technologies that, eventually, NASA could use in the OSP. NASA awarded another contract worth US$53 million (including options through 2006) to Lockheed Martin, to develop a reusable, launchpad-abort demonstrator. The demonstrator, an escape module capable of recognizing problems and evacuating crew within seconds, would assist crews to escape emergencies occurring on the launchpad.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contracts for Flight Demonstrators,” news release c02-gg, 20 November 2002; Chris Kidler, “NASA Awards X-37 Contracts,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 November 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that, after international partners had completed certain portions of the ISS, former schoolteacher Barbara R. Morgan would fly on a Space Shuttle mission to the station. NASA had selected Morgan as a mission specialist in the astronaut class of 1998. She had subsequently worked in ISS Mission Control, relaying instructions between ISS Mission Control and the crew of Expedition 4 aboard the ISS. Morgan had previously served as a backup candidate for the Teacher in Space Program, training with Christa McAuliffe and the STS-51L crew of Space Shuttle Challenger. At the time of O’Keefe’s announcement, Morgan was part of a new Educator Astronaut Program administered by NASA and the Department of Education, designed to attract students to engineering, math, and science.(NASA, “Press Briefing Scheduled with NASA Administrator and Astronaut Barbara Morgan,” news release N02-28, 15 April 2002; William Harwood, “McAuliffe’s Backup Will Go to Space in 2004,” Washington Post, 13 April 2002.)
ESA announced that an international group of astronauts would attend a training session at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany, to prepare for missions to the ISS. The specific objective of the training was to prepare the astronauts for the tasks they would need to accomplish when a Japanese experiment module and ESA’s Columbus laboratory docked with the ISS. Upon completing the training, the international ISS partners planned to assign the astronauts to specific, long-duration ISS missions. The training session, scheduled to last from 26 August to 6 September, would include ESA astronauts Pedro Duque, Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, and Thomas Reiter; Japan’s NASDA astronauts Takao Doi, Satoshi Furukawa, Aikihiko Hoshide, and Koichi Wakata; and NASA astronauts Nicole Passonno Stott and Stephanie D. Wilson.(ESA, “Ten Astronauts Train in Europe for the International Space Station,” ESA news release 56-2002, 19 August 2002.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed Frederick D. Gregory as NASA’s Deputy Administrator, making Gregory the first African American to serve as NASA’s second-in-command. Before becoming Deputy Administrator, Gregory had served as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Flight from December 2001 to August 2002 and as Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance from June 1992 to December 2001. In addition, Gregory had been an astronaut on three Shuttle missions and had served in the U.S. Air Force for 30 years.(Kelly Young, “Senate Names New NASA Official,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 August 2002; NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory,” http://www.nasa.gov/about/ highlights/gregory_bio.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe selected astronaut Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist. In this post, Lucid became responsible for ensuring that NASA’s programs were of scientific merit. At the time of the selection, Lucid was a spacecraft communicator supporting the Space Shuttle and ISS missions. A veteran of five Space Shuttle flights, Lucid had been one of the first six women selected to become an astronaut and the only woman awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor. Lucid replaced Kathie L. Olsen, who had occupied the position since May 1999. Olsen had accepted an appointment as the Associate Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut, Dr. Shannon Lucid, Selected as Chief Scientist,” news release 02-27, 12 February 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-111 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 5:22 p.m. (EDT). NASA had originally scheduled the mission to lift off on 30 May but had delayed the launch because of mechanical and weather concerns. The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell and astronauts Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, Valery G. Korzun, Paul S. Lockhart, Philippe Perrin, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson. Korzun, Treschev, and Whitson were also members of ISS Expedition 5, which was to remain at the ISS when Endeavour returned to Earth. STS-111 had several objectives. The Shuttle was transporting to the ISS the Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM), which contained racks for experiments, stowage, and resupply. The crew would also install a component called the Mobile Base System (MBS) to service the ISS’s robotic arm. Both the MPLM and the MBS were part of the payload of the mission, also designated ISS Utilization Flight 2. A further objective of the mission was to transport the crew of Expedition 5 to the ISS and to return the members of Expedition 4 to Earth.(NASA, “STS-111 (110),” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-111/mission-sts-111.html (accessed 17 August 2008); NASA, “STS-111: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-111/ (accessed 17 August 2008).)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 and the ISS installed the first Starboard truss segment, the S1 Truss, connecting it with the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Installation of the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long) S1 Truss was the mission’s main objective. Astronauts David A. Wolf and Piers J. Sellers accomplished the task during three spacewalks, with astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Sandra H. Magnus operating the ISS’s robotic arm to attach the S1 to the central truss segment, the S0 Truss. The astronauts also installed the Crew and Equipment Translation Aid, a cart that runs on rails along the top of the truss.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Install Girder on Space Station,” New York Times, 11 October 2002; NASA, “ISS Assembly Mission 9A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/structure/ iss_assembly_9a.html (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA named 16 crew members for two Space Shuttle missions to the ISS, scheduled for 2003. Mission STS-115 would carry Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. and crew members Daniel C. Burbank, Christopher J. Ferguson, Steven G. MacLean, Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, and Joseph R. Tanner. Mission STS-116 would carry Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt and the crew―American astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and William A. Oefelein, and Swedish ESA astronaut Christer Fuglesang. NASA planned for STS-115 to deliver a second port truss segment to the ISS. Later, crew would attach the second port truss segment to a third port truss, which STS-116 would deliver. STS-116 would also involve rotation of the crew: the Shuttle would carry ISS Expedition 8 Commander C. Michael Foale, astronaut William S. McArthur, and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev to the ISS, for a long-term stay, and would return ISS Expedition 7 Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and crew members Edward T. Lu and Sergei I. Moschenko to Earth.(NASA, “Astronauts Named to Key Space Station Missions,” news release 02-35, 26 February 2002.)
NASA announced that Donald R. Pettit, a backup member of the crew of the Expedition 6 Mission to the ISS, would replace Donald A. Thomas on the mission. NASA had reassigned Thomas, a veteran of four Space Shuttle flights, because of medical issues affecting his qualification for long-duration spaceflight. Pettit, a chemical engineer who had joined the astronaut corps in 1996, had previously served as a staff scientist at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico.(NASA, “Backup Crew Member Assigned to Expedition Six,” news release 02-139, 26 July 2002.)
NASA named astronaut and veteran Shuttle Commander James D. Halsell Jr. to lead its Return to Flight Team, which would prepare for the first Shuttle launch since the loss of Columbia, to occur as early as September 2003. Halsell had logged more than 1,250 hours in space on five Shuttle missions and, most recently, had served as Manager of Shuttle Launch Integration at NASA’s KSC. Before the Columbia disaster, NASA had assigned Halsell to STS-118, a mission to the ISS scheduled for later in 2003.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Names Shuttle Leader,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 April 2003.)
American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit undertook a 61⁄2-hour spacewalk at the ISS to finish preparing the station for the arrival of a new crew. In the second spacewalk of their four-month mission, Bowersox and Pettit worked on power connections, replaced lighting for a transport trolley, reconfigured cables on a navigational gyroscope, and secured covers on the station’s thermal control system. Cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin monitored the astronauts’ work from inside the ISS.(Reuters, “Astronauts End Space Walk from Orbiting Station,” 9 April 2003. 126)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
John E. Riley, a 33-year member of NASA’s Public Affairs Department, broadcast voice of NASA’s Mission Control for the Apollo program, and NASA spokesperson, died of cancer at the age of 78. He had begun working for NASA in 1959 and, as a member of the Apollo program team, had provided commentary during the first moonwalk. Riley had also initiated the practice of encouraging astronauts’ interviews with media and had traveled with astronauts internationally.(Matt Schwartz, “Obituary: Riley, 78, Longtime Spokesman for NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 21 April 2003.)
NASA notified SPACEHAB Inc. that NASA had not renewed SPACEHAB’s contracts for building and maintaining the Space Vehicle Mockup Facility (SVMF), the facility with ISS mockups at NASA’s JSC, and for operating the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (NBL) facility, where astronauts simulate spacewalks in a swimming pool. Instead, NASA had awarded the multiyear contract, valued at up to US$78.97 million, to Raytheon Technical Services of Houston. SPACEHAB’s subsidiary Johnson Engineering had operated the NBL for approximately 10 years. In 1998 SPACEHAB had acquired Johnson Engineering and had continued to operate the NBL. SPACEHAB had depended on Johnson Engineering and the NBL/SVMF contract for about half of its US$100 million in annual revenues. The loss of the contract followed SPACEHAB’s loss of one of its major flight articles, the Research Double Module, a pressurized science facility that had made its debut during STS-107 on the ill-fated Space Shuttle Columbia. SPACEHAB had insured the module for only US$17.7 million of its US$62.7 million value. SPACEHAB expected to contract with NASA to fly additional modules, which would enable the company to recoup its investment in the hardware.(NASA, “NASA Buoyancy Laboratory, Space Vehicle Mockup Facility Contract Awarded,” news release, 7 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_c03004_bb_030207.html (accessed 16 July 2008); Brian Berger, “Double Whammy: Spacehab Loses NASA Contract,” Space News, 12 February 2003; Brian Berger, “$100 Million Commercial Science Lab Lost on Columbia Was Insured,” Space News, 2 February 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-3/ISS-9S launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan transporting to the ISS the Expedition 8 crew―American Mission Commander C. Michael Foale, Russian Flight Engineer Alexander Y. Kaleri, and Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque. Foale and Kaleri were traveling to the ISS for a 200-day mission, replacing American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko who were completing a six-month stay aboard the orbiting station. Duque would conduct 10 days of scientific experiments on the ISS and would return to Earth with Lu and Malenchenko.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Dmitry Solovyov for Reuters, “ISS Crew Blasts Off at Baikonur,” 20 October 2003; Justin Ray, “New Station Residents Arrive at Their Orbiting Home,” Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
Scientists studying data from NASA’s Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) satellite and ESA’s four-satellite Cluster constellation published a study in the journal Nature reporting that solar wind creates large cracks in Earth’s magnetic field, allowing the wind to penetrate the magnetic field and causing geomagnetic storms. The leader of the study, Harald U. Frey of the University of California at Berkeley, stated that the data showed that the cracks do not open and close sporadically, as scientists had previously thought, but rather, that the cracks can remain open for several hours. Using this information, scientists would be able to create a better model of the affect of space weather on Earth, helping them to predict geomagnetic storms, which disrupt power, interfere with satellites, and endanger astronauts. IMAGE had monitored a spot in Earth’s upper atmosphere, revealing an area of heavy particles (ions) striking the ionosphere above the Arctic region, thereby creating an aurora with enough energy to power 75,000 homes. Unlike the auroras known as the northern and southern lights, this aurora was not visible to the human eye. Far above the IMAGE satellite, the Cluster constellation had flown through the opening created by the solar wind’s interaction with Earth’s protective magnetic field. The scientists estimated that the size of the crack was twice that of Earth. The crack occurred at the edge of the magnetic field, 38,000 miles (61,155 kilometers) above the planet.(H. U. Frey et al., “Continuous Magnetic Reconnection at Earth’s Magnetopause,” Nature 426, no. 6966 (4 December 2003): 533–537; Maggie Fox for Reuters, “Cracks Let Solar Wind Disrupt Earth’s Atmosphere,” 4 December 2003; Chris Kridler, “Protective Layer’s Cracks Make Earth Vulnerable,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 December 2003.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched on STS-107 from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:39 a.m. (EST). NASA had postponed the launch, originally scheduled for July 2001, because of technical and scheduling problems. Flying an orbital mission, a rare event since the ISS partners had begun construction of the space station in 1998, STS-107 was a “pure research mission.” The crew would conduct scientific investigations in two 12-hour shifts each day in the laboratory module of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. The crew included Shuttle Commander Rick D. Husband; Pilot William C. McCool; Payload Commander Michael P. Anderson; Payload Specialist Ilan Ramon, Israel’s first astronaut and a fighter pilot with the rank of colonel in Israel’s Air Force; Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, an aerospace engineer originally from India; and Mission Specialists David M. Brown and Laurel B. Clark, both physicians. The launch occurred under exceptionally tight security with more than 300 dignitaries and guests from Israel in attendance.(Broward Liston for Reuters, “Space Shuttle Launches with First Israeli Astronaut,” 16 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “Columbia Takes Off Under Tight Security,” New York Times, 16 January 2003.)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, to head NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a “natural selection to lead the Agency’s premiere center for aviation and space research,” according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred,” 13 June 2003.)
At the Mojave Airport in California, aircraft designer Burt Rutan unveiled for the first time his White Knight launch system and SpaceShipOne spacecraft, which he had built in secret. Rutan had designed the White Knight, a type of aircraft, to carry the spacecraft to 50,000 feet, where the White Knight would release SpaceShipOne to launch like an aircraft into a steep climb. Rutan had begun testing the launch platform at lower altitudes in August 2002, also testing on the ground the release mechanism between the spacecraft and the launch platform. In the public unveiling, Rutan flew the White Knight only. The craft flew to an altitude of 9,000 feet (2,734 meters) before spiraling down to make a soft but extremely short landing. Rutan demonstrated SpaceShipOne’s systems, explaining that the craft should land in the same manner as the launch system. The flight profile of the system allowed SpaceShipOne to reach 54 nautical miles (62 miles or 99.8 kilometers) maximum altitude over a flight patch of 35 miles (56.3 kilometers). NASA designated anyone flying at an altitude of over 50 miles (80.4 kilometers) as an astronaut. If Rutan’s system succeeded in flights outside the atmosphere, it would become the first private human spaceflight program.(Jon Bonne, “Private Manned Space Plane Unveiled,” MSNBC.com, 19 April 2003.)
NASA released a flight-deck videotape, which the crew of STS-107 had recorded on 1 February between 8:35 and 8:48 a.m. (EST). NASA had recovered the videotape from the Shuttle’s crash site near Palestine, Texas. The video showed flight-deck activity as Columbia passed over the south central Pacific Ocean at an altitude of approximately 500,000 feet. Filmed with a small on- board camera, mounted to the right of Pilot William C. McCool and then passed to Mission Specialist Laurel B. Clark, the videotape showed Commander Rick D. Husband, Pilot McCool, Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, and Mission Specialist Clark on the flight deck during reentry. The astronauts were conversing among themselves as they worked through routine checklist activities with flight controllers at NASA’s Mission Control.(NASA, “NASA Releases Columbia Crew Cabin Video,” news release N03-23, 28 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_n03023.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
NASA announced appointments to the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), formed to conduct an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s recommendations. On 13 June, NASA had initially announced the formation of the SCTG to oversee an independent assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement the CAIB’s recommendations. Cochaired by veteran astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, NASA had selected the SCTG’s members from experts in industry, academia, and government, active in fields relevant to spaceflight safety. NASA had organized the SCTG pursuant to the Federal Advisory Committee Act, selecting only non-NASA employees as members, as well as one nonvoting, ex officio NASA representativethe Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “NASA Names Return to Flight Task Group Members,” news release 03-248, 25 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03248_SCTG_Named.html (accessed 23 December 2003).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the members of the Space Shuttle Mishap Interagency Investigation Board, also known as the Gehman Board. To chair the Board, NASA had appointed retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr., who had cochaired the independent commission that investigated the attack on the USS Cole in Aden, Yemen, on 12 October 2000. Other members included Rear Admiral Stephen A. Turcotte of the U.S. Naval Safety Center; Major General John L. Barry of the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio; Major General Kenneth W. Hess of Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico; James N. Hallock of the U.S. Department of Transportation; Steven B. Wallace of the FAA; and Brigadier General Duane W. Deal of the 21st Space Wing at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado. Several senior- level NASA leaders were also named to the panel: G. Scott Hubbard, Director of NASA’s ARC; Bryan D. O’Connor, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance and a former astronaut; and Theron M. Bradley Jr., NASA’s Chief Engineer. NASA intended the Gehman Board to make a parallel investigation, complementing NASA’s own internal investigation. The Board would have access to the same scientific information and to the cooperation of the same agencies as NASA.(NASA, “NASA Announces Space Shuttle Columbia Accident Investigation Board (The Gehman Board),” news release 03-034, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-034.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); David Arnold, “Specialist Panel Convenes, Begins Search for Cause,” Boston Globe, 4 February 2003.)
NASA launched a nationwide campaign to recruit elementary, middle, and high school classroom teachers for its astronaut corps, building on the legacy of its Teacher in Space Project of 1985. NASA had selected Christa McAuliffe and Barbara R. Morgan from among 12,000 applicants for the first project, which had ended tragically when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launching on 28 January 1986 with McAuliffe on board. McAuliffe’s backup Barbara R. Morgan had rejoined NASA in 1998 to train and qualify as a mission specialist. In December 2002, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had announced Morgan’s assignment to a November assembly mission to the ISS. NASA planned for the new recruitment campaign to extend the legacy of McAuliffe and the work of Morgan, making future educator- astronauts as much a part of the astronaut corps as test pilots, engineers, physicians, astronomers, geologists, and scientists from other disciplines. To accomplish this goal, NASA planned to train teachers with proven technical skills, making them eligible for missions ranging from 12-day Shuttle flights to months-long residencies aboard the ISS. Because of their ability to communicate with students in the classroom more effectively than traditional NASA astronauts, the educator-astronauts would be a critical part of an educational initiative to “make math and science as inspiring to youngsters as pop music and sports.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Seeking a Few Good Teachers,” Houston Chronicle, 22 January 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale, living aboard the ISS, set a new U.S. space record―Foale had spent more time in orbit than any other American had achieved. During four Shuttle missions, an expedition aboard Russia’s former space station Mir, and his current residence at the ISS, Foale had spent more than 231 days in space, surpassing Carl E. Walz’s previous record for an American in space―230 days, 13 hours, 3 minutes, and 37 seconds. Walz had participated in four Shuttle missions and one ISS expedition in 2002. Along with astronaut Daniel W. Bursch, Walz continued to hold the U.S. record for the longest, single spaceflight―196 days.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Breaks U.S. Space Endurance Record,” news release 03-400, 9 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03400_Foale_record.html (accessed 23 March 2009); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Michael Foale’s 231 Days in Orbit Sets Record,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 December 2003; Associated Press, “Astronaut Sets Record for Time in Space,” 9 December 2003.)
The People’s Republic of China launched Shenzhou 5 on a Long March 2F rocket, becoming the third nation after Russia and the United States to send a human into orbit. Veteran fighter pilot Yang Liwei expected to orbit Earth 14 times before landing. The launch was the culmination of the decade-long effort of China’s secretive, military-linked space program, undertaken with the hope of improving the communist nation’s image abroad, as well as among its own citizens. Chinese officials described the Shenzhou program as homegrown, but western analysts stated that Russia had provided China with important technology and training for its taikonaut (astronaut) corps. Western analysts described the Shenzhou craft as an improvement over the Russian Soyuz design, with new solar arrays enabling the front-end orbital module to remain in space after the taikonaut compartment had returned to Earth. In addition, the craft’s improved collision-avoidance systems provided Shenzhou with enhanced capacity to avoid dangerous space debris.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; David Lynch, “China Blasts Off into Space,” USA Today, 15 October 2003; Christopher Bodeen for Associated Press, “China Launches First Manned Space Mission,” 15 October 2003.)
Israeli scientists announced that, while traveling aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, astronaut Ilan Ramon had successfully captured images of smoke from a burning rain forest, a dust storm above the Mediterranean Ocean, and a small dust plume off the African coast over the Atlantic Ocean. Operating a twin-camera multispectral instrument in Columbia’s payload bay, Ramon had scanned dust and other aerosol particles, which storms had blown from deserts and high winds had carried across the globe. The instrument had also operated during the night, capturing images of the tops of thousands of thunderstorms. The team of scientists from Tel Aviv University’s Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) intended to use the images to develop a better understanding of climate change, one of the goals of Columbia’s research flight, which had encountered two years of delays. Joachim Joseph, a principal researcher on the project, remarked that the experiment had gathered “very good data, very unique data.” The purpose of the US$2 million experiment was to “provide a better understanding of how migrating dust plumes affect climate.” (NASA, “Shuttle’s Desert Dust Experiment Delivers,” news release N03-010, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/note2edt/2003/n03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2003); Associated Press, “Astronaut Photographs Dust Storm,” 31 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “ Space Shuttle Crew Completes Israeli Dust and Cloud Studies,” New York Times, 31 January 2003.)
Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the craft’s unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecraft’s descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the craft’s antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, “Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction,” 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, “Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russia’s Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission,” 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, “Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency,” news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, “NASA Names New Chief of Staff,” news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz had won Discover Magazine’s Innovation Award for Space Science and Technology in the Space Explorer category. The annual awards, presented in the categories of Space Explorer, Communications, Space Scientists, Technology for Humanity, and Aerospace, honored scientists whose work had benefited the U.S. space program and all of humanity. A veteran of seven spaceflights, a record he shared with only one other astronaut, Chang-Dìaz was Director of the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory at NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where he was leading a team to develop the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) Engine. The team was working on a conceptual engine that would eventually enable humans to explore distant regions of Earth’s solar system and, perhaps, regions beyond the solar system. A native of Costa Rica, Chang-Dìaz had earned undergraduate and advanced degrees in mechanical engineering and applied plasma physics from the University of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming an astronaut in 1981. He had first traveled to space in 1986 and, most recently, had participated in the ISS assembly and crew-exchange mission in June 2002, during which he undertook three spacewalks.(NASA, “Astronaut Chang-Diaz Wins Discover Magazine Award,” news release 03-335, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03335_ChangDiaz_Award.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASA announced the appointment of John M. Grunsfeld to succeed Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist, effective immediately. NASA tasked Grunsfeld with ensuring the scientific merit of NASA’s programs. Grunsfeld, an astronomer, astrophysicist, and veteran astronaut, had been an integral member of two Space Shuttle–servicing missions to the HST. Lucid had served as Chief Scientist since February 2002. NASA’s Administrator Sean O’Keefe had asked her to return to NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, to help with return-to-flight efforts. During her tenure as Chief Scientist, Lucid had updated NASA science policy, a project that NASA had not undertaken since 1996. One of her most important tasks had been working with the Offices of Biological and Physical Research, Earth Science, Space Science, and Space Flight to develop a comprehensive plan for prioritizing research projects on board the ISS.(NASA, “Astronaut John M. Grunsfeld Succeeds Shannon Lucid as NASA Chief Scientist,” news release 03-280, 3 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03280_Grunsfeld.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
NASA and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) commissioned the US$34 million NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) at the DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, where NASA biologists and physicists would perform thousands of experiments to measure the hazards of space radiation and to develop countermeasures to protect astronauts. Construction of the facility had begun in 1998. NASA and the DOE had cooperated in building the NSRL, which housed an accelerator producing beams of protons or heavy ions, like those that the Sun and other cosmic sources typically produce. The beams moved through a 328-foot (100-meter) transport tunnel to a 400-square-foot (37-square-meter) target hall, to hit a target composed either of a biological sample or of shielding material. Scientists planned to measure the interaction of specific particles with targets to determine the effectiveness of various materials in shielding against radiation and to develop and to test new materials. An NSRL health team would perform tests with biological samples to learn how radiation damages cells, how to predict risks, and to develop countermeasures to mitigate radiation effects.(NASA, “New NASA Facility Will Help Protect Space Crews from Radiation,” news release 03-326, 14 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03326_new_facility.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
NASA announced that Administrator Sean O’Keefe had appointed three new members to the CAIB in compliance with a request from CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. The new members were Douglas D. Osheroff, the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Physics and Applied Physics at Stanford University and a 1996 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics; Sally K. Ride, a physicist and professor of Space Science at the University of California, San Diego, as well as a former NASA astronaut and the first American woman in space; and John M. Logsdon, Director of the George Washington University Space Policy Institute. O’Keefe had also appointed NASA astronaut retired U.S. Air Force Colonel Michael J. Bloomfield, in response to Gehman’s request that Bloomfield replace former astronaut Bryan D. O’Connor as Astronaut Advisor to the Board. O’Connor would return to NASA Headquarters in his role as NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “New Members Added to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board,” news release 03-097, 5 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03097.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
Chinese taikonaut Yang Liwei successfully completed his 21-hour mission of 14 orbits around Earth aboard the Shenzhou 5, landing safely in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From aboard the ISS, American astronaut Edward T. Lu, speaking in Chinese, had welcomed Yang to space and wished him a safe journey and success. Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko had told Mission Control in Houston that he was glad to have someone else in space besides himself and Lu, congratulating the great accomplishment of thousands of people in the People’s Republic of China who had worked together to send Yang into space. After emerging from his capsule, Yang stated that Shenzhou 5 had operated very well, that he felt well, and that he was “proud of the motherland.”(John Pomfret, “China’s First Space Traveler Returns a Hero: Craft Made 14 Orbits in 21-Hour Mission,” Washington Post, 16 October 2003; Ching-Ching Ni, “China Completes Spaceflight: Nation’s First Astronaut, Lt. Col. Yang Liwei, Returns from Earth Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2003.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
NASA awarded a US$9.7 million grant to Colorado State University to study radiation and cancer. The grant was one of three that NASA awarded to institutions as part of a new initiative to establish national centers studying risks associated with deep space travel. The grant established the NASA Specialized Center of Research (NSCOR) at Colorado State University, which would investigate the risk of the development of cancer associated with radiation exposureparticularly with the development of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), which has a direct correlation with radiation exposure. The research, which would study threats to astronauts from radiation in space, would directly benefit cancer patients who develop AML as a secondary cancer after radiation therapy treatments of the initial cancer.(Christiana Nelson, “NASA Grants CSU Almost $10 Million,” Rocky Mountain Collegian (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO), 22 October 2003.)
NASA filed a request for proposal with Federal Business Opportunities, inviting companies to define their schedules for Orbital Space Plane (OSP) design completion, development, testing, and delivery. NASA requested the completion of a crew-rescue vehicle by 2008 and a crew- transfer vehicle by 2012, despite congressional requests that NASA slow down its work on the OSP project. The Boeing Company and a Lockheed Martin–Northrop Grumman team had both been developing concepts for the OSP, a vehicle anticipated as the next space vehicle to ferry astronaut crews to and from the ISS. NASA had hoped to award the prime contract in August 2004 at the earliest. On 29 October, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, responsible for authorizing NASA programs, had restated its position that NASA should halt work on the OSP Program until the White House, Congress, and NASA had agreed on the direction the U.S. human spaceflight program would take after completion of the ISS. Congressional leaders had also questioned NASA’s funding profile for the program.(Jason Bates, “NASA Releases Request for Orbital Space Plane Plans Despite Congressional Concern About the Program,” Space News, 4 November 2003.)
A reentry section of the People’s Republic of China’s Shenzhou 4 spacecraft landed in Inner Mongolia after Shenzhou 4 had orbited Earth for nearly a week. Phillip Clark, a U.K. observer of China’s space program, remarked that the Shenzhou 4 mission was key to flying Chinese astronauts in the future, noting that orbital control of the craft during this flight had been far tighter than in the two preceding tests. Furthermore, during two back-to-back Shenzhou launches, the Chinese had completed all the maneuvers necessary for a rendezvous and docking mission, indicating that China would progress quickly to an orbital docking. Clark predicted that either Shenzhou 7 or Shenzhou 8 would complete a nose-to-nose docking.(Leonard David, “After ShenzhouChina’s Space Plans Boosted Following Successful Mission,” Space.com, 5 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/after_shenzhou4_030105.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASA’s plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, “Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, “Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives,” http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
NASA announced the names of three additional members of the crew of the Space Shuttle Program’s Return to Flight Mission STS-114. In 2001 NASA had named four astronauts to STS- 114―Mission Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of JAXA. The four were already training for the flight, scheduled to launch no earlier than September 2004. Astronauts Andrew S. W. Thomas, Wendy B. Lawrence, and Charles J. Camarda rounded out the mission’s crew of seven. NASA had originally planned for STS-114 to have a seven-member crew, but in the wake of the Columbia accident, NASA had changed the mission objective to focus on testing and evaluating new procedures for flight safety, rather than on ISS logistics and crew rotation. Thomas and Lawrence were veteran astronauts―Thomas was the second-highest-ranking member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, and Lawrence had flown on the Shuttle three times. Camarda was a rookie making his first orbital flight. NASA had assigned Robinson and Noguchi to conduct spacewalks on the flight.(NASA, “NASA Names Crew Members for Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” 7 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03360_STS_114_crew.html (accessed 5 February 2003); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Veterans, Rookie Fill Return-to-Flight Shuttle Crew,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 November 2003; Jim Banke, “NASA Names Additional Crew for Return to Flight Mission,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts114_ crew_)
The National Research Council (NRC) issued a report calling for NASA to send a Space Shuttle mission to service the HST. The report challenged Administrator Sean O’Keefe’s earlier decision that NASA would not conduct a Shuttle servicing mission for the HST because of potential safety risks. According to the NRC report, if NASA did not service the orbiting telescope, it would eventually become dysfunctional and fall out of orbit. Although the report acknowledged that a Shuttle mission would pose some risks for astronauts, the NRC stated that the scientific value of continuing HST operations merited a mission, both to maintain the orbiting telescope and to upgrade its components. The report recommended that NASA should consider sending a robotic servicing mission for the HST instead of a Shuttle mission, but should not rule out sending a Shuttle servicing mission, if NASA determined that the robotic option was too costly or complex.(Guy Gugliotta, “Scientists Say Shuttle Can Service Telescope; Report Counters NASA Stance on Repairing Hubble,” Washington Post, 14 July 2004; Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board and Space Studies Board, “Assessment of Options for Extending the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope” (letter report, National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 13 July 2004), http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=11051#toc (accessed 28 April 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, O’Keefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 11, a six-month mission set to launch in April 2005. Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would serve as Station Commander, and American astronaut John L. Phillips would serve as Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer. In 2000 Krikalev, who had experienced the most spaceflights of any Russian cosmonaut, had served as a member of the first ISS crew for Expedition 1. Phillips also had ISS experience as a member of Mission STS-100 in 2001. The backup crew members for Expedition 11 were American astronaut Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin.(NASA JSC, “Next International Space Station Crew Named,” news release H04-383, 23 November 2004.)
NASA announced that astronaut Leroy Chiao would replace William S. McArthur Jr. as Commander of Expedition 9, the next mission to the ISS. NASA had disqualified McArthur from Expedition 9 because of an unspecified medical issue. Chiao, who had trained as McArthur’s substitute, would join Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev for the mission, scheduled to launch in April 2004.(NASA, “Chiao Replaces McArthur as Next Space Station Commander,” news release 04-019, 12 January 2004. 581 Mark Carreau, “Leak on Space Station Stopped,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the immediate appointment of James B. Garvin as NASA’s new Chief Scientist. Garvin had previously served as Chief Scientist for NASA’s lunar and Mars exploration programs. As Chief Scientist for all of NASA, Garvin would be responsible for ensuring the scientific merits of NASA’s programs, including formulating the programs’ scientific requirements. Garvin replaced former astronaut John M. Grunsfeld, who had served in the post since September 2003. NASA had selected Grunsfeld to train as an astronaut for a future long-duration mission.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Chief Scientist,” news release 04-349, 21 October 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe presented the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to the families of the crew members of Space Shuttle Challenger. O’Keefe presented the honor in the name of the U.S. Congress and on behalf of President George W. Bush. The seven astronauts on board Challenger had died when the Shuttle exploded soon after launching on 28 January 1986.(NASA, “Challenger Crew Honored with Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” news release S04-238, 23 July 2004.)
The Expedition 9 crew of the ISS launched at 11:19 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on the Russian Soyuz TMA-4/ISS-8S. The crew members consisted of Russian cosmonaut, Expedition 9 Commander Gennady I. Padalka; NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke; and ESA astronaut André Kuipers of the Netherlands. Padalka and Fincke would remain at the ISS for nearly six months, while Kuipers would spend nine days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew members of Expedition 8―NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri.(NASA, “Expedition 9 on the Way to Space Station,” news release 04-133, 18 April 2004; National Space Science Data Center, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 605, 1 May 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx605.html. 629 Thomas H. Maugh II, “Einstein’s Theory Rockets into Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 21 April 2004; NASA, “The Gravity Probe B: The Relativity Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ gpb/index.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
Major media reported details of a NASA internal document, which stated that a proposed plan to use the ISS as a safe haven for Space Shuttle astronauts would likely have a high risk of failure. The NASA document was a response to a proposal that the ISS should temporarily house the Shuttle crew if a problem arose that prevented an orbiting Shuttle from returning its crew to Earth safely. In the internal document, NASA objected that the ISS had neither sufficient supplies nor support systems to keep both ISS and Shuttle crew members alive longer than a few months. NASA officials responded to the publication of the document, stating that the provisional contingency plan had been one of many ideas considered for improving Space Shuttle safety.(John Schwartz, “NASA Rescue Plan Is Reported To Have High Risk of Failure,” New York Times, 9 July 2004.)
After more than six months in space, the crew members of ISS Expedition 8 returned to Earth, safely landing in Kazakhstan at 8:12 p.m. (EDT). The crew of Expedition 8 consisted of NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri. During their tenure at the ISS, Foale and Kaleri had conducted scientific research. Expedition 8 had been the second- longest expedition to the ISS, with the two men spending a total of 194 days, 18 hours, and 35 minutes in space. Returning with them to Earth was ESA astronaut André Kuipers, who had spent nine days on the space station conducting research as part of ISS Expedition 9. The other two members of Expedition 9, Gennady I. Padalka and E. Michael Fincke, remained at the ISS for a mission scheduled to last nearly six months.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-007, 29 April 2004. 195)
The company Scaled Composites launched the first privately developed piloted vehicle to travel beyond Earth’s atmosphere. The vehicle, called SpaceShipOne, departed from Mojave Airport in California at 6:45 a.m. Pacific Standard Time (PST), attached to another aircraft. Upon reaching an altitude of 46,000 feet (8.7 miles or 14 kilometers), the aircraft released SpaceShipOne. Propelled by a fuel containing rubber and nitrous oxide―laughing gas―SpaceShipOne eventually attained an altitude of 328,491 feet (62 miles or 100 kilometers), achieving suborbital spaceflight. After SpaceShipOne had remained in suborbital flight for nearly 31⁄2 minutes, the vehicle’s pilot Michael W. Melvill―who became the first civilian astronaut with this flight―safely landed the craft at Mojave Airport. Burt Rutan, the founder of Scaled Composites, had designed SpaceShipOne, and Microsoft cofounder Paul G. Allen had financed the project.(Peter Pae, “Private Spaceflight Is a Public Success,” Los Angeles Times, 22 June 2004; Scaled Composites, “SpaceShipOne Makes History: First Private Manned Mission to Space,” news release, 21 June 2004.)
NASA and the ISS partners announced crew assignments for the next two expeditions to the space station. NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka would serve on Expedition 9, and NASA astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov would provide the crew for Expedition 10. In addition, Chiao and Sharipov would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 9, while NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 10. Although NASA and its partners had previously scheduled Tokarev to pair with Chaio on Expedition 10, the ISS partners had decided to replace Tokarev with Sharipov, because Sharipov had previously trained with Chiao.(NASA, “New Crews Named for 2004 Space Station Missions,” news release 04-056, 6 February 2004.)
Representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States―the nations participating in the ISS project―met to discuss their cooperative activities for the station. At the meeting at ESA’s Technical Centre in the Netherlands, ESA officials reviewed ISS operations and plans, unanimously endorsing a new technical configuration for the space station that would incorporate components from each of the ISS partner space agencies. Upon completion, the ISS would have improved research capabilities and would accommodate more crew members than the current maximum of three.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 04-237, 23 July 2004; Warren E. Leary, “More Astronauts Approved for Space Station,” New York Times, 24 July 2004.)
ISS crew members repaired an air leak in the space station. Astronaut C. Michael Foale and cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri fixed a leak in a flex hose located in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. The orbiting space station had begun to lose air on 22 December 2003. After examining the station’s air pressure readings, NASA’s Mission Control had informed ISS crew members of the leak on 5 January 2004. The air leak had not endangered either the ISS crew or operations. By systematically isolating the ISS’s compartments and using an ultrasound device to determine the location of a hissing sound emitted by the faulty hose, Foale and Kaleri had discovered the source of the air loss.
ISS crew members Alexander Y. Kaleri and C. Michael Foale conducted a spacewalk, leaving the station vacant. The spacewalk marked the first time that the ISS crew had left the station without another crew member remaining on board to assist in case of emergency. The purpose of the spacewalk was to service experiments located on the station’s exterior and to prepare the orbiting structure for future assembly work. The astronauts were unable to complete all of the planned tasks, however, because a problem with Kaleri’s spacesuit prompted Russian flight controllers to end the spacewalk early.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Is Cut Short; Malfunction in Cosmonaut’s Suit Cited,” Washington Post, 27 February 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 10 left for the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-5/ISS-9S, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 11:06 p.m. (EDT). The crew members were American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonauts Yuri G. Shargin and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Chiao and Sharipov would stay at the ISS until April 2005, and Shargin would spend eight days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew of Expedition 9.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-035,” news release SS04-035, 13 October 2004. 212)
NASA announced the selection of 11 individuals for the astronaut class of 2004the first astronaut trainees since 2000. In June 2004, the new class would begin training at NASA’s JSC as educator astronauts, engineers, pilots, and scientists, eventually working on NASA’s next- generation space vehicle and other projects. The trainees for the class of 2004 included Joseph M. Acaba, Richard R. Arnold II, Randolph J. Bresnik, Christopher J. Cassidy, James P. Dutton Jr., José M. Hernández, Robert S. Kimbrough, Thomas H. Marshburn, Dorothy M. Metcalf- Lindenburger, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Shannon Walker.(NASA, “NASA Introduces the Next Generation of Explorers,” news release 04-152, 6 May 2004; Patty Reinert, “11 Space Hopefuls Get NASA’s Good News,” Houston Chronicle, 7 May 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 9 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:36 a.m., local time. American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka had spent 188 days at the ISS, where they had performed four spacewalks. Returning with them was Russian cosmonaut Yuri G. Shargin, who had traveled to the ISS on 13 October 2004 with the crew members of Expedition 10.(Mark Carreau, “Station Crew Returns to Earth,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2004; Stefano S. Coleman, “Two Safely Back After 6 Months on Space Station,” New York Times, 24 October 2004.)
An independent panel of experts provided its interim assessment of NASA’s efforts to meet the CAIB’s requirements for resuming Space Shuttle flights. NASA had chartered the Stafford- Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) to assess independently its implementation of the CAIB’s preflight recommendations―mandatory for NASA’s resuming Space Shuttle flights. The 26-member Task Group, headed by former astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, stated that it had approved NASA’s compliance plans for eight of the CAIB’s 15 requirements. The task force did not see any major obstacles to NASA’s resuming Shuttle flights by May or June of 2005. The Task Group also noted, however, that NASA continued to have difficulty developing methods to repair the exterior heat tiles and thermal-resistant carbon-fiber material damaged during Shuttle flights.(Warren E. Leary, “Panel Sees Shuttle Flights Resuming Soon,” New York Times, 17 December 2004.)
American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka successfully completed repairs to the ISS during a much-delayed spacewalk lasting 6 hours. Among the numerous repairs that Fincke and Padalka completed were the replacement of a faulty circuit breaker and the restoration of power to a gyroscope that helped stabilize the ISS. The ISS partners had rescheduled the spacewalk from 24 June 2004 because of problems with the crew members’ spacesuits.(Mark Carreau, “Finally, Spacewalk a Success,” Houston Chronicle, 1 July 2004; NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-018, 1 July 2004.)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASA’s first Director of Manned Space Flight Safety, died at the age of 101. Lederer, an aviation-safety expert, had introduced notable aviation-safety technologies, such as blinking anticollision lights and flight-data recorders. Lederer had started his career in aviation safety in 1926 as an aeronautical engineer for the U.S. Air Mail Service, where he had redesigned the service’s airplanes to prevent them from igniting after crashes, a frequent cause of death of the pilots. In the 1950s, he had helped establish the agency that later became the FAA. In 1967, after a fire on Apollo 1 had killed three astronauts during a launchpad test, NASA had asked Lederer to establish an Office of Manned Space Flight Safety. In 1970 NASA had appointed Lederer as the safety director for all NASA activities. Lederer had retired two years later. Later, Lederer had taught at the University of Southern California and had served two three-year terms on the Advisory Council for the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations.(Stuart Lavietes, “J. F. Lederer, 101, Dies; Took Risk Management to the Sky,” New York Times, 9 February 2004.)
Former astronaut Robert D. Cabana became Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Brock R. Stone, who had retired after a 36-year career with NASA. Cabana had previously served on four Space Shuttle missions and in many management positions supporting the Astronaut Office and the ISS Program. Before becoming Deputy Director of JSC, Cabana had served as Director of Flight Crew Operations. NASA had appointed former astronaut Kenneth D. Bowersox to fill that position.(NASA JSC, “NASA Fills Key Space Flight Positions,” news release I-I04-080, 3 March 2004.)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the station’s management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASA’s other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISS’s hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the station’s operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the station’s exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program,” New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Safety Problems Noted,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
The National Research Council (NRC) issued a report outlining recommendations for servicing the HST. The issue of servicing the HST had initiated a public discussion in January 2004, when NASA had decided to cancel a Shuttle mission to service the HST because of concern for astronaut safety. The debate had erupted again after April 2004, when NASA had announced that it would conduct an unpiloted servicing mission for the HST. In response to criticism for those decisions, NASA had requested that the NRC evaluate servicing options for the HST. The NRC recommended that NASA service the HST using a piloted Shuttle mission, because a robotic mission would be too complex for NASA to complete before 2007, when NASA anticipated that the HST’s machinery would wear out. According to the guidelines recommended by the CAIB, astronauts would be able to service the HST by 2007. The NRC also reported that, if NASA carefully planned and conducted the piloted Shuttle mission, the mission would be far more likely to extend the telescope’s operational life at a relatively lower cost.(Guy Gugliotta, “Astronauts Acceptable, Panel Says,” Washington Post, 9 December 2004; National Research Council, Assessment of Options for Extending the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope: Final Report (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2005).)
Former astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper died at age 77 in Ventura, California. One of the original seven astronauts for the Mercury program, the United States’ first human spaceflight program, Cooper was born in Shawnee, Oklahoma, on 6 March 1927. He had joined the U.S. Air Force in 1949, and NASA had selected him as a Mercury astronaut in April 1959. In May 1963, Cooper had piloted the program’s last mission, which lasted 34 hours and 20 minutes―longer than all the combined duration of all previous Mercury missions. Cooper had made his second and final trip to space on Gemini 5 in August 1965, in a two-person mission that had set a record for space endurance of 191 hours. The mission had demonstrated that humans could survive in a weightless environment and, therefore, that a trip to the Moon was feasible. In addition, Cooper had been the first American astronaut to make two spaceflights, to sleep in space, and to appear in a televised broadcast from space. After retiring from the Air Force in 1970, he had run several companies, including a consulting firm specializing in projects ranging from aerospace to hotel development.(John Johnson, “Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr., 77,” Los Angeles Times, 5 October 2004; Matthew L. Wald, “Gordon Cooper, Astronaut, Is Dead at 77,” New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns,” news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, “NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
In the journal Geophysical Research Letters, researchers studying data from the Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) reported their determination that a strange flash over the Indian Ocean, which had occurred on 20 January 2003, was not related to lightning. The researchers named the mysterious reddish glow Transient Ionospheric Glow Emission in Red, or TIGER. Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon, a crew member of the ill-fated STS-107, had recorded the glow while aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, using an infrared video camera. During the Shuttle flight, Ramon had collected data about dust particles in the atmosphere for the MEIDEX Sprite campaign at the Open University in Ra’anana, Israel. Researchers for MEIDEX had analyzed Ramon’s video, including a single frame that showed a mysterious reddish glow 150 kilometers (93.2 miles) above the ocean near Madagascar. Like blue jets and elves, sprites are emissions―transient luminous events (TLEs)―that occur above thunderstorms. Airline pilots had first reported TLEs several decades ago. The TIGER phenomenon contrasted with typical TLEs because of its shape and its lack of any direct relationship to thunderstorm activity.(Maggie McKee, “Columbia Crew Saw New Atmospheric Phenomenon,” New Scientist, 20 January 2005; Michael Schirber, “High-Altitude Mystery Flash Recorded by Space Shuttle,” LiveScience.com, 19 January 2005, http://www.livescience.com/environment/050118_tiger_flash.html (accessed 18 August 2009).)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate had confirmed the nomination of Michael D. Griffin as NASA’s 11th Administrator. Griffin replaced Sean O’Keefe, who had resigned in February to become Chancellor of Louisiana State University. Since 2004, Griffin had served as the Space Department Head at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Baltimore, Maryland. Before holding that position, he had served as President and Chief Operating Officer of In-Q-Tel and had held several positions within Orbital Sciences Corporation. Earlier in his career, he had served as Chief Engineer at NASA and as Deputy for Technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. Griffin held a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and five master’s degrees, credentials that had led Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Subcommittee, which oversees NASA, to introduce Griffin as the ideal person to lead NASA. During his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, Griffin had stated that, as Administrator, he would reevaluate NASA’s decision not to send astronauts to repair and service the HST. He had named his priorities for NASA, including the Space Shuttles’ safe return to flight. Furthermore, he had stated that he planned to speed up NASA’s development of a replacement craft for the Shuttle, so that the United States could continue to send humans into space. Griffin had stated that the United States’ dependence on other nations to ferry astronauts to space was unacceptable in terms of national security. Griffin had also testified that he supported President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, which included returning humans to the Moon and, ultimately, sending human explorers to Mars and beyond.(NASA, “Michael D. Griffin To Become NASA Administrator,” news release 05-250, 13 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05250_griffin_confirmed.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Warren E. Leary, “NASA Nominee Says He’ll Reassess Decision Not To Send Astronauts To Fix Hubble Telescope,” New York Times, 13 April 2005.)
NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate issued a request for proposals (RFP) for the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) that NASA intended to use to transport astronauts beyond low Earth orbit and to the Moon by 2020. NASA had set the deadline for submissions for 2 May 2005 and planned to select two contractors in September 2005. The two contractors would develop competing prototypes with a December 2008 completion date, at which time NASA would select the prime contractor. NASA stipulated that the minimum specifications for the CEV were that the craft weigh 20 tonnes (18.14 tons) or less; house as many as four astronauts, for as long as 16 days; have the ability to rendezvous and dock with future lunar landers and interplanetary modules; and allow a safe abort throughout all phases of its flight. NASA stipulated that it would permit contractors to design spacecraft that exceeded these specifications. For instance, the RFP permitted the design of craft that could maintain a crew in space for longer than 16 days or accommodate a crew of six. The RFP also gave contractors the flexibility to decide whether the CEV would be able to dock with the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Issues Solicitation for Crew Exploration Vehicle,” news release 05-063, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05063_crew_exploration.html (accessed 2 September 2009); Robert Zimmerman for United Press International, “Space Watch: Spacefaring by Bureaucrats,” 18 March 2005. 753 NASA, “NASA Research Aids UNESCO Global Conservation Efforts,” news release 05-061, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05061_unesco-global.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASA’s workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administration’s 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASA’s efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttle’s retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASA’s failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASA’s ability to accomplish this, such as NASA’s near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the President’s Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement” (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 1–19, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
ISS Expedition 10 Commander Leroy Chiao and Flight Engineer Salizhan S. Sharipov completed the second and final spacewalk of their mission 1 hour ahead of schedule, returning into the ISS after 4.5 hours. To help in navigation, Chiao and Sharipov installed a set of space-to- space antennas around a section of Zvezda, the Russian service module that would aid in the docking operations of Europe’s Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) during a future cargo mission. The crew also attached a GPS unit to the Zvezda module to help the ATV. The ATV, scheduled to arrive during the next year, had the capability to deliver up to 8.5 tons (7,711 kilograms or 7.71 tonnes) of cargo, including 10,000 pounds (4,536 kilograms or 4.54 tonnes) of propellant. After the crew finished connecting the antennas, Sharipov returned to the Pirs docking compartment to retrieve a small satellite called NanoSputnik. The satellite, which weighed just 11 pounds (5 kilograms) and measured only 1 foot (0.31 meter) long, carried a transmitter designed to test control and orientation systems for small spacecraft during its 100- day mission. Sharipov released the satellite into a retrograde orbit by hand, while Chiao photographed the launch.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalking Astronauts Outfit ISS for New Cargo Ship,” Space.com, 29 March 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_eva2_050328.html (accessed 3 September 2009); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Two Astronauts Complete Spacewalk Work,” 29 March 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi of JAXA and Stephen K. Robinson of NASA performed the second of three scheduled spacewalks for STS-114. The two astronauts conducted tests on materials designed to service the orbiter’s heat-shielding tiles and replaced a 600-pound (272.2-kilogram) gyroscope on the exterior of the ISS. The device was one of four gyroscopes that help maintain the station’s orientation in space.(NASA, “STS-114 MCC Status Report #13,” 1 August 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/ news/STS-114- 13.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
The crew of Expedition 11 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 9:09 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 11 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The two men had spent 179 days in space, during which time they had performed a variety of scientific experiments and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Accompanying Krikalev and Phillips on their return was American contractor Gregory Olsen, who had spent eight days on the ISS performing research under a commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency.(NASA, “Expedition 11 Safely Returns from International Space Station,” news release 05-340, 10 October 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson completed a final spacewalk during which Robinson performed an unprecedented maneuver to complete a critical operation of the orbiter’s thermal protection system. The principle objective of the spacewalk was to remove two pieces of protruding heat shielding―called gap fillers―from the bottom of the orbiter. NASA was concerned that the fillers might add extra heat to the orbiter’s heat- shielding tiles upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere, thereby threatening the mission. Astronauts James M. Kelly and Wendy B. Lawrence used the robotic arms of the Shuttle and those of the ISS to lower Robinson to the underside of Discovery, while Noguchi monitored the operation. Despite concerns that Robinson might lose communication with the other astronauts, the operation was a success. The maneuver was the first time that an astronaut had worked on the underside of an orbiter while in space. During the spacewalk, Noguchi and Robinson also installed an external stowage platform and a new iteration of an experiment to test materials in the environment of space.(NASA, “NASA’s Spacewalking Astronaut Completes Unique Repair,” news release 05-212, 3 August 2005; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-114.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
The Soyuz TMA-6 crew arrived at the ISS. After greeting the new arrivals, the Expedition 10 crew held a safety briefing to familiarize the Expedition 11 crew and Roberto Vittori, the Italian astronaut visiting the ISS, with emergency escape procedures. The mission was Commander Sergei K. Krikalev’s third long-term space assignment and his second aboard the ISS. Krikalev was the first person to serve more than one tour at the station.(NASA, “11th Crew Arrives at Space Station” (International Space Station Status Report SS05-020, 17 April 2005), http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, “New Crew Arrives at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2005.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-112, the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which effectively allowed U.S. astronauts to continue flying on Russian spacecraft, thereby maintaining the United States’ access to the ISS. The terms of the original act, passed in 2000, did not permit U.S. government agencies to make “extraordinary payments” to Russia, including purchasing space on Soyuz spacecraft, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. However, at the time that Congress had passed the original act, Russia had an agreement with the United States to provide 11 free voyages on Soyuz spacecraft to U.S. astronauts, so that NASA did not have to purchase space on Soyuz. In September 2005, American astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. had become the 11th U.S. passenger on a Soyuz, and, subsequently, Russia had required payment for any carriage of U.S. astronauts. Therefore, NASA had asked Congress to amend the act so that it could buy space on Russian spacecraft.(Guy Gugliotta, “U.S. Access to Space Station Is Preserved,” Washington Post, 11 November 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts, Stephen K. Robinson of NASA and Soichi Noguchi of JAXA, completed a spacewalk during which they tested new prototype methods to repair heat- resistant tiles on the orbiter’s exterior. Robinson applied an experimental compound inside cracks in damaged panels, and Noguchi applied a thick, dark-colored paint to thermal protection tiles, to replace cracked or missing black surface coatings. NASA had developed the repair techniques in response to recommendations from the Columbia Accident Investigation Board. During the spacewalk, the two astronauts also performed several tasks to upgrade the ISS, such as replacing a broken GPS antenna and installing a bracket designed to hold a toolbox and parts kit for use during future spacewalks.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Test Repair Methods on Heat Tiles,” New York Times, 31 July 2005; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Adds One Day to Shuttle’s Mission,” Washington Post, 31 July 2005.)
NASA scientists led by Karel J. Schrijver announced the results of their research on the development of better methods of forecasting solar storms. Radiation from solar storms―extremely powerful explosions in the Sun’s atmosphere―can affect unprotected astronauts and airplane passengers, as well as satellites. In the past, scientists had usually analyzed changes in solar magnetic fields to forecast solar storms (also called solar flares), but this method had demonstrated limited reliability. However, a team of NASA scientists using NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) had found that strong electrical currents in the solar atmosphere―currents associated with changes in solar magnetic fields―are the primary drivers of solar flares. Therefore, observing the electrical currents is a more reliable method of forecasting solar flares than the method previously used. The researchers had also discovered that solar flares are strongest and most likely to occur in regions of the Sun where electrical currents accumulate until they have reached an explosive threshold. According to Schrijver and the other researchers, these findings would enable scientists better to forecast periods of potentially hazardous space weather.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Closer to Timely Space Weather Forecasts,” news release 05-226, 16 August 2005; Carolus J. Schrijver et al., “The Nonpotentiality of Active-Region Coronae and the Dynamics of the Photospheric Magnetic Field,” Astrophysical Journal 628, no. 1 (20 July 2005): 501–513.)
James D. Wetherbee, the only U.S. astronaut to command five Space Shuttle flights, announced his plans to retire from NASA. Wetherbee had participated in six Space Shuttle missions since becoming an astronaut in 1984, serving as pilot aboard Mission STS-32 in 1990 and commanding STS-52 in 1992, STS-63 in 1995, STS-86 in 1997, STS-102 in 2001, and STS-113 in 2002. His missions had included flights both to the Russian Mir space station, including the first Shuttle–Mir rendezvous, and to the ISS. Just before retiring, Wetherbee had worked as Space Shuttle Lead in the Independent Technical Authority at NASA’s JSC, a group responsible for identifying and analyzing possible hazards and determining launch readiness. Wetherbee had also served for two years as Director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC and for five years as Deputy Director of JSC.(NASA, “Veteran NASA Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” news release 05-017, 11 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/archives/2005-all-archives.html (accessed 13 August 2009); Associated Press, “Veteran Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” 12 January 2005.)
NASA researchers announced the possible discovery of oxygen sources on the Moon, which astronauts might be able to use in future human explorations. Using NASA’s HST, the researchers had examined the first high-resolution ultraviolet images of the Moon ever captured. The images had revealed high concentrations of a mineral called ilmenite in an area called the Aristarchus Plateau. Human visitors to the Moon could conceivably use ilmenite―composed of iron, oxygen, and titanium―as a source of oxygen, by extracting the oxygen from the mineral through chemical or heating processes. However, the NASA scientists stated that they would continue evaluating the findings, as well as their potential usefulness for future lunar missions.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Telescope Turns to Moon and Sees Possible Oxygen Source,” New York Times, 20 October 2005; Mark Carreau, “Lunar Observations Yield Signs of Oxygen-Bearing Minerals,” Houston Chronicle, 20 October 2005.)
Russian cosmonaut and ISS crew member Sergei K. Krikalev set a world record of 748 days for total time spent in space. Krikalev had begun his cosmonaut training in 1985 and had first served as a crew member of Russia’s Mir space station in 1988. Krikalev had served on the Mir crew again in 1991 and had later become a member of the first ISS crew comprising both Russian cosmonauts and U.S. astronauts. In addition, he had been the first Russian to travel on a NASA Space Shuttle, achieving that distinction on Shuttle Discovery in 1994. The ISS partners had scheduled Krikalev’s return to Earth for October 2005―by then he would have spent 814 days in space.(Mark Carreau, “Russian Cosmonaut Sets a World Record of 748 Days in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 17 August 2005.)
Former NASA astronaut Michael L. Coats became Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Jefferson D. Howell Jr., who had left to become a visiting professor at the University of Texas in Austin. Coats had begun working at NASA in 1978 and had flown three Space Shuttle missions before retiring from NASA in 1991. Before becoming JSC Director, Coats had worked for Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names Former Astronaut New Johnson Center Director,” news release J05-055, 7 November 2005; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” 14 April 2009, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 21 July 2009).)
Northrop Grumman Corporation announced that it had finalized an agreement with the Boeing Company to compete as a team to develop NASA’s new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) and related human lunar-exploration systems, in anticipation of NASA’s formal request for proposals (RFPs). NASA intended the CEV to serve as the central human space-transportation system within the Project Constellation, which would incorporate human and robotic space systems, ferrying astronauts to the Moon and beyond. According to the agreement, Northrop Grumman’s Integrated Systems sector would serve as team leader and prime contractor during the initial development phase, Spiral 1. During the Spiral 1 phase, the team hoped to demonstrate the CEV’s ability to operate safely in low Earth orbit with astronauts aboard. Boeing NASA Systems, an operating unit of Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, would serve as principal subcontractor. The two companies’ roles would reverse to implement the second phase, Spiral 2. During the Spiral 2 phase, NASA intended to begin to expand human space exploration to the Moon and beyond.(Northrop Grumman, “Northrop Grumman, Boeing Finalize Space Exploration Teaming Agreement,” news release, 24 January 2005, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=71298 (accessed 17 August 2009); Los Angeles Business Journal, “Northrop, Boeing Finalize Deal To Team for NASA Contract,” 25 January 2005.)
The Expedition 10 crew, American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov, returned to Earth from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-5 after almost 193 days in space. Together with Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, who had conducted scientific experiments at the ISS after his arrival on 17 April with Expedition 11, the crew landed on target in north-central Kazakhstan. Although the crew and recovery team encountered no major problems, weeks of heavy snow and rain had caused flooding in the steppes, complicating the recovery. Only three of the 10 recovery helicopters were able to land in the wet conditions. During their mission, Chiao and Sharipov had maintained ISS systems and conducted scientific research. They had replaced critical hardware in the Joint Quest Airlock, repaired U.S. spacesuits, completed two spacewalks to prepare the ISS for the arrival of a new European cargo spacecraft during the next year, and submitted a scientific research paper on the use of ultrasound in space. Chiao had voted in the U.S. presidential election the previous November, the first astronaut to do so in space. Vittori had spent 10 days in space, eight of them aboard the ISS, and had performed 22 experiments, including tests of astronaut fatigue, research on the durability of components of microsatellites, research into the electromagnetic waves that emanate from Earth and may be related to earthquakes, and experiments growing shoots as a potential food source for people in orbit.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report SS05-020a, 24 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020a_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Shamil Zumatov for Reuters, “Russian, U.S., Italian Space Crew Return to Earth,” 25 April 2005; Agence-France Presse, “Astronauts Home Safely from International Space Station,” 26 April 2005.)
Both crew members of the ISS, NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the first assembly work since the 2003 accident of Space Shuttle Columbia, which had led to the suspension of construction on the station. The two removed broken and disused equipment and installed a new television camera, designed to aid in the assembly of additional truss segments for the ISS. McArthur and Tokarev were performing these tasks to prepare the ISS for the future installation of a new solar power module, planned for 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-051,” status report SS05-052, 8 November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/nov/HQ_SS05052_station_status-html (accessed 19 July 2009); Mark Carreau, “Camera Installed, Despite a Few Snags,” Houston Chronicle, 8 November 2005.)
During a hearing of the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics―Live from Space: The International Space Station―NASA astronaut John L. Phillips became the first person to provide congressional testimony while in space. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics had convened the hearing to gather information on numerous topics concerning the ISS, such as current activities on the ISS, scientific and research accomplishments resulting from ISS operations, and long-term human spaceflight. At the time of the hearing, Phillips was aboard the ISS serving as a member of Expedition 11, along with Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev. Former ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Peggy A. Whitson also provided testimony at the hearing.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Gives First Congressional Testimony from Space,” news release 05-152, 14 June 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Live from Space: The International Space Station, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 14 June 2005, 3.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
The China National Space Administration (CNSA) launched its second piloted spacecraft, the Shenzhou 6, on a Long March 2F rocket from Jiuquan, China, at 1:00 a.m. (GMT). The Shenzhou 6 carried taikonauts Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng. The CNSA planned for them to remain in low Earth orbit for five days. The CNSA provided few details about the mission and declined to publicize information, such as the taikonauts’ names and the spacecraft’s scheduled return date, until hours before the launch. According to a CNSA spokesperson, Junlong and Haisheng would conduct scientific experiments while in orbit.(Howard W. French, “On Live Television, 2 Chinese Astronauts Begin 5 Days in Low Orbit of Earth,” New York Times, 12 October 2005; China National Space Administration, “Shenzhou-6 To Take Off Wednesday Morning,” news release, 11 October 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the crew of ISS Expedition 12 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 11:55 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 12 were American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 11, comprising Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to remain at the station for nearly six months. The launch also included American executive Gregory Olsen, who would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with the Russian Space Agency. Olsen planned to return to Earth with the Expedition 11 crew on 10 October 2005.(NASA, “Expedition 12 on the Way to International Space Station,” news release 05-292, 30 September 2005. 843 NASA, “Langley Center Director Lesa B. Roe,” 3 October 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/ about/roe_bio.html (accessed 13 July 2009); NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-042, 13 June 2003.)
NASA announced the crew for International Space Station (ISS) Expedition 13, scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in March 2006. Russian cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov would command the mission, and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams would serve as Flight Engineer and NASA Science Officer. Expedition 13 would also include the first Brazilian astronaut to fly in space, Marcos Cesar Pontes, who would engage in scientific experiments aboard the ISS for approximately one week. Williams had flown aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-101 as Mission Specialist in May 2000, performing a spacewalk that lasted almost 7 hours. As Flight Engineer for the 1997 mission to the Russian Mir space station, Vinogradov had completed five spacewalks. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 13: American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Fyodor N. Yurchikhin.(NASA, “NASA Announces Next International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-002, 5 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06002_Expedition_13_crew.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 5 January 2006, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/060105_exp13_crew_announcement.html (accessed 28 June 2010).)
NASA announced the completion of the first systems requirements review (SRR) for its Constellation Program, a human spaceflight program aimed at sending astronauts to the Moon and possibly to Mars. NASA was conducting SRRs of human spacecraft systems to establish a foundation for the design, development, construction, and operation of those systems. NASA had completed its last review in August 1973 for the Space Shuttle program. The Constellation Program SRR examined the systems intended to replace the Shuttle systems, including the Orion spacecraft and the Ares I and Ares V launch rockets. The review confirmed numerous parameters of those systems, including Orion’s launch weight for lunar missions (61,000 pounds, or nearly 27,700 kilograms) and the Ares rockets’ capacity to provide sufficient thrust to launch Orion into orbit. NASA also announced that it was preparing detailed project-level reviews of the Constellation Program’s systems, scheduled for completion in early 2007. After completing those reviews, NASA would conduct another full review to reconcile information gained in the project-level reviews with the data from the first SRR.(NASA, “NASA Completes Milestone Review of Next Human Spacecraft System,” news release 06-354. 16 November 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/nov/HQ_06354_Constellation.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
President George W. Bush submitted his US$2.77 trillion budget for FY 2007, which included US$16.8 billion to fund NASA, a 3.2 percent increase over FY 2006. According to NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, the priorities established by this budget reflected NASA’s commitment to implement the Vision for Space Exploration, to complete the assembly of the ISS with the fewest possible spaceflights, and to deliver an operational Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) no later than 2014. The budget provided for a reduction in funding for the Shuttle program, from US$4.78 billion in FY 2006 to US$4.06 billion in FY 2007, and a 3 percent increase in funding for the ISS, to US$1.81 billion. NASA had requested funds of US$3.98 billion for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, a 30 percent increase from the previous fiscal year. The Directorate would develop the CEV, two new launchers, and the lunar landers needed to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA had estimated the cost of completing ISS assembly with the minimum number of Shuttle flights, while ensuring the safety of Shuttle flights, and had calculated a budget shortfall of US$3−5 billion. To make up this shortfall, the FY 2007 budget would cut funding for aeronautics research by 18 percent, to US$724.4 million. In addition, the budget would cap the increase for NASA’s science budget, which funded deep- space probes and Earth-observation satellites, at 1.5 percent in FY 2007, and at 1 percent annually for the following four years.(NASA, “NASA Administrator’s Statement About FY 2007 Budget,” news release 06-056, 6 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06056_Budget_Statement.html (accessed 10 September 2010); Warren E. Leary, “Unexpected Costs Force NASA Cuts,” New York Times, 7 February 2006; Brian Berger, “NASA Seeks 30-Percent Increase For Explorations Programs,” Space News, 6 February 2006.)
NASA announced the crew for the Space Shuttle Discovery STS-120 mission, scheduled to launch an Italian-built U.S. module for the ISS in summer 2007. The Node 2 module would interconnect the research, habitation, control, and docking modules of the ISS. American astronaut Pamela A. Melroy, the second woman to command a Shuttle, would command the mission, and American astronaut George D. Zamka would serve as Pilot. Melroy had served as Pilot of Space Shuttle Discovery STS-92 in 2000 and as Pilot of Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-112 in 2002. Other crew members would be American astronauts Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, and Michael J. Foreman, and Italian astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli of ESA. NASA and the Italian space agency, Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI), had arranged Nespoli’s mission within the framework of a MOU. According to the terms of the MOU, Italy would supply three pressurized Multi-Purpose Logistic Modules (MPLM) to the United States, which would assign to Italy flight opportunities and the use of the ISS.(ESA, “ESA Astronaut Paolo Nespoli Assigned To Crew for Shuttle Flight STS-120,” news release 19-2006, 19 June 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_19_2006_p_EN.html (accessed 8 June 2010); NASA, “NASA Assigns Crew for Shuttle Mission,” news release 06-242, 19 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_ 06242_crew_shuttle.html (accessed 8 June 2010).)
Atlantis astronauts Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper and Joseph R. Tanner performed the first of three planned spacewalks to install the P3/P4 truss. During the 6.5-hour spacewalk, the pair connected power cables to the truss, released launch restraints on the structure’s components, and prepared those components for later operation. Another notable achievement of the spacewalk was the crew’s use of a new procedure to acclimatize astronauts to the environment of outer space. Under the new procedure, called a “camp out,” the astronauts followed a protocol requiring that they spend the night before the spacewalk shut inside the ISS’s Quest airlock, under lowered air pressure. Sleeping in reduced air pressure speeds the removal of nitrogen from the astronauts’ bodies, thereby helping them avoid decompression sickness—also known as the bends—during spacewalks.(NASA, “STS-115.”)
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and Sunita L. Williams conducted the third spacewalk for Mission STS-116, rearranging electrical channels on the station’s exterior. The completion of that task finalized preparations for the planned additions of European and Japanese laboratory modules to the ISS. During the lengthy 7.5-hour spacewalk, Curbeam and Williams also made some progress on retracting a solar array, although they were unable to fold the device completely. NASA planned for a fourth spacewalk to continue work on the array.
Discovery crew members Michael E. Fossum and Piers J. Sellers performed the first of two scheduled extravehicular activities—spacewalks—for Mission STS-121. During the 7.5-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts performed several tasks to ensure the continued operation of a data, power, and video cable on the station’s exterior. In addition, the two men tested Discovery’s robotic arm and Orbiter Boom Sensor System, components that astronauts could use to repair a damaged orbiter if necessary.(NASA, “STS-121.”)
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and A. Christer Fuglesang conducted a fourth spacewalk for Mission STS-116. The goal of the 6.5-hour spacewalk was to retract the troublesome solar arrays on the P6 truss, located on the ISS’s exterior. It constituted Curbeam’s fourth spacewalk for STS-116, making him the first astronaut to conduct four spacewalks during a single mission. The retraction of the array would enable the astronauts to move the power-producing array to another location on the ISS and to install a permanent electrical grid for the orbiting station.(Michael Cabbage, “Spacewalkers Retract Solar Array,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 December 2006; NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power.”)
To raise money for the Russian space program, ISS crew member Mikhail V. Tyurin drove a golf ball off the ISS during a spacewalk, an event that comprised a small, but highly publicized, part of the 5.5-hour spacewalk. Tyurin and American astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria spent most of the spacewalk conducting serious tasks, such as installing a proton detector to monitor solar eruptions. NASA beamed imagery of the event to Mission Control, showing Tyurin using a 6- iron to drive a lightweight replica of a golf ball off a special spring-loaded tee. Element 21 Golf Company of Toronto, Canada, had paid the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos an undisclosed fee for the golf outing, and NASA had approved it after determining that the ball posed no threat to the ISS. NASA expected the ball to enter Earth’s orbit and to incinerate in the upper atmosphere within a few days.(Mark Carreau, “After Sending Golf Ball into Space, It’s Down To Business,” Houston Chronicle, 23 November 2006; Stefano S. Coledan, “From Outer Space, a Cry of Fore!” New York Times, 23 November 2006.)
NASA and the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos announced the crew members for Expedition 15, the next expedition to the ISS: American astronauts Clayton C. Anderson and Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonauts Oleg V. Kotov and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. The ISS partners had scheduled Kotov and Yurchikhin to fly to the ISS in March 2007; Anderson would travel to the ISS in June 2007, and Tani would go in August 2007. Yurchikhin would command Expedition 15, and the remaining three crew members would serve as flight engineers.(NASA, “NASA Announced New International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-337, 18 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06337_new_station_crew.html (accessed 20 April 2010).)
Michael E. Fossum and Piers J. Sellers performed a second spacewalk for Mission STS-121. In the course of the spacewalk, which lasted almost 7 hours, the two astronauts restored the ISS’s mobile rail transporter car to full operational status and replaced a damaged component of the station’s electrical power system. That component, called the trailing umbilical system, had sustained damage during earlier operations.(NASA, “STS-121.”)
The crew of ISS Expedition 12, American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 7:48 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The two men had spent nearly 190 days in space, conducting two spacewalks and using every Russian docking port on the complex. They were the first ISS crew to dock at all the Russian ports. Accompanying McArthur and Tokarev on their return was Brazil’s first astronaut Marcos C. Pontes, who had spent eight days on the ISS conducting scientific experiments, under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS06-016,” 8 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/ 2006/apr/HQ_SS06016_ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 25 September 2009).)
NASA formed a five-member investigation board at NASA’s KSC in Florida, to review the 4 March 2006 incident during STS-121 in which Space Shuttle Discovery’s remote manipulator system (robotic Shuttle arm) sustained damage. The arm, a 50-foot-long, jointed extension, was used to grapple payloads and to remove them from the payload bay, and to move spacewalking astronauts to various work platforms. Hugo M. Delgado Jr., Deputy Director for the Office of the Chief Engineer at KSC, would chair the board, which would investigate the facts surrounding the incident, determine its probable cause, assess the possibility of a recurrence, and recommend corrective actions. The 4 March incident was one in a series of accidents that had occurred at KSC in 2006, prompting Director of KSC James W. Kennedy to order a brief shutdown of operations. At that time, Kennedy had warned KSC employees that a major accident could derail NASA’s plans to complete the ISS and to begin exploring the Moon and Mars.(NASA, “NASA Appoints Board To Investigate Shuttle Arm Incident,” news release 06-100, 17 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06100_Shuttle_arm_board.html (accessed 14 September 2009); New York Times, “Accident Involving Shuttles at Kennedy Space Center Prompt Safety Directive,” 18 March 2006.)
Discovery crew members used the orbiter’s robotic arm to check Discovery’s wing for damages. This marked the first time that astronauts had used an orbiter’s robotic arm to conduct such an inspection. NASA believed that Discovery might have sustained damage during its docking at the ISS and wanted to assess the orbiter before its scheduled return to Earth the following day.89 The inspection revealed no obvious damage to protective material on the spacecraft’s exterior.
Astronauts Michael E. Fossum and Piers J. Sellers performed their third and final spacewalk for Mission STS-121. The mission’s management team had delayed the return flight to Earth by one day to conduct the spacewalk, so that the crew could test repair techniques and a thermal imaging camera. During the spacewalk, Fossum and Sellers tested a technique in which they made repairs to Discovery’s damaged thermal protection panels, using an experimental sealant called nonoxide adhesive experimental (NOAX). NOAX was a preceramic polymer sealant containing carbon-silicon carbide powder. In addition, Fossum and Sellers installed a grapple bar on an ammonia tank inside the ISS’s S1 truss, so that the crew could move the tank later.(NASA, “STS-121”; NASA Mission Control Center, “STS-121 Mission Control Center Status Report #17,” NASA status report STS-121-17, 12 July 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/sts121/news/ STS-121-17.html (accessed 28 June 2010).)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 14, a six-month mission scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in September 2006. American astronaut Michael E. Lopez- Alegria would command the mission and serve as NASA’s station science officer, and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin would serve as Flight Engineer. American astronaut Sunita L. Williams, making her first spaceflight, would join Expedition 14 in progress, after traveling to the ISS on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-116, scheduled for December 2006. ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter would travel to the ISS aboard Space Shuttle Discovery STS-121, scheduled for summer 2006, serving as the third astronaut on Expedition 13 and later joining the Expedition 14 crew until Williams’s arrival. Lopez-Alegria had served on board Space Shuttle Columbia STS-73 in 1995, on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-92 in 2000, and on Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 in 2002, conducting five spacewalks during the assembly of the station complex. Tyurin had served as Flight Engineer of ISS Expedition 3 in 2001. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 14, American astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Clayton C. Anderson.(NASA, “NASA Announces 14th International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-209, 2 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06209_14th_ISS_crew.html (accessed 16 March 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 3 May 2006.)
The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos launched a Soyuz TMA-9 passenger craft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 04:08 (UT). The spacecraft carried two ISS crew members, American astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin. Accompanying the two astronauts was the first female space tourist to the ISS, Anousheh Ansari, an Iranian-American entrepreneur who had paid US$20 million for the voyage. Ansari would perform blood and muscular experiments for ESA aboard the ISS.(Marc Kaufman, “As Shuttle Heads Home, NASA Lauds Mission,” Washington Post, 18 September 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 635, 1 October 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx635.html (accessed 17 March 2010).)
During a 6-hour spacewalk, ISS crew members Jeffrey N. Williams and Thomas A. Reiter completed both scheduled tasks and additional assignments. The scheduled tasks included installation of a device to minimize hazards associated with electrical currents and replacement of a computer on the ISS’s S1 truss. In addition, the astronauts installed new samples of materials for the Materials on International Space Station Experiment (MISSE), an ongoing experiment studying how prolonged exposure to an outer space environment affects various materials. The additional tasks included the removal of a malfunctioning GPS antenna and the installation of a vacuum-system valve on the station’s Destiny laboratory, among other projects.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS06–036,” status report SS06-036, 3 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_SS06036_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
NASA launched the Space Shuttle Discovery (STS-121) from NASA’s KSC at 2:37 p.m. (EDT). The mission was NASA’s second Return to Flight mission since the 2003 Columbia tragedy. Discovery’s crew planned to continue testing safety equipment and procedures that NASA had introduced on the first Return to Flight Mission (STS-114), which Discovery had flown in 2005. Other objectives of the mission included delivery of equipment, experiments, and supplies to the ISS and the transport to the ISS of a third crew member, ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter. STS- 121 crew members included Commander Steven W. Lindsey, Pilot Mark E. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Michael E. Fossum, Lisa M. Nowak, Piers J. Sellers, and Stephanie D. Wilson.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launch Provides Spectacular Fireworks,” news release 45-06, 4 July 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/kennedy/news/releases/2006/release-20060704.html (accessed 15 March 2010); NASA, “STS-121,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-121.html (accessed 25 January 2010).)
The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos launched the crew of ISS Expedition 13 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 9:30 p.m. (EST) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 13 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Pavel V. Vinogradov and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 12, which comprised American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to stay at the station for six months. In NASA’s second return-to-flight mission, STS-121, scheduled for July 2006, Discovery would bring ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter to the ISS to join the crew of Expedition 13. The Russian spacecraft also transported astronaut Marcos C. Pontes of the Brazilian space agency, Agência Espacial Brasileira (AEB), who had joined NASA as an international astronaut in 1998. Pontes, the first Brazilian to fly in space, would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with Roskosmos, returning to Earth with the Expedition 12 crew on 8 April 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report SS06-013,” 29 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_SS06013_ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 24 September 2009); NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS06-014,” 1 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_SS06014_ ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Tariq Malik, “Orbital Rendezvous: Fresh Crew, Brazilian Astronaut Arrive at ISS,” Space.com, 1 April 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060401_exp13_ docking.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
NASA’s Discovery returned to Earth, landing at NASA’s KSC at 9:14 a.m. (EDT) to complete the 13-day Mission STS-121. During STS-121, the crew had tested the use of Discovery’s robotic arm boom extension as a work platform, performed repairs to the exterior of the ISS, delivered 14 tons (12.7 tonnes or 12,700 kilograms) of equipment and supplies to the orbiting space station, and transported ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter to the ISS. Reiter joined Russian Pavel V. Vinogradov and American Jeffrey N. Williams as an ISS crew member, marking the first time since May 2003 that the ISS had three crew members. Discovery crew had also tested improved safety procedures and equipment for the Shuttle. Furthermore, the flight had verified the safety of a significant aerodynamic modification to the Shuttle’s external fuel tank. More specifically, NASA had removed protuberance air load ramps from the external fuel tank, because a piece of foam had jettisoned from that area of the tank during Discovery’s launch for the Return to Flight Mission (STS-114) in 2005.(NASA, “NASA Welcomes Space Shuttle Crew Back to Earth,” news release 06-280, 17 July 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/sep/HQ_06321_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
Eileen M. Collins, who had joined the astronaut corps in 1990, announced her retirement from NASA. In February 1995, Collins had served as NASA’s first female Shuttle pilot on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-63, the first Shuttle mission to rendezvous with the Russian Mir space station. In May 1997, she had served as pilot on Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-84 flight to Mir, and in July 1999, she had become NASA’s first female Shuttle commander on Space Shuttle Columbia STS-93, which had launched the Chandra X-Ray Observatory. In July–August 2005, she had served as commander of Space Shuttle Discovery STS-114, the first Shuttle flight since the 2003 loss of Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin described Collins as a “brave, superb pilot,” and NASA Flight Crew Operations Director Kenneth D. Bowersox called her a “gifted leader.”(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Eileen Collins Completes Career of Space Firsts,” news release 06-208, 1 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06208_Collins_retires.html (accessed 1 October 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s First Female Shuttle Commander Retires from Spaceflight,” Space.com, 1 May 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060501_collins_retirement.html (accessed 18 June 2010).)
truss (port side 5 truss) on the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, a lattice-like structure on the station’s exterior, which provided power, data, and other utilities for the station. Discovery’s seven-member crew included Commander Mark L. Polansky, Pilot William A. Oefelein, Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams, and Mission Specialists Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Joan E. Higginbotham, Nicholas J. M. Patrick, and ESA’s Christer Fuglesang. Williams would remain at the ISS as part of Expedition 14, replacing ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter, who would return to Earth with the Discovery crew.(NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ sts116/launch/sts116_summary.html (accessed 7 June 2010).)
Crew members of the ISS and Atlantis successfully unfolded two new solar arrays for the ISS’s power system, thereby increasing the station’s capacity for producing electricity. The 240-foot- long (73.2-meter-long) arrays were components of the station’s truss structure. Astronauts had installed an identical set of arrays at the ISS in 2000, and NASA planned to install two additional arrays during Shuttle flights in 2007 and 2008. Although the new arrays were already generating electricity, the generated power would not feed into the station’s power grid until the rewiring and activation of a related cooling system, which NASA had scheduled for completion in December 2006. NASA estimated that, once the crew had installed all of the arrays, the
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin announced that NASA would conduct a fifth and final crewed servicing mission to the HST, an expedition that would help extend and improve the observatory’s capabilities through 2013. Griffin’s announcement reversed previous NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe’s decision to cancel the servicing mission. The mission’s main objective was to install two new instruments, the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (COS) and Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3). The COS would survey the universe’s large-scale structure, known as the cosmic web. The gravity of dark matter and the spatial distribution of galaxies and intergalactic gas determine the structure known as the cosmic web. The WFC3 would observe objects in the solar system and in distant galaxies, providing scientists with information that would help them determine how those objects had formed. NASA announced that the mission’s crew members would be Commander Scott D. Altman, Pilot Gregory C. Johnson, and Mission Specialists Andrew J. Feustel, Michael T. Good, John M. Grunsfeld, Michael J. Massimino, and K. Megan McArthur. NASA had tentatively scheduled the mission for 2008. The mission was controversial because it posed risks to astronauts. However, O’Keefe’s cancellation had also engendered controversy, because failing to service the HST would have meant the end of the HST’s mission by 2008.(NASA, “NASA Approves Mission and Names Crew for Return to Hubble,” news release 06-343, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06343_HST_announcement.html (accessed 5 April 2010); Mark Carreau, “NASA to Repair Hubble Despite Potential Risks,” Houston Chronicle, 1 November 2006.)
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and A. Christer Fuglesang conducted a second spacewalk for Mission STS-116, the 75th in the history of the ISS. During the near 6-hour excursion, the spacewalkers completed the first phase of the reconfiguration of the station’s electrical system, a complex task that required the astronauts to plug in and unplug various cables, while simultaneously coping with the harsh environment of space. The second phase of the power reconfiguration would take place on 16 December. The rewiring was part of an extensive project to switch the ISS from its temporarily configured power system to a permanent arrangement. For the previous six years, the ISS had drawn its electrical power from one array of solar panels, but under the planned permanent configuration, the station would draw power from another set of solar arrays, which would rotate to face the Sun as the ISS orbited Earth.
Astronauts Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper and Joseph R. Tanner performed the third and final spacewalk for Mission STS-115. They powered up a cooling system for the newly unfolded solar arrays and replaced a radio antenna that provided backup communications between the ISS and the ground. The astronauts also completed additional work aimed at reducing workloads for future spacewalkers. Those tasks included installing insulation on communications antennas and testing an infrared camera designed to detect damage on Shuttles.(NASA, “STS-115.”)
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and A. Christer Fuglesang performed the first extravehicular activity (EVA), or spacewalk, of Mission STS-116. During the 6.5-hour EVA, the two astronauts installed the girder-like P5 truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. Fellow astronauts Joan E. Higginbotham and Sunita L. Williams assisted them from inside the ISS, using the station’s robotic arm (Canadarm2). The P5 truss would support a set of solar arrays, which NASA expected to attach during a Shuttle mission planned for 2007. The astronauts’ other major task during the spacewalk was the retraction of the solar arrays on the station’s P6 truss, so that the newer solar arrays on the P4 truss could begin tracking the motion of the Sun. Although NASA had designed the P6’s arrays to fold up like an accordion, mechanical problems prevented crew members from fully retracting the device. Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis had installed the newer solar arrays during Mission STS-115 in August 2006.(NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power”; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-115,” http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-115.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Michael Cabbage, “Walk Add 2 Tons to Space Station; Truss Addition Paves Way for Solar Upgrade,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 13 December 2006. 150 NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power”; John Schwartz, “2 Spacewalkers Are Successful in Tricky Rewiring of the Space Station,” New York Times, 15 December 2006.)
Atlantis crew members Daniel C. Burbank and Steven G. MacLean performed the second spacewalk for Mission STS-115. During the spacewalk, which lasted nearly 7 hours, the two astronauts further prepared the P3/P4 truss for installation, releasing locks on an automobile- sized component of the truss that would enable the ISS’s solar arrays to track the Sun. The purpose of the locks was to secure the truss during launch.(NASA, “STS-115.”)
STS-118 Mission Specialist Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson made the fourth and final spacewalk of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours, the pair installed the antenna of the External Wireless Instrumentation System, attached a stand for the extension boom of the Shuttle’s robotic arm, and retrieved two materials experiment containers for return to Earth aboard Endeavour. Mission Control had cancelled approximately 2 hours worth of tasks from the EVA to enable the crew to close the hatch between the ISS and the Shuttle in preparation for an early departure. NASA managers had rescheduled the return flight to enable Endeavour to land a day early, in case Hurricane Dean headed toward Houston. The hurricane could have forced an emergency relocation of flight controllers from Houston to a makeshift control center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. A temporary control center would have been neither as organized nor as large as the Houston operation.(NASA KSC, “STS-118”; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Hurriedly Complete Spacewalk,” 19 August 2007.)
NASA announced the conclusion of the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) mission. FUSE had become inoperable in July 2007 when it became incapable of pointing steadily. NASA had launched FUSE in 1999 to study how chemicals disperse throughout galaxies, as well as the composition of interstellar gas clouds. FUSE’s mission was to help answer important questions about the conditions in the universe immediately following the Big Bang. However, FUSE’s reaction wheels, designed to turn and aim the telescope, holding it on target, had malfunctioned. To operate correctly, FUSE required three reaction wheels, but in November and December 2001, two of the four wheels had stopped operating. FUSE flew too high for the Space Shuttle to carry astronauts to repair it. Therefore, NASA scientist Jeffrey W. Kruk had devised a way to use FUSE’s magnetic torquer bars, designed to act as a weak break against Earth’s magnetic field, as a third wheel to help FUSE’s remaining wheel and backup wheel turn and aim the telescope. This solution had worked until December 2004, when the third reaction wheel had broken down, leaving FUSE with only one working wheel and the torquer bars. The FUSE project team had required 11 months to devise a new pointing system for the telescope. Once the team had completed the repair, FUSE had explored the universe with few interruptions from November 2005 until July 2007. FUSE Project Scientist George Sonneborn, of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, remarked that the telescope had collected scientific data of high quality for eight years, longer than its five-year goal.(NASA, “NASA Concludes Successful FUSE Mission,” news release 07-227, 17 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07227_FUSE.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Frank D. Roylance, “8-Year Space Vigil Goes Dark,” Baltimore Sun, 19 October 2007.)
NASA announced the assignments to NASA’s field centers of specific tasks related to lunar exploration, as part of the Constellation Program. NASA assigned lead responsibility for designing the lunar lander and other lunar-surface systems, such as rovers and astronaut habitats, to JSC in Houston. MFSC would lead the development of the lunar lander’s descent stage and the development of the Earth-departure stage of the Ares-5 rocket. NASA gave ARC lead responsibility for the integrated health-management systems of Ares 5, the lunar lander, and for other lunar-surface systems, as well as a supporting role in developing Ares 5’s payload shroud. DFRC would assist ARC in developing mission-operation simulations capabilities and supporting ground- and flight-test operations for lunar projects. NASA assigned GRC lead responsibility for developing the lunar lander’s ascent stage and Ares 5’s power system, thrust- vector control system, and payload shroud, as well as for testing the Earth-departure stage at Plum Brook Station in Ohio. GSFC would take the lead in developing an unpressurized cargo carrier for Orion and avionics for lunar landers. GSFC would also develop equipment and tools for lunar EVAs. JPL would have a variety of supporting roles in the lunar-lander project and lead responsibility for a particular robotic lunar-surface mobility system—the All-Terrain Hex- Legged Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (ATHLETE), a six-legged robot. KSC would have lead responsibility for final assembly of the human lunar lander, help integrate lunar-habitat modules, and prepare Ares 1 and Ares 5 for launch. NASA assigned LaRC a variety of supporting roles in the lunar-lander project, in addition to lead roles in developing the aerodynamics of Ares 5 and structures and mechanisms for lunar-surface systems. As NASA’s primary rocket-engine testing facility, SSC would continue that role for the Ares 1 and Ares 5 and would support the testing of the lunar-lander descent engine.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Center Assignments for Moon Exploration,” news release 07-234, 30 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07234_ESMD_Work_Assignments.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Brian Berger, “NASA Assigns Field Center Roles for Ares 5, Lunar Lander,” Space.com, 30 October 2007, http://www.space.com/news/071030-sn-ares-fieldassign.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski and Douglas H. Wheelock conducted the third EVA of STS-120, which lasted 7 hours and 8 minutes. With the assistance of an orbital crane, the two astronauts installed the P6-truss segment, which had a 17.5-ton (15.9-tonne or 15,900-kilogram) solar-power girder. They also installed a 40-foot (12.2-meter) radiator, to dissipate heat generated by station systems, and a spare main-bus switching unit on a stowage platform, for future use. The astronauts deployed the first solar array without incident, but discovered a 2.5- foot (0.76-meter) tear in a solar blanket during deployment of the second array. With solar-array deployment at 80 percent, Mission Control decided to halt the process to allow engineers the opportunity to analyze the situation and to recommend next steps. Despite its 80 percent 160 deployment, the array was already producing 97 percent of its power-generation capability.
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to review the findings of two reports that NASA had made public on 27 July 2007. The reports examined NASA’s medical and behavioral health care system for its astronauts. The NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review had identified a number of issues related to NASA culture, communication, and behavioral concerns, including some astronauts’ alleged preflight alcohol abuse. However, NASA’s internal JSC review had contradicted the finding, stating that the investigators had been unable to verify any instance of alcohol abuse. At the hearing, Richard E. Bachmann Jr., Chair of the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee, stated that NASA’s rebuttal of reports and derision of the claims that astronauts had imbibed alcohol during the preflight alcohol-restriction period had discouraged open communication. Moreover, Bachmann expressed deep concern about NASA’s apparent disregard of mental health and behavior issues among astronauts and about the reluctance of flight surgeons and astronauts alike to report improper conduct. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) remarked that the findings of the two panels seemed to describe two different organizations. Udall instructed
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko undertook a spacewalk to prepare the space station for the relocation of the Harmony module, a pressurized compartment designed to serve as a docking port for European and Japanese laboratories. NASA had scheduled the Discovery astronauts to conduct this spacewalk as the fifth and final EVA of their mission to the ISS. However, the discovery and repair of tears in a critical solar-power module had taken precedence. During this EVA, Whitson and Malenchenko cleared cables from Harmony’s destined location and disconnected electrical and fluid connections. Mission STS- 120 had delivered the module to the ISS in October, and the crew had installed Harmony at a temporary location. Completion of Harmony’s transfer would require three spacewalks and extensive robotic work. Astronauts living aboard the ISS would need to reposition the module before NASA launched its next Shuttle mission, scheduled for early December 2010. That mission would carry Europe’s laboratory Columbus to the ISS.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk at Station,” 9 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Tackles Next Phase of Remodeling,” Houston Chronicle, 10 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010).)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted their second spacewalk in four days, to finish connecting cooling lines to a permanent system of the ISS. Working for just over 7 hours, the astronauts rerouted a series of two electrical cables and four quick-disconnect fluid lines to the Destiny laboratory’s permanent cooling system; retracted the aft heat-rejecting radiator on the P6 Truss; and finished disconnecting and stowing the second of two fluid lines for the Early Ammonia Servicer. Lopez- Alegria photographed the starboard solar array and the blanket box into which it folds, so that engineers could analyze the photos and finalize plans for its retraction during the Shuttle Mission STS-117, scheduled for March 2007. He also removed a sunshade that the crew no longer needed from a data-relay box, folding the sunshade to bring it inside the ISS, so that the crew could dispose of it later. At the conclusion of the spacewalk, Williams and Lopez-Alegria again followed precautionary decontamination procedures in the ISS’s airlock, as they had on 31 January, because they had seen ammonia flakes early in the spacewalk. Williams set a record for spacewalking time accrued by a woman—22 hours and 37 minutes—surpassing the record that NASA astronaut Kathryn C. Thornton had set in 1993.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06”; Marc Carreau, “Spacewalkers Finish Job; Astronauts Sets Record,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2007.)
Astronauts Richard A. Mastracchio and Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams undertook the second EVA of STS-118, to install the 600-pound (272-kilogram) CMG on the Z1 segment of the ISS’s truss, and to remove and replace the gyroscope that had failed in late 2006. The defective gyroscope was one of four such devices controlling the ISS’s position. NASA announced it had added a new computer program, the Inductive Monitoring System, to assist in monitoring these four gyroscopes. NASA had begun using the system earlier in 2007. David L. Iverson, the computer scientist at NASA’s ARC who had led the five-year effort to develop the new system, explained that the purpose of the software was to alert ground controllers to anomalies, so that they could analyze the situation immediately and take any necessary preventive measures. During the test phase, the new software had identified problems with the gyroscopes long before the previous system would have flagged anomalies. Engineers had also used the software program in F-18 fighter planes and in the Space Shuttle’s leading-edge impact-detection system, as well as in monitoring electric-power plants and water quality.(NASA, “New NASA Software Monitors Space Station Gyroscopes,” news release 07-201, 13 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07201_ISS_Gyro_Software.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Traci Watson, “Endeavour Astronauts Replace Faulty Gyroscope,” USA Today, 14 August 2007.)
Jeffrey P. Bezos, founder of Amazon.com and the commercial spaceflight company Blue Origin, released images of the 13 November 2006 test launch of the space capsule Goddard, the first vehicle of Blue Origin’s New Shepard program. Goddard was a vertical-takeoff, vertical-landing vehicle, shaped like a cone, with a square base sitting on four legs. During the successful test launch, which lasted 25 seconds, the craft ascended to 300 feet (91.4 meters) before descending to land gently on the launchpad, approximately 120 miles (193 kilometers) east of El Paso, Texas. Bezos, who had founded Blue Origin in 2000, planned for the craft eventually to carry several astronauts into suborbital flight. However, he clearly stated that he intended for these plans to proceed slowly, choosing as Blue Origin’s motto “Gradatim Ferociter” or “Step by Step, Fiercely.”(Jeff Bezos, “Development Flight, and We Are Hiring,” Blue Origin, 2 January 2007, http://www.blueorigin.com/ letter.htm (accessed 9 November 2009); Aero-News Network, “Bezos Releases Details of November’s Goddard Launch,” 5 January 2007; Stefanie Olsen, “Bezos Unleashes Space Rocket Prototype,” New York Times, 4 January 2007.)
Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the second EVA of STS-120, disconnecting cables from the P6 truss, to remove the P6 truss from the Z1 truss. Tani and Parazynski made progress outfitting the new Harmony module, mating the power and data grapple fixture, and reconfiguring connectors on the S1 truss, in preparation for the later deployment of the radiator on S1. Tani also inspected the SARJ, collecting fine metal shavings on part of a wheel with solar panels attached to it. The discovery of the metal shavings enabled engineers to identify the source of friction that had caused the wheel to begin slowing down in September. Engineers had designed the wheel to spin freely so that the solar panels pointed toward the Sun; the panels generated electricity to operate the ISS’s computers, oxygen- producing machine, and other systems. Tani reported that, in addition to collecting the metal shavings, he had observed that parts of the wheel’s surface appeared discolored, a possible sign of corrosion. To prevent further damage to the wheel, engineers stopped it from spinning, thereby reducing the amount of electricity that the panels generated. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 33 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120”; Traci Watson, “Damaged Component Could Thwart Space Station Plans,” USA Today, 29 October 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronauts Discover Damage to Space Station,” 29 October 2007.)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted a spacewalk outside the ISS, lasting 7 hours and 55 minutes, which exceeded the planned time of 6 hours and 30 minutes. The two astronauts moved half of the ISS’s coolant lines to a permanent cooling station on the station’s Port 6 (P6) Truss. Several flakes, either of toxic ammonia or of paint, floated away from a cooling-line cap as the astronauts disconnected two of the fluid lines connected to an ammonia reservoir, preparing to stow them away. Time constraints prevented the astronauts from stowing both of the fluid lines. Moreover, the astronauts failed to accomplish tasks that would enable them to “get ahead,” such as photographing a solar array that the ISS partners planned to retract during the next Shuttle mission in March. Because of the suspected leak during stowage of the fluid line, Mission Control required Lopez-Alegria and Williams to remain in their spacesuits for an additional 25 minutes once inside the ISS’s airlock, as a precaution against contaminating the station with ammonia.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06,” 4 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0706_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Spacewalkers st Start Switch of Station’s Cooling System,” New York Times, 1 February 2007; Mike Schneider, “Astronauts Take 1 of 3 Spacewalks,” Associated Press, 1 February 2007.)
Four teams competed at NASA’s Regolith Excavation Challenge to dig a minimum of 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of simulated lunar soil—regolith—within 0.5 hours, using no more than 30 watts of power. However, none of the teams succeeded in winning the US$125,000 first prize. The top performer was the entry from Technology Ranch of Pixmo Beach, California, the only machine to run for a full 30 minutes in its first attempt and to scoop up 75 kilograms (165 pounds) of regolith. The Regolith Excavation Challenge was the seventh centennial challenge NASA had held since 2005. However, the only person who had won any of the competitions was Peter K. Homer, who had won US$200,000 for his entry in the Astronaut Glove Challenge on 3 May. Kenneth Davidian, Program Manager of NASA’s Centennial Challenges Program, stated that NASA would add the unawarded prize money to the winnings for the 2008 Regolith Excavation Challenge, increasing the value of the prize for that competition to US$375,000. Davidian said that he expected the number of teams competing in the challenge would double and that many more NASA engineers would observe the competition in the future.(Dana Mackenzie, “No One Scoops the Prize at Moon Digger Contest,” New Scientist, 14 May 2007.)
underwater telephone. The Atlantis had an on-board telephone connected to a satellite telephone, which could contact anyone on shore. Atlantis had telephoned NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where a high-powered dish transmitter had contacted the ISS directly. Oceanographers and astrobiologists were equally enthusiastic about the telephone call because much of the information oceanographers learn researching the sea floor applies to space exploration. Astrobiologist Richard Shand of Northern Arizona University described the feat of communicating with people who are not currently on Earth’s surface, using three different media—water, air, and vacuum—as an astonishing accomplishment. Apollo astronauts, who had called Houston from a distance of 384,400 kilometers (238,855 miles), retained the record for a long-distance call. The call from the Alvin submersible to the ISS was a 253-kilometer (157-mile) long-distance call.(Christina Reed, “Houston, We Have a Phone Call,” Science Now, 26 January 2007.)
NASA announced the winner of the first Astronaut Glove Challenge, one of NASA’s Centennial Challenges. Peter K. Homer of Southwest Harbor, Maine, won US$200,000 for his design of a glove that performed better overall than those his competitors had created, according to tests rating the glove’s strength, flexibility, and comfort. NASA stated that Homer had made innovations in finger dexterity that could enhance the gloves created for NASA’s astronauts in the future.(NASA, “Peter Homer Wins NASA’s Challenges for Improved Astronaut Gloves,” news release 07-101, 3 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07101_Winner_of_Astronaut_Glove_ Challenge.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
NASA to present a credible plan and accompanying timetable for implementing the NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee’s recommendations, including the most controversial one, related to the allegations that some astronauts had drunk alcohol shortly before flight. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had compared the alcohol allegations to urban legends, testified that NASA was already in the process of addressing the committee’s concerns. At the time of the hearing, NASA was preparing an anonymous survey to assist in identifying its employees’ continuing concerns about safety issues and about other review committee findings.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “Subcommittee Questions NASA on Health Care of Astronaut Corps,” news release, 6 September 2007, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science+ and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&packageId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA’s Astronaut Health Care System—Results of an Independent Review, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2007; Eun Kyung Kim, “Fear May Be NASA Problem,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 September 2007.)
NASA released safety-review findings that showed no evidence of astronauts using alcohol improperly before spaceflight. NASA Chief of Safety and Mission Assurance Bryan D. O’Connor had conducted the review to evaluate allegations included in the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee’s report, released in late July. For the safety review, which covered the past 20 years of spaceflight, NASA had interviewed approximately 90 participants in and witnesses to the activities that had occurred during the last few days before Shuttle and Soyuz launches. In addition, NASA had reviewed more than 40,000 records, from as far back as 1984, including reports of mishaps and close calls, anonymous safety reports, safety-hotline reports, and alcohol- and drug-related disciplinary actions, as well as NASA’s relevant policies and procedures. The review had also included an inspection of crew quarters at NASA’s JSC in Houston and NASA’s KSC in Florida. O’Connor remarked that the investigation had been much more exhaustive than NASA’s usual response to an anonymous allegation concerning a matter of safety; therefore, he expressed confidence that NASA had sufficient safeguards to prevent an impaired crew member from participating in spaceflight.(NASA, “NASA Safety Review Finds No Evidence of Improper Alcohol Use by Astronauts Before Space Flight,” news release 07-184, 29 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07184_oconnor_alcohol_ study.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Warren E. Leary, “No Evidence of Drunken Astronauts, NASA Says,” New York Times, 30 August 2007.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from KSC in Florida at 11:38 a.m. (EDT) on STS-120, a 14- day mission to continue ISS construction. The STS-120 crew consisted of Commander Pamela A. Melroy; Pilot George D. Zamka; and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, Stephanie D. Wilson, Daniel M. Tani, and ESA astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli. Mission Specialist Tani would join Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Yuri I. Malenchenko, replacing Clayton C. Anderson, who had lived aboard the ISS for five months. Mission goals included installing the Harmony connecting module (Node 2) and moving the P6 segment of the ISS truss, with its solar arrays, to a permanent position at the end of the
U.S. astronauts Patrick G. Forrester and Steven R. Swanson conducted a fourth unscheduled spacewalk outside the ISS, to wrap up incomplete tasks. During the spacewalk, which lasted 6 hours and 29 minutes, Forrester and Swanson completed their primary task of activating the SARJ, a rotating joint on the ISS’s new power module; installed a new camera stanchion on the S3 Truss; and linked a computer-network cable between the U.S. and Russian sides of the stations. The two astronauts were unable to bolt down the debris shields that Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov had installed on the Zvezda module during the spacewalk on 6 June. Instead, they opted to tether the two panels in place.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Mike Schneider for Associated Press, “Astronauts Complete 4th Spacewalk,” 18 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Finish Power Upgrades to Station,” Houston Chronicle, 18 June 2007.)
NASA issued a statement regarding the status of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak, the U.S. Navy captain charged with attempted kidnapping and related charges. Under a mutual agreement with the U.S. Navy, NASA was terminating Nowak’s detail as an astronaut, effective 8 March. Nowak, the first astronaut ever dismissed by NASA, had begun her detail with NASA following her selection as a member of the astronaut class of 1996. She had flown on her only mission, STS-121, in 2006. NASA had requested the U.S. Navy’s agreement to terminate Nowak’s detail because NASA lacked the administrative authority to address the criminal charges pending against Nowak. Because Nowak was a naval officer assigned to NASA, rather than a NASA civil servant, she was not subject to administrative action by NASA. NASA further stated that the decision to terminate Nowak’s detail did not indicate that NASA had taken a position on the criminal charges against her.(NASA, “Statement Regarding the Status of Lisa Nowak,” news release 07-26, 7 March 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07026_Nowak_Status.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Lianne Hart, “NASA Fires Astronaut Charged in Assault on Rival,” Los Angeles Times, 8 March 2007.)
In one of the most difficult and dangerous spacewalks ever attempted, NASA astronaut Scott E. Parazynski successfully cut loose a tangled set of wires that had prevented a solar array at the ISS from unfurling properly on 30 October. Parazynski rode on the end of the robotic arm extension, which at 90 feet (27 meters) barely reached the damaged solar wing. The extension placed Parazynski farther away from the ISS than any astronaut had ever been. After 1 hour riding the extension out to the power grid, Parazynski worked for 2 hours, cutting hinge wires and guide wires. Once cut, the 90-foot (27-meter) guide wire retracted smoothly into its reel at the base of the solar wing. Throughout the operation, Parazynski used an L-shaped Teflon stick wrapped in insulating tape to keep the solar wing away, protecting himself from electrical shock. The spacewalk was the fourth and final EVA for the Discovery astronauts.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Fix Ripped Solar Wing,” 4 November 2007; Liz Austin Peterson for Associated Press, “Astronauts Revel in Wing Repair Success,” 4 November 2007.)
108NASA, “X-48B Blended Wing Body Research Aircraft Takes First Flight,” news release 07-165, 26 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07165_BWB_First_Flight.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Boeing Company, “Boeing Flies Blended Wing Body Research Aircraft,” news release, 26 July 2007, http://www.boeing. com/news/releases/2007/q3/070726c_nr.html (accessed 8 June 2010). committee recommended that NASA determine the scope of alleged alcohol-related incidents. The Review Committee had previously reported anecdotally that several astronauts had violated the rule prohibiting members of the flight crew from drinking alcohol or working under the effects of alcohol during the 12 hours before launch. Concurrent with the Review Committee’s study, Director of NASA’s JSC Michael L. Coats had led an internal assessment of behavioral medicine practices for astronauts. The JSC Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee had evaluated JSC’s extensive health care programs for astronauts and had recommended improvements to those programs, such as adding a more extensive behavioral health assessment to the annual flight physical examinations for all astronauts.(NASA, “NASA Releases Findings of Astronaut Health Review,” media advisory 07-92, 26 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_M07092_Astro_Reports.html (accessed 11 June 2010); NASA, “Opening Remarks: NASA Deputy Administrator Shana Dale,” 27 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 183223main_Shana_Dale%20_opening%20_statement_7-27-07.pdf (accessed 14 July 2010).)
“Alvin” Drew Jr., and CSA astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams. Astronaut Barbara R. Morgan, who had been Christa McAuliffe’s backup during NASA’s teacher-in-space program, had been a spectator at KSC when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launch on 28 January 1986. After the accident, Morgan had returned to teaching. However, in 1998 she had joined the Astronaut Corps. She was participating in STS-118 as a Mission Specialist, not as a teacher. Endeavour’s payload included the Starboard 5 (S5) truss, the Spacehab module, and external stowage platform 3, with a replacement control moment gyroscope (CMG). The mission, Endeavour’s 20th, was the first in almost five years. The Columbia tragedy in 2003 had extended Endeavour’s time on the ground. Following its last mission in December 2002, Endeavour had undergone a major overhaul involving over 194 modifications, including GPS receivers, a modern glass cockpit, a system for docking at the ISS, and a system for monitoring the three engines during launch. NASA had also replaced more than 2,000 of Endeavour’s heat tiles and blankets and more than 3,000 gap fillers between its tiles. The overhauled Shuttle seemed to launch flawlessly. NASA observed one debris event on live video, but the object appeared to have missed the orbiter.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-173, 8 August 2007; NASA Kennedy Space Center, “STS-118: Endeavour,” NASA Facts no. FS-2007-09-027-KSC, http://www.nasa. gov/pdf/182309main_STS-118W.pdf (accessed 7 July 2010); Chris Bergin, “Endeavour Launches: Debris Observed, But Appears To Miss Orbiter,” NASASpaceflight.com, 8 August 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/08/ endeavour-launches-debris-observed/ (accessed 7 July 2010); Kenneth Chang, “Shuttle Endeavour Takes Off,” New York Times, 9 August 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani conducted a spacewalk to connect power and heater cables, as well as the coolant lines that would carry ammonia between the Harmony module and the ISS. The astronauts took turns carrying the 18.5-foot (5.6 - meter), 300-pound (136-kilogram) tray containing the coolant lines to Harmony, where they bolted the tray to the adjacent lab module. After securing the tray, Whitson and Tani worked ahead of schedule, routing the coolant lines and other cables. The spacewalk lasted 7 hours and 16 minutes.
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California after weather concerns prevented the crew from landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. Sunita L. Williams returned home with the STS-117 crew, having surpassed Shannon W. Lucid’s 1996 record of 188 days and 4 hours. Williams had set a new 195-day record for the longest spaceflight by a woman. U.S. astronaut Clayton C. Anderson remained at the ISS, scheduled to return home aboard Discovery in October. The STS-117 mission had successfully increased the power capability of the ISS, preparing the station for the future delivery of European and Japanese laboratories. Although Atlantis had sustained some damage soon after launch on 8 June, several inspections in orbit had revealed no critical damage, and Mission Control had declared the Shuttle’s thermal protection system safe for reentry on flight day 13. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to last 11 days, but had added extra days to allow time in case of the necessity of repairs to the thermal protection system. Olivas had stapled a thermal blanket back into place during the unscheduled fourth spacewalk on 17 June.(NASA, “Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-142, 22 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07142_Atlantis_landing.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Lands in California,” 25 June 2007.)
Two U.S. astronauts, Mission Specialists John D. Olivas and James F. Reilly II, conducted the first extravehicular activity (EVA) of STS-117. During the 6-hour-and-15-minute spacewalk at the ISS, the astronauts made power, data, and cooling connections on a new 16-tonne (17.6-ton or 16,000-kilogram) truss segment containing solar arrays. One of STS-117’s objectives was to deliver the new US$367 million solar-power module to the ISS. The ISS partners intended for the arrays to increase the ISS’s power generation substantially and to serve future European and Japanese science modules. Mission managers decided to extend STS-117 two days, in case the crew needed to repair the fabric heat shield on the orbiter’s left tail section. Managers feared that Atlantis’s tail section had sustained damaged shortly after launch.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “US Atlantis Astronauts Step Out on Space Walk,” 12 June 2007; Houston Chronicle, “New Solar Array Being Unfurled on Space Station,” 13 June 2007.)
Mission Specialists Richard A. Mastracchio and Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams undertook the first EVA of STS-118, marking the first time that either astronaut had spacewalked. Over the course of 6 hours and 17 minutes, the pair worked to install and activate the 1.58-ton (1.4-tonne or 1,433-kilogram), 11-by-14-foot (3.33-by-4.3-meter) S5-truss segment and to retract the forward heat-rejecting radiator from the P6 truss. NASA planned to relocate the forward heat-rejecting radiator to the end of the port truss during the upcoming STS-120. Pilot Charles O. Hobaugh assisted Williams and Mastracchio from inside the ISS, operating the ISS’s robotic arm, which held the truss.(NASA KSC, “STS-118”; Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Begin Spacewalk as NASA Analyzes Shuttle Damage.”)
NASA astronauts Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Sunita L. Williams undertook their third spacewalk outside the ISS in nine days. Over 6.5 hours, the astronauts accomplished their primary task—jettisoning two large thermal covers, folding them with smaller shrouds that had covered an electronics box, and tossing them away from the ISS, so that they would eventually burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. The astronauts also connected cables to a new system that would allow the ISS to share power with a docked orbiter; added a platform intended to hold a storage container; and photographed the docking port. Lopez-Alegria set a new U.S. spacewalking record of 61 hours and 22 minutes. The all-time record of more than 82 hours belonged to Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyov. Sunita L. Williams extended the spacewalking record she had set on 4 February to 29 hours and 17 minutes. The series of spacewalks that had begun on 31 January marked the first time that ISS crew had conducted three spacewalks within such a short time, without a Space Shuttle docked at the ISS.(Mike Schneider, “Astronaut Sets U.S. Spacewalking Record,” Associated Press, 9 February 2007. 8)
South Korean Vice Minister of Science and Technology Chung Yoon announced the selection of Ko San, a 30-year-old expert on artificial intelligence, to visit the ISS as South Korea’s first astronaut. Ko San had been one of two finalists. The other finalist, Yi So-yeon, was a 29-year- old female doctoral student in biotechnology. More than 36,000 South Koreans had applied to become the first person in South Korea to travel in space. Ko and Yi had been training in Russia when South Korean authorities selected Ko as the winner. They appointed Yi as his backup, in the event Ko was unable to participate in the mission. They selected Ko over Yi because he had performed better in certain experiments and had demonstrated a stronger capability of communicating with Russian cosmonauts. As backup, Yi would continue to train with Ko and would serve as a consultant in planning Ko’s mission.(Kurt Achin, “S. Korea Names Astronaut for the Country’s First Voyage into Space,” Voice of America, 6 September 2007; “Space Mission To Help Boost Aerospace Research,” Korea Times, 6 September 2007.)
NASA announced that it had selected proposals for future lunar-science activities and had established two new programs to enhance the research that the Vision for Space Exploration had made possible. Under the Lunar Sortie Science Opportunities (LSSO) Program, NASA had selected seven from among more than 70 proposals to develop simple, autonomous instrument packages that future astronauts could deploy on the lunar surface. Scientists planned to use these packages, known as suitcase science studies, to study the Moon’s interior; to examine lunar dust, which creates problems for astronauts; to search for natural resources on the lunar surface; and to use lasers to provide precise information about the position and features of the Moon. The studies complemented two new programs already established in the Science Mission Directorate’s Planetary Science Division at NASA Headquarters—the Lunar Advanced Science and Exploration Research (LASER) Program and the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Participating Scientist Program. The LRO mission, scheduled to launch in 2008, would help NASA prepare for long-duration human operations on the Moon. For that program, NASA planned to fund researchers analyzing data from the orbiter’s six instruments. Under the LASER program, NASA intended to solicit proposals for research investigating the lunar environment to determine how to enable humans to live and work on the Moon in the future.(NASA, “NASA Prepares for Performing New Science on the Moon,” news release 07-141, 21 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07141_moon_science.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, “NASA Sets New Lunar Science Programs,” Aviation Week, 28 June 2007, http://www. aviationweek.com/aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/lro062707.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
Former U.S. Navy pilot and astronaut Walter M. “Wally” Schirra Jr., one of the astronauts known as the Original Seven, died of a heart attack at the age of 84. Schirra was the only astronaut to participate in all three of the United States’ first human space projects—Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. Selected in 1959 as one of the first seven astronauts, Schirra had made his first spaceflight on 3 October 1962, piloting the fifth Mercury mission, in which Mercury orbited Earth six times in 9 hours and 13 minutes. On 15 December 1965, Schirra had flown aboard Gemini 6-A with Thomas P. Stafford II, in a mission that included the first rendezvous of maneuverable spacecraft. Gemini 6-A, carrying Schirra and Stafford, had flown in formation for 5 hours with Gemini 7, which carried astronauts Frank F. Borman II and James A. Lovell Jr. With his fellow Apollo 7 crew members Walter Cunningham and Donn F. Eisele, Schirra had tested the Apollo’s systems during an 11-day flight beginning on 11 October 1968, a test that proved that Apollo was ready to ferry astronauts to the Moon. The Apollo 7 flight, Schirra’s final mission for NASA, had been the first to provide televised images from orbit. Following his retirement from the U.S. Navy in 1969, Schirra had worked with Walter L. Cronkite Jr. as a news commentator for CBS. Schirra was also a founding member and director of the Mercury Seven Foundation. The U.S. military had awarded Schirra the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, three Distinguished Flying Crosses, three Air Medals, and the Philippines Legion of Honor. NASA had awarded him two Distinguished Service Medals and its Exceptional Service Medal.(NASA, “Veteran Astronaut Walter Schirra Dies,” news release 07-100, 3 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07100_Schirra_Dies.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Richard Goldstein, “Walter M. Schirra Jr., Astronaut, Dies at 84,” New York Times, 4 May 2007.)
of the ISS in preparation for the expansion of the space station.(Patrick Peterson, “Docking Port Relocated, Attached to Harmony,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010). 167 Xinhua News Agency, “Russia, India To Develop Advanced Military Aircraft, 13 November 2007; Agence France-Presse, “Russia, India To Join in Moon Mission,” 12 November 2007.)
Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Oleg V. Kotov restored two of the three data channels on each of the two computers that had failed on 12 June during the deployment of the solar arrays on the ISS’s new power module. Russian engineers had determined that backup- power supplies for the computers had also failed. While Yurchikhin and Kotov worked on restoring the computers, U.S. astronauts James F. Reilly II and John D. Olivas conducted the third scheduled EVA of the Atlantis Mission STS-117. During a spacewalk lasting 7 hours and 58 minutes, Reilly installed a hydrogen vent on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory, and Olivas repaired a 4-by-6-inch (10.2-by-15.2-centimeter) piece of thermal blanket on Atlantis’s left orbital- maneuvering-system pod. The thermal blanket had loosened during launch. Together, Olivas and Reilly also finished retracting the old solar panels.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Thomas H. Maugh II, “Cosmonauts Reboot Space Station Computers,” Los Angeles Times, 16 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Complete To-Do List on Shuttle, Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 16 June 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani conducted their third spacewalk in 15 days, to connect a second set of ammonia-coolant lines to the Harmony module, to finish reconnecting the station-to-Shuttle power-transfer system, and to carry out a second inspection of the ISS’s right-side SARJ. According to ISS Flight Director J. Derek Hassmann, the SARJ inspection revealed significant and widespread “race ring damage and particulate that was consistent with the damage Daniel M. Tani observed” in late October. The astronauts also prepared Harmony’s right-side port for the upcoming attachment of the Columbus laboratory. On the ground, JSC flight controllers checked out electrical- and cooling-system connections in preparation for fully activating Harmony.(William Harwood, “Successful Spacewalk Ends as Harmony Activation Proceeds,” Spaceflight Now, 26 November 2007.)
NASA issued a statement in support of astronaut Daniel M. Tani and his family. Tani, stationed at the ISS, had lost his mother on 19 December when she died in an automobile accident. NASA spokesperson Eileen M. Hawley remarked that NASA believed this was the first time an American astronaut had lost a family member while on a mission in space. The statement indicated that NASA intended to provide Tani and his family with any assistance they needed. Hawley explained that NASA did not have a prescribed policy for emergencies such as this and would respond according to Tani’s wishes.(NASA, “NASA Statement on the Death of Astronaut Dan Tani’s Mother,” news release 07-282, 20 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07282_Mike_Coays_Statement.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Mark Carreau and Carol Christian, “Space Station Astronaut’s Mom Dies in Car Wreck,” Houston Chronicle, 20 December 2007.)
Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski and Douglas H. Wheelock embarked on the first EVA of STS-120. The astronauts installed the Harmony module in a temporary location; prepared the P6 truss for relocation, a task that NASA had scheduled for the second EVA; retrieved a failed radio-communications antenna; and secured one of Harmony’s window covers, which had opened during launch. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 14 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120 (23rd Space Station Flight) Discovery,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/216375main_ STS-120.pdf (accessed 29 September 2010).)
for designing the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon and, eventually, to transport human explorers to Mars. Gilbrech had joined NASA in 1991 and had played a key role in helping NASA solve the problem of the Shuttle’s dangerous foam debris, which had caused the Columbia tragedy in 2003. Griffin also named Robert D. Cabana, Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC in Houston since 2004, to replace Gilbrech as Director of NASA’s SSC, where he would oversee all operations of NASA’s primary center for rocket-propulsion testing and of the Applied Research and Technology Project Office. NASA had selected Cabana as an astronaut in 1985. He had flown twice as a Space Shuttle pilot and twice as a Shuttle commander, accumulating more than 1,000 hours in space.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Announces Senior Leadership Appointments,” news release 07-175, 10 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07175_Gilbrech_Cabana.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Mark Carreau, “NASA Names New Leader for Moon Exploration,” Houston Chronicle, 12 August 2007.)
Aeronautical engineer Jerome B. Hammack, who was one of the seven inventors of NASA’s Mercury capsule and had been instrumental in creating the recovery team to retrieve Mercury astronauts from the ocean, died of cancer at the age of 85. After playing a key role in the Mercury program, NASA’s first human space program, Hammack had carried out similar duties in the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, and Shuttle projects. In 1958 Hammack had joined National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor organization, and, in the early 1960s, he had been one of the 35-member group that came to Houston to establish the institution that became NASA’s JSC.(Lynwood Abram, “Hammack, Helped [Design] Vehicles for Space Program,” Houston Chronicle, 24 August 2007.)
Timothy Shank, a researcher on board the Alvin submersible, located 2.5 kilometers (1.5 miles) deep in the Pacific Ocean, placed a telephone call to Sunita L. Williams, a NASA astronaut
Over a period of 6 hours and 56 minutes, Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the 100th spacewalk for ISS construction. The astronauts focused on inspecting two devices related to the power-generating solar arrays—the SARJ and the beta gimbal assembly (BGA) on the starboard side. Both devices had malfunctioned. The spacewalk, a so-called fact-finding mission, sought to determine what had caused the SARJ to shed metal filings and the BGA to trip circuit breakers. Whitson and Tani found widespread contamination inside the gear that rotates the SARJ. They also retrieved a set of bearings—one of 12 on the joint—suspected of being a source of the contamination. They used orange Kempton tape to take samples of the metal filings. The astronauts found no damage to the cables and other hardware on the BGA joint, which had suffered triple electrical failures on 8 December. During this EVA, Whitson, who had already made history as the first female commander of the ISS, surpassed Sunita L. William’s spacewalking record to set a new record for women in space, at 32 hours and 36 minutes.
U.S. astronauts Patrick G. Forrester and Steven R. Swanson undertook a 7-hour-and-16-minute spacewalk to assist with the retraction of a 115-foot-long (35-meter-long) solar panel that crew had installed on the ISS seven years before. The retraction was essential to the successful activation of the new solar power module because the old solar array was preventing the pair of arrays on the new module from rotating as they tracked the Sun. Shuttle Commander Frederick W. Sturckow and the ISS crew attempted to initiate the retraction using remote commands, but the panel failed to fold correctly. During the spacewalk, Forrester and Swanson rode on the tip of the ISS’s robotic arm to the top of the space station, carrying tools that enabled them to smooth the array folds and to straighten obstructing wire guides. Although, after 2 hours, the panel had only retracted partially, Forrester and Swanson returned to the new power module to work on the 2,500-pound (1,134-kilogram) solar alpha rotary joint (SARJ). The astronauts planned to resume their efforts to retract the panel the following day. Because another Shuttle crew had encountered difficulties retracting an array in December 2006, Forrester and Swanson had trained extensively before their mission, learning to address problems with the solar-array retraction.(John Johnson Jr., “Spacewalkers Face Workaday Glitches,” Los Angeles Times, 14 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Solar Panel Keeps Shuttle Spacewalkers Busy,” Houston Chronicle, 14 June 2007; Robyn Shelton, “Astronauts Tame Stubborn Solar Array,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 14 June 2007.)
The Soyuz craft carrying Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Oleg V. Kotov, and Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor landed at 6:36 a.m. (EDT), more than 200 miles (322 kilometers) west of the designated landing site in Kazakhstan. The craft, returning from the ISS, had veered off course, causing the crew to experience higher than normal gravity load during the descent. The steep off-course landing was similar to the Soyuz incident in May 2003. However, this time, Russian crews were able to locate the Soyuz crew quickly. Medical tests showed that none of the three space travelers had experienced injuries and that all were in good condition. The two Russian cosmonauts were returning from a six-month assignment at the ISS, and Muszaphar, Malaysia’s first astronaut, was returning from 10 days aboard the station conducting scientific research.
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronauts—a Russian, an American, and a Malaysian—to the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysia’s first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, “Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station,” 11 October 2007.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely at NASA’s KSC after the 13-day STS-118 assembly mission to the ISS. Although the Shuttle had sustained damage during launch, including a small gouge in the protective tile on the orbiter’s underside, inspections during orbit had revealed no critical damage to the craft, and NASA managers had declared Endeavour’s thermal protection system safe for reentry. Endeavour had landed a day early because of NASA’s concern about Hurricane Dean. The hurricane had ultimately followed a track that did not threaten Houston, the home of NASA’s Mission Control. During the mission, Canadian astronaut Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams had undertaken three of the four spacewalks of STS-118, setting a new spacewalking record for Canada. Williams had surpassed the record held by Canadian Chris A. Hadfield, who had performed two EVAs during a single mission in 2001.(NASA, “Shuttle Endeavour Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-177, 21 August 2007; Andy Blatchford, “Canadian’s Record Spacewalk,” Toronto Star, 19 August 2007; Traci Watson, “Shuttle Coming Home Early as Dean Nears,” USA Today, 20 August 2007.)
NASA released the findings of two reviews examining the medical and behavioral health assessment of astronauts. Following the arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February 2007, NASA had requested that an independent external committee conduct a comprehensive review of the health services available to astronauts. Commander of the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine Richard E. Bachmann Jr. had chaired the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee, composed of representatives from eight federal agencies. The Review Committee suggested that NASA examine the structure of the Astronaut Office. In addition, the
Associate Administrator for NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missions—STS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASA’s efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitz’s resignation, praising the former astronaut’s tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASA’s decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttle’s reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, “Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA,” news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, “Scott J. ‘Doc’ Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former),” http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family,” Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
Florida police released on bail Lisa M. Nowak, a NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy captain. The police had arrested Nowak the day before, after she threatened Colleen M. Shipman, a captain in the U.S. Air Force. Nowak had perceived Shipman as a romantic rival. NASA placed Nowak on 30-day leave and removed her from her mission duties. Nowak had flown her only mission as a crew member on STS-121 in July 2006, aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. NASA spokesperson Nicole Cloutier-Lemasters explained that, according to its past policy, NASA had screened crew members assigned to the ISS, before, during, and after missions, but had not screened Shuttle crews flying for two-week stints. Although Cloutier-Lemasters said that NASA did not plan to conduct an investigation of Nowak, NASA’s Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that NASA had begun a review of its screening policy. NASA hoped to determine whether it had overlooked indications for concern in Nowak’s case. Dale explained that NASA intended the review process to reveal whether or not astronauts were receiving adequate psychological and medical care and attention.(Mike Schneider and Erin McClam, “Astronaut Charged with Attempted Murder,” Associated Press, 7 February 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronaut’s Arrest Spurs Review of NASA Testing,” New York Times, 8 February 2007.)
NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC) and Virgin Galactic signed a MOU, providing a framework to explore potential collaborations, such as developing spacesuits, heat shields for spacecraft, hybrid rocket motors, and hypersonic vehicles. The press also reported that the MOU included provisions for training NASA astronauts, for NASA to buy seats on a Virgin Galactic flight, and for NASA to provide technical advice to Virgin Galactic; however; these provisions were not, in fact, part of the agreement. A newly formed organization in the NASA Research Park at Ames—NASA’s Space Portal—had enabled the negotiation with Virgin Galactic to help NASA promote the development of the commercial space economy.(NASA, “NASA, Virgin Galactic To Explore Future Cooperation,” news release 07-49, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07049_Virgin_Galactic.html (accessed 14 October 2009); NASA, “NASA Provides Additional Information on Agreement with Virgin Galactic,” news release 07-50, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07050_Virgin_Galactic_info.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Associated Press, “NASA, Virgin Galactic Sign Agreement,” 22 February 2007; Matthew Moore, “Virgin Galactic To Train NASA Astronauts,” Daily Telegraph (London), 22 February 2007.)
NASA announced modifications to the ISS contract with Roskosmos. The US$719 million modified contract covered crew rotations for 15 crew members—six in 2009, six in 2010, and three in 2011—as well as the delivery and removal of 5.6 tonnes (6.2 tons) of cargo. The modification also included NASA’s purchase of a Russian Docking Cargo Module flight in 2010, which would carry 1.4 tonnes (1.5 tons) of NASA cargo to the ISS, and the purchase of a flight opportunity in 2009, which would allow an astronaut from one of the ISS partner nations to
NASA announced the names of the committee members tasked with conducting a comprehensive review of the health care systems and medical policies that NASA provided for the benefit of astronauts, as well as the standards and certification NASA required of astronauts. The review included an examination of behavioral health care services available to astronauts. To chair the group of external experts, NASA named Richard E. Bachmann Jr. of the U.S. Air Force, an expert in aerospace medicine with experience providing medical support to people conducting operations in extreme environments. NASA appointed James M. Duncan, NASA Chief of Space Medicine, and Wayne R. Frazier, an executive from the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, to serve on the committee in an ex officio capacity. The arrest of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak in February had prompted the review.(NASA, “NASA Announces Medical Review Team Members,” news release 07-75, 26 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07075_Medical_Review_Members.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Jeanna Bryner, “NASA Sets Team To Review Astronaut Mental Healthcare,” Space.com, 26 March 2007, http://www.space. com/news/070326_nasa_healthcare.html (accessed 27 January 2010).)
NASA announced the completion of its Systems Requirement Review (SRR) of the Orion crew exploration vehicle (CEV), marking the first major milestone in Orion’s engineering process. In conducting the review of Orion’s requirements data set, NASA scientists and engineers had discussed more than 1,700 topics, covering all aspects of Orion’s performance, design, and qualifications. The SRR would provide a baseline for the design, development, construction, and safe operation of the spacecraft that NASA would use to carry astronauts beyond Earth orbit. In November 2006, NASA had completed an overall review of requirements for the Constellation Program, which also included the Ares launch vehicles and systems for the human exploration of planetary surfaces.(NASA, “NASA Completes Key Review of Orion Spacecraft,” news release 07-58, 7 March 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07058_Orion_SRR.html (accessed October 14, 2009); Jefferson Morris, “Baseline Requirements Completed by NASA for Orion,” Aviation Week, 9 March 2007; “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft One Step Closer to Assembly,” Aero-News Network, 9 March 2007.)
2,423.09 kilograms) two Solar Alpha Rotary Joints that allow the ISS’s solar arrays to follow the Sun. Although an astronaut had lost an untethered tool belt during the first spacewalk, the repairs appeared to have been successful. Astronaut Gregory E. Chamitoff, who had been aboard the ISS for over five months, had returned to Earth on board Endeavour. Sandra H. Magnus had replaced Chamitoff on the ISS. She expected to stay until February 2009.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 08-315, 30 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-315_Endeavour_lands.html (accessed 22 August 2011); Robert Z. Pearlman, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Lands Safely in California,” Space.com, 30 November 2008, http://www.space.com/6180-space-shuttle-endeavour-lands-safely-california.html (accessed 22 August 2011); James Dean, “Endeavour Voyage Ends in California,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 December 2008.)
NASA announced that William W. Parsons would be resigning as Director of NASA’s KSC to pursue opportunities in the private sector. Parsons had begun his career with NASA in 1990. He had served in numerous positions, including Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC), Launch Site Support Manager, Manager of the Space Station Hardware Integration Office, Chief of Operations of the Propulsion Test Directorate, SSP Manager, and Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC. NASA had selected former astronaut Robert D. Cabana as the new Director of NASA’S KSC. Cabana, who had completed his astronaut training in 1986, had flown on four Space Shuttle missions: STS-41 in October 1990, STS-53 in December 1992, STS-65 in July 1994, and STS-88 in December 1988. Additionally, he had served as Director of NASA’s SSC, Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC, Chief of NASA’s Astronaut Office, Manager of International Operations of the ISS Program, Director of NASA’s Human Spaceflight Program in Russia, Deputy Director of the ISS Program, and Director of Flight Crew Operations.(NASA, “Cabana To Succeed Parsons as Kennedy Space Center Director,” news release 08-249, 30 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08-249_Parsons_leaves.html (accessed 25 July 2011). 123 Brian Berger, “Bush Signs NASA Budget, Soyuz Waiver into Law,” Space.com, 5 October 2008, http://www. space.com/5929-bush-signs-nasa-budget-soyuz-waiver-law.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
NASA’s Lunar Science Institute, along with nine other international space agencies, signed a statement of intent to consider participating in the International Lunar Network (ILN), a cooperative effort to install mobile science stations on the Moon. The stations would replace the technology that NASA astronauts had placed on the lunar surface during the Apollo program. The signing of the statement took place in the course of a four-day NASA Lunar Science Conference at NASA’s ARC. The conference had gathered approximately 500 scientists, from Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States, to discuss the future of lunar exploration. Although scientists from the participating agencies planned to refine the ILN concept, the agencies expected to make initial decisions regarding communications standards and potential landing sites, and to select a set of scientifically equivalent core instruments to perform specific measurements.(NASA, “NASA Hosts International Meeting for Lunar Science Discussions,” new release 08-190, 29 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08190_NASA_hosts_ILN.html (accessed 18 May 2011); David Perlman, “Scientists Swap Moon, Mars Exploration Plans,” San Francisco Chronicle, 22 July 2008.)
John S. Bull, a member of NASA’s original class of 19 astronauts, died at the age of 73. He had never flown in space. Bull had begun to train as an astronaut in 1966. In early 1967, NASA had chosen him as a member of the crew of LTA-8, a thermal-vacuum test of the Moon lander. However, sinus problems had prevented him from participating in the mission. In November 1967, NASA had selected Bull for the support crew of the Apollo 8 mission. However, he had resigned from the astronaut corps in July 1968 because he had a rare pulmonary disorder. Bull had obtained a Master’s degree and a PhD from Stanford University, returning to NASA in 1973. He had performed flight-test research at NASA’s ARC until 1986 and had then managed NASA- wide research programs in autonomous systems technology for space applications, until his retirement in 1989.(Collectspace.com, “John S. Bull, Former NASA Astronaut, Dies,” 14 August 2008, http://www.collectspace.com/ news/news-081408a.html (accessed 15 July 2011).)
A Russian Soyuz TMA-12 passenger-transport craft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 12:17 (UT), marking the beginning of the ISS’s Expedition 17 mission. The Soyuz carried Russian cosmonauts, Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko, and South Korean astronaut So-yeon Yi. Yi, the first South Korean to enter space, would stay on the ISS for only 10 days, conducting experiments. She would then return to Earth with the departing Expedition 16 crew members, aboard a Soyuz TMA-11 that had been docked at the ISS since October 2007. Kononenko was Expedition 17’s Flight Engineer, and Volkov was the mission’s Commander. Volkov was the son of cosmonaut Alexander A. Volkov, making this launch the first occasion of a second-generation cosmonaut or astronaut traveling to space. The third member of the expedition, American astronaut Garrett E. Reisman, was already aboard the ISS. Over the course of six months, the crew of Expedition 17 planned to install the large Japanese Kibo laboratory, supervise the undocking of ESA’s Jules Verne ATV, and complete at least one spacewalk.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654, 1 May 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx654.html (accessed 17 February 2011); Clara Moskowitz, “New Station Crew, Korean Astronaut Rocket Into Space,” Space.com, 8 April 2008, http://www.space.com/5217-station-crew-korean-astronaut-rocket-space.html (accessed 3 March 2011).)
NASA announced that astronaut Carl E. Walz would leave his position to take a job in the private sector. NASA had selected Walz as an astronaut in January 1990. He had flown on four Space Shuttle missions, spending a cumulative 231 days in space. Walz had flown on STS-51 in September 1993. During that mission, he had undertaken a 7-hour spacewalk. On July 1994, he had flown on STS-65; and, in September 1996, on STS-79. In December 2001, he had flown to the ISS on Expedition 4. During that expedition, he had taken two spacewalks. Walz had also served in a variety of technical and managerial positions in the NASA Astronaut Office. At the time of his resignation, he had been serving as Director for the Advanced Capabilities Division in the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate at NASA Headquarters.(NASA, “Veteran Astronaut Carl Walz Leaves NASA,” news release 08-318, 4 December 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-318_Walz_Leaves.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
A Russian Soyuz rocket lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 07:01 (UT), ferrying an American space tourist and two Expedition 18 crew members to the ISS. Tourist Richard A. Garriott was the son of former astronaut Owen K. Garriott, who had been a crew member of Skylab 3 in 1973. Garriott had reached a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos to spend nine days aboard the ISS and to return to Earth with the Expedition 17 crew on 23 October 2008. The Expedition 18 crew, consisting of Commander E. Michael Fincke of NASA and Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, would replace two members of the Expedition 17 crew, Russian cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko. The third crew member, Russian cosmonaut Gregory E. Chamitoff, had arrived at the ISS in June 2008 and planned to stay until November 2008. The main goal of Expedition 17 was to prepare the ISS to accommodate six crew members on long-duration missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, “New Crew Blasts Off for International Space Station,” news release 08-257, 12 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-257_X18_Launch.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC at 11:15 (EDT), completing Mission STS-124 to the ISS. The crew included NASA astronauts, Commander Mark E. Kelly, Kenneth T. Ham, Michael E. Fossum, Karen L. Nyberg, Ronald J. Garan Jr., and Garrett E. Reisman, and Akihiko Hoshide of JAXA. Reisman was returning to Earth after almost three months aboard the ISS. Gregory E. Chamitoff had taken his place aboard the ISS. The astronauts had transported the second room of JAXA’s Kibo laboratory, the JPM, to the ISS. During the course of the 14-day mission, the crew had conducted three spacewalks. They had installed the JPM, which was approximately the size of a bus, along with its robotic arm. In addition, they had installed in its permanent position the laboratory’s logistics module, which had been in a temporary location since March 2008.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 08-150, 14 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08150_discovery_lands.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
In the final planned spacewalk for the Expedition 16 mission aboard the ISS, Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani successfully replaced the Bearing Motor Roll Ring Module, a motor on the starboard side of the ISS that had been malfunctioning since early December. The defect had caused the station’s solar panels to fail to pivot toward the Sun, reducing the ISS’s supply of electricity and threatening to compromise the ISS’s ability to support future Shuttle missions. The 7-hour spacewalk suffered a minor setback when a communication failure left the astronauts briefly without direct contact with Mission Control in Houston. Because of the risk of electrical shock while in contact with the panels, Whitson and Tani had to perform the repair work carefully. They were only able to work during the 33-minute intervals when the Earth eclipsed the Sun during the ISS’s rotation around the Earth. The astronauts completed the motor replacement in time to inspect an additional problem with the starboard solar panels—damage to gears from metal debris. Whitson and Tani collected samples of the debris to use in determining future repair plans.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Bring Space Station a Step Closer to Full Power,” Space.com, 30 January 2008, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/080130-expedition16-eva5-wrap.html (accessed 9 December 2008).)
A SpaceX Falcon 1 rocket failed, at approximately 2 minutes and 20 seconds after its launch at 03:34 (UT) from the U.S. Army’s Reagan Missile Test Site on Omelek Island in the Kwajalein Atoll. SpaceX executives explained that unanticipated residual thrust from the Merlin engine had caused the first stage of the rocket to collide with the second stage, as the second stage began to fire. The rocket’s two stages and its payload were destroyed in the Pacific Ocean. The Falcon 1’s cargo included a Department of Defense Trailblazer demonstration satellite; NASA’s NanoSail- D, a solar propulsion experiment; and NASA’s small automated laboratory PRESat. Additionally, the rocket carried the ashes of 208 people who had paid the company Celestis to launch their remains into space. The ashes of astronaut L. Gordon Cooper Jr. were on board. SpaceX officials stated that they would be able to prevent a similar launch failure from happening in the future by adding 1.5 seconds to the Falcon 1’s separation sequence.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 658, 1 September 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx658.html (accessed 8 July 2011); John Schwartz, “Launch of Private Rocket Fails; Three Satellites Were Onboard,” New York Times, 4 August 2008; Tariq Malik, “SpaceX Traces Third Rocket Failure to Timing Error,” Space.com, 7 August 2008, http://www.space.com/5707-spacex-traces-rocket-failure-timing-error.html (accessed 21 July 2011).)
Chandrayaan 1, India’s first lunar satellite, launched at 00:52 (UT), aboard a PSLV-C11 rocket from Sriharikota, India. The 1.4-tonne (1,400-kilogram or 3,086.47-pound) spacecraft was on a two-year mission to map the lunar surface. It carried 11 scientific instruments: five instruments from India, three from ESA, two from NASA, and one from Bulgaria. NASA’s instruments were the Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) and Mini Synthetic Aperture Radar (Mini-SAR). M3 was an imaging spectrometer that would create the first map of the Moon’s entire surface at high spatial and spectral resolution. Because the map would show the mineral content of the lunar surface, scientists could use it to understand the geological origin and development of the Moon and the terrestrial planets. Additionally, lunar astronauts could use the map to locate water or other resources. Mini-SAR, an imaging radar, would map the permanently shadowed polar regions, helping scientists learn about possible locations of water ice and the nature of objects that hit the Moon. NASA’s ground tracking station at the Johns Hopkins University APL would provide space-communications support to Chandrayaan 1.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, “NASA Returns to the Moon with Instruments on Indian Spacecraft,” news release 08-263, 20 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-263_NASA_on_Chandrayaan-1.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched at 00:55 (UT) from NASA’s KSC with a crew of seven astronauts and a cargo of 32,000 pounds (14,514.96 kilograms) of supplies. The crew reported seeing debris falling during the seconds after liftoff; however, they saw no evidence of damage to the Space Shuttle. The main goal of Mission STS-126 was to make improvements to the ISS that would expand its housing capacity from a crew of three to a crew of six. The astronauts planned to install additional sleeping quarters, equipment for generating oxygen, a resistance exercise device, an additional toilet, and a system for purifying fluids—including urine—into drinking water. Additionally, officials had scheduled four spacewalks, primarily to clean and lubricate the two Solar Alpha Rotary Joints, which allow the ISS’s solar arrays to track the Sun. The STS-126 crew, commanded by Christopher J. Ferguson, included Pilot Eric A. Boe, and Mission Specialists Stephen G. Bowen, Robert S. Kimbrough, Sandra H. Magnus, Donald R. Pettit, and Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 661, 1 December 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx661.html (accessed 22 August 2011); NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Launches on Home Improvement Mission,” news release 08- 294, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-294_STS126_launch.html (accessed 22 August 2011); John Schwartz, “Shuttle Departs with Gear for Space Station,” New York Times, 15 November 2008.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to the Houston-based firm Oceaneering International for the design, development, and production of a new line of spacesuits for the Constellation Program. Under the new contract, NASA would order 109 spacesuits for astronauts to use on voyages to the ISS and, later, to the Moon. The cost-plus-award-fee contract included a basic performance period and two contract options. The basic performance period of the contract included the design, manufacture, and first flight of the suit components. Valued at US$183.8 million, the basic performance period would run from June 2008 to September 2014. Option 1, the development and testing of the components of a spacesuit for use on the Moon’s surface, had a value of US$302 million and would run from October 2010 through September 2018. Option 2, the production of the Orion suit, had a value of US$260 million and would run from October 2014 through September 2018. NASA also announced the subcontractors for the Constellation Program: Air-Lock of Milford, Connecticut; David Clark of Worcester, Massachusetts; Cimarron Software Services of Houston, Texas; Harris Corporation of Palm Bay, Florida; Honeywell International of Glendale, Arizona; Paragon Space Development of Tucson, Arizona; and United Space Alliance of Houston. Oceaneering International had competed for the contract against Explorations Systems and Technology, which was a joint venture of Hamilton Sundstrand and ILC Dover. Hamilton Sundstrand had been the primary contractor providing NASA’s spacesuits since the 1960s.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Constellation Spacesuit for the Moon,” news release C08-037, 12 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_C08037_Constellation_Spacesuit.html (accessed 12 June 2011); Associated Press, “Oceaneering International Awarded Contract for New Spacesuit,” 12 June 2008.)
Atlantis landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at 14:08 (UT) after a 13-day journey to the ISS, successfully completing the Shuttle mission STS-122, to deliver and install ESA’s microgravity science laboratory Columbus. The seven-member crew included American astronauts Stephen N. Frick, Alan G. Poindexter, Leland D. Melvin, Rex J. Walheim, and Stanley G. Love, and ESA astronauts Hans W. Schlegel and Léopold Eyharts. The mission had begun with a 19:45 (UT) launch on 7 February 2008 from KSC and had included three spacewalks. Crew members had docked the Columbus laboratory to the Harmony module of the ISS; installed power, data, and cooling cables to the laboratory; replaced a spent nitrogen tank; placed two science experiments on the laboratory’s exterior; retrieved a broken gyroscope; installed a solar monitor; and positioned the European Technology Exposure Facility. STS-122 had also exchanged Eyharts for American astronaut Daniel M. Tani, who had been aboard the ISS for almost four months.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 652; NASA, “Shuttle Atlantis Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 08-061, 20 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08061_Atlantis_Lands.html (accessed 28 December 2010).)
NASA announced astronaut James F. Reilly’s resignation from NASA to pursue a career in the private sector. Reilly had been an astronaut since 1994. During his first mission, in January 1998, he had flown aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-89 to Mir. In 2001 he had participated in the STS-104 flight of Atlantis to the ISS. On that mission, he had made three spacewalks to install a joint airlock on the ISS. On his final flight, Mission STS-117 in 2007, he had again flown aboard Atlantis to the ISS, making two additional spacewalks to perform construction and maintenance on the ISS. During his career as an astronaut, Reilly had logged more than 853 hours in space and more than 31 hours of spacewalking.
A Russian Soyuz spacecraft landed in Kazakhstan at 10:37 p.m. (CDT), returning space tourist Richard A. Garriott and cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko from the ISS. Garriott, who had been the sixth tourist to visit the ISS, had lifted off for the ISS with two American astronauts on 12 October 2008. Commander Volkov and Flight Engineer Kononenko had served 197 days aboard the ISS on the Expedition 17 mission, performing two spacewalks. During their mission, NASA’s Space Shuttle had visited the ISS to deliver a Japanese laboratory. The Expedition 18 crew, American Commander E. Michael Fincke and Russian Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, had replaced Volkov and Kononenko on the ISS.(Tariq Malik, “New Space Station Crew Takes Charge,” Space.com, 22 October 2008, http://www.space.com/ 6011-space-station-crew-takes-charge.html (accessed 11 August 2011); NASA, “Expedition 17 Crew Returns from International Space Station,” news release 08-269, 23 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/ HQ_08-269_Expedition_17_landing.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 21:02 (UT), commencing Mission STS- 124 to the ISS. During liftoff, observers noticed pieces of insulating foam falling from Discovery’s external fuel tank; however, NASA officials stated that they were not worried about the foam, since it had fallen after the time when it could have damaged the spacecraft. Seven crew members were aboard the Space Shuttle, including American astronauts, Commander Mark E. Kelly, Pilot Kenneth T. Ham, Gregory E. Chamitoff, Michael E. Fossum, Ronald J. Garan Jr., and Karen L. Nyberg, and Japanese astronaut Akihiko Hoshide. During the mission, the astronauts planned to repair a broken toilet on the ISS and to install on the Japanese Kibo laboratory a new, 16-tonne (16,000-kilogram or 35,273-pound) room, known as the Japanese Pressurized Module (JPM). The astronauts planned three spacewalks. In addition to installing the JPM, they intended to clean a damaged power-supply rotary joint and to perform routine maintenance. NASA planned for the mission to last for 14 days. Garrett E. Reisman, who had been aboard the ISS since March 2008, would return to Earth with the STS-124 crew, and Chamitoff would remain aboard the ISS in his place.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 655; NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches with Japanese Laboratory,” news release 08-136, 31 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08136_STS-124_launch_release. html (accessed 16 March 2011); John Schwartz, “Shuttle Discovery Heads Toward the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 June 2008.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a sole-source contract to Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International of Windsor Locks, Connecticut, to provide a water-production system aboard the ISS. Under the terms of the contract, Hamilton Sundstrand would provide equipment that would use excess carbon dioxide and hydrogen on the ISS to produce water and methane, using a chemical process called a Sabatier reaction. The ISS’s waste-water system would treat the water produced in this process, so that the astronauts could use it for drinking, washing, preparing food, generating oxygen, and cooling electronic equipment. NASA planned to send the equipment to the ISS aboard mission STS-130, scheduled for launch in 2009. Officials hoped that the water-production system would pave the way for other new technologies that NASA could use in future missions traveling too far from the Earth for routine resupply. The contract represented a change in NASA’s business arrangements. Instead of purchasing the hardware for water production, NASA had contracted only for the production of services. The contractor had agreed to be responsible for all system development and performance. The contract, which 47 would extend through 30 September 2014, could reach a value of as much as US$65 million.
In their second spacewalk in five days, Russian cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko left the ISS to undertake a spacewalk in which they set up a docking target and worked on two scientific experiments. The ISS partners had originally scheduled the tasks for the 10 July 2008 spacewalk, but officials had postponed those activities to allow time for the removal of an explosive bolt on a Soyuz spacecraft. During the walk, which lasted nearly 6 hours, Volkov and Kononenko placed a docking target on the side of the Zvezda module, in preparation for the scheduled arrival in 2009 of a new airlock, the Mini-Research Module 2 (MRM2). The astronauts then installed a physics experiment called Vsplesk, which would study the effects of high-energy particle streams near Earth. The cosmonauts also retrieved the payload of the Biorisk experiment, which had studied the effects of space radiation and zero gravity on microorganisms. Additionally, they made an impromptu repair of a ham-radio antenna.(Jeremy Hsu, “Cosmonauts’ Second Spacewalk Goes Smoothly,” Space.com, 16 July 2008, http://www.space.com/ 5630-cosmonauts-spacewalk-smoothly.html (accessed 26 May 2011).)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 110-329, the Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance and Continuing Appropriations Act for 2009, which included language renewing through July 2016 NASA’s waiver from the Iran-North Korea-Syria Nonproliferation Act (INKSNA). The terms of INKSNA, as enacted in 2000, barred U.S. government agencies from making “extraordinary payments” to Russia, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. Under these terms, NASA would be unable to purchase transport on Soyuz spacecraft. In 2005 Congress had enacted legislation granting NASA a waiver from INKSNA through January 2012, allowing NASA to negotiate a US$700 million contract for occasional flights to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. However, that contract would expire in 2011, and Congress needed to renew the waiver before NASA could begin negotiating a new contract. NASA would need to purchase Soyuz vehicles to transport American, Canadian, European and Japanese astronauts to the ISS during the period between the retirement of the Space Shuttle Program (SSP), scheduled for 2010, and the first flights of the Constellation Program, scheduled for 2015.
Warner K. Dahm, the last of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team to retire from NASA, died at age 90 in Huntsville, Alabama. A German aerodynamics expert, Dahm had joined von Braun’s program during World War II and had later come to the United States with his colleagues to assist in developing American rocketry. He had worked at NASA first as a member of the team for Operation Paperclip in Texas and later at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Over the years, Dahm had lent his expertise to the design of the V-2 and Wasserfall anti-aircraft rockets, the Redstone rocket, the Jupiter ballistic missile, Saturn 1, Saturn 1B, the Saturn-5 rocket that flew America’s first astronauts to the Moon, Skylab, and the Space Shuttle Transportation System. In 2006, at the age of 89, he had retired from his position as Chief 5 Aerodynamicist at Marshall. Dahm had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 2003.
Endeavour landed at NASA’s KSC at 20:39 (EDT), completing STS-123. The Shuttle had lifted off from NASA’s KSC on 11 March 2008 at 02:28 (EDT) with seven astronauts on board, including Takao Doi, from Japan, and Americans, Dominic L. Pudwill Gorie, Gregory H. Johnson, Robert L. Behnken, Michael J. Foreman, Richard M. Linnehan, and Garrett E. Reisman. Reisman had remained aboard the ISS, replacing ESA astronaut Léopold Eyharts, who had returned with the Endeavour crew. The 16-day mission was the longest Shuttle trip ever made to the ISS. STS-123 also broke a record for the number of spacewalks in a single mission. During five spacewalks, the astronauts had installed the first section of the Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency’s (JAXA’s) Kibo science experiment laboratory; installed CSA’s robotic arm, known as Dextre; handed over a Shuttle inspection boom; examined a jammed solar-wing joint; and tested thermal tiles.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Begins Mission to the Space Station,” new release 08-077, 11 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08077_Endeavour_launch.html (accessed 13 January 2011); NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 08-090, 26 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08089_Endeavor_Lands.html (accessed 13 January 2008); Liz Austin Peterson, “Shuttle Aims for Wednesday Night Landing,” Associated Press, 26 March 2008.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 1:25 p.m. (PST), returning seven astronauts from a 16-day mission to the ISS. While aboard the ISS, crew members had unloaded over 7 tons (6.35 tonnes or 6,350.29 kilograms) of cargo from Endeavour; set up a refrigerator, exercise machine, two sleep stations, and a rack for science experiments; and activated a recycling system to turn astronauts’ urine and perspiration into potable water. The crew of Endeavour brought back samples so that NASA scientists could test the water before NASA approved the system for use. Astronauts Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn- Piper, Stephen G. Bowen, and Robert S. Kimbrough had conducted four spacewalks to repair the
NASA announced that Armadillo Aerospace of Rockwell, Texas, had won a US$350,000 prize during the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander Challenge in Las Cruces, New Mexico. Sponsored by NASA’s Centennial Challenges program and managed by the X Prize Foundation, the Lunar Lander Challenge was a two-level competition to foster innovation in commercial space technology. Armadillo had won the first level with a vehicle demonstrating some of the technologies that a lunar lander would require to transport payloads or astronauts between lunar orbit and the lunar surface. Armadillo’s vehicle had risen to a height of 50 meters (164.04 feet); traveled to a landing pad 100 meters (328.08 feet) away, while staying in the air for at least 90 seconds; landed; and later repeated the flight. Armadillo’s attempt at Level Two, which was more challenging, had not succeeded, leaving US$1.65 million in unawarded prize money that NASA would make available for future competitions. In the past, the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander Challenge had been a key event at the X Prize Cup; however, the X Prize Foundation had dramatically scaled back X Prize Cup events in 2008, because of budgetary constraints and scheduling conflicts.(NASA, “NASA $350,000 Prize Goes to Armadillo Aerospace in Lunar Challenge,” new release 08-271, 27 October 2008; http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-271_Armadillo_Challenge.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Jose L. Medina, “X Prize Cup Shrinks,” Las Cruces Sun News (NM), 17 October 2008.)
George David Low, a former NASA astronaut who had flown on three Space Shuttle missions, died at the age of 52 from colon cancer. Low, who was the son of former NASA Director George M. Low, had worked at NASA’s JPL from 1980 to 1984 before NASA selected him to train as an astronaut. During his 12 years as an astronaut, Low had spent more than 714 hours in space and had circled Earth more than 540 times. After retiring as an astronaut, Low had continued to serve NASA on the Russian Integration Team and in the Legislative Affairs Office. In 1996 he had joined Orbital Sciences Corporation, and in 2006 he had become the Senior Vice President and Program Manager for Orbital’s Commercial Orbital Transportation Service program.(Joe Holley, “G. David Low, 52; Cerebral Astronaut Flew on 3 Shuttles,” Washington Post, 20 March 2008.)
ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Yuri V. Lonchakov spent 6 hours on a spacewalk outside the ISS. They installed a device, known as a Langmuir probe, to monitor the electrical field around the ISS. Russian engineers believed that electrical interference might have damaged the explosive bolts on two Soyuz spacecraft, causing the craft to experience rough flight reentries in October 2007 and April 2008. Fincke and Lonchakov also installed a Russian experiment called Impuls, retrieved the Russian microbe experiment Biorisk, and took photographs of the Russian segment of the ISS. The spacewalkers attempted to install the European biological experiment EXPOSE-R, but the experiment would not activate to relay telemetry. Russian flight controllers eventually ordered Fincke and Lonchakov to remove the experiment and to return it to the ISS. The spacewalk was the first for Lonchakov and the fifth for Fincke.(Mark Carreau, “Space Station Astronauts Finish 6-Hour Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 23 December 2008; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Add New Experiments to Space Station,” Space.com, 23 December 2008, http://www. space.com/6254-spacewalkers-add-experiments-space-station.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
The People’s Republic of China’s Shenzhou 7 successfully returned to Earth, landing in Mongolia at 09:38 (UT), in China’s third crewed mission to space. Shenzhou 7 had launched from Jiquan in Gansu Province on 25 September 2008 at 13:10 (UT), on a Long March−2F rocket, with astronauts Zhai Zhigang, Liu Boming, and Jing Haipeng on board. On 27 September 2008, Zhai had performed China’s first spacewalk, leaving the spacecraft for 20 minutes to collect a test sample of solid lubricant that engineers had attached to the outside of the craft. The spacewalk also tested Zhai’s US$4.4 million Chinese-made spacesuit. After the spacewalk, the astronauts had released an 88-pound (39.92-kilogram) satellite, which would take photographs and transmit them back to Earth. The mission marked China as the third nation, along with the United States and Russia, capable of independently launching crewed spaceflights and conducting spacewalks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 659, 1 October 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx659.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Clara Moskowitz, “China’s Third Manned Spaceflight Returns Safely to Earth,” Space.com, 28 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5904-china-manned-spaceflight-returns-safely-earth.html (accessed 27 July 2011); Chistopher Bodeen, “Chinese Cheer as Astronauts Makes [sic] First Spacewalk,” Associated Press, 28 September 2008.)
The Russian Soyuz TMA-11 landed in Kazakhstan at 04:30 (EDT), after a ballistic reentry that deposited the spacecraft approximately 295 miles (474.76 kilometers) from its intended landing location. NASA officials explained that, in a ballistic reentry, a spacecraft reenters Earth’s atmosphere at an angle steeper than normal, subjecting the astronauts to higher gravitational forces. Russian officials pledged to investigate the cause of the rough landing. The crew members on board—Peggy A. Whitson, Yuri I. Malenchenko, and So-yeon Yi—did not report any injuries from the incident. The three crew members were returning to Earth after completing Expedition 16 to the ISS. Yi, South Korea’s first astronaut, had been aboard the ISS for 10 days, conducting experiments. Whitson, an American astronaut, had served as the first female commander of the ISS. During this mission, she had set the record for the most cumulative time an American had spent in space. Malenchenko, a Russian cosmonaut, had been Flight Engineer for Expedition 16. During the busy mission, lasting six months, crew members had conducted a wide variety of scientific experiments. During seven spacewalks, they had attached new modules to the ISS, repaired damages to the station, and received three visits from the Shuttle and one visit from ESA’s unpiloted cargo ship Jules Verne.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Land Off-Target, But Safely,” Space.com, 19 April 2008, http://www.space.com/5262-space-station-astronauts-land-target-safely.html (accessed 3 March 2011); NASA, “Expedition 16 Soyuz Lands Safely in Kazakhstan,” news release 08-105, 19 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/apr/HQ_08105_Exp_16_lands.html (accessed 17 February 2011).)
Harrison “Jack” H. Schmitt, a scientist, former astronaut, and former U.S. Senator, announced that he was resigning as Chair of the NASA Advisory Council. The NASA Advisory Council, a panel of experts in various fields, advised the NASA Administrator on major policy. Since becoming Chair in November 2005, Schmitt had led the Advisory Council in submitting over 100 recommendations to the NASA Administrator. He had been the primary advocate behind a February 2007 workshop that produced 35 scientific recommendations related to NASA’s return to the Moon and had led the Advisory Council’s efforts to build relationships fostering the use of the ISS as a national laboratory. NASA named Kenneth M. Ford as the new Advisory Council Chair. Ford had served on the Exploration Committee of the Advisory Council since June 2007. He was the founder and Director of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition. Ford had developed and directed NASA’s Center of Excellence in Information Technology at NASA’s ARC. He had also served as both Director and Associate Director of NASA’s ARC. A recipient of NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal and the Robert S. Englemore Memorial Award, Ford had served on the U.S. Air Force Science Advisory Board and the National Science Board. He was also a fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.(NASA, “Schmitt Completes NASA Advisory Council service; Ford Named Chairman,” news release 08-262, 16 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-261_Scmitt_Leaves_NAC.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC at 2:28 p.m. (EST) on STS-129, carrying nearly 30,000 pounds of replacement parts for use at the ISS. NASA had packed the spare parts inside two Express Logistics Carriers (ELCs). Astronauts would install the ELCs outside the space station on the central truss during one of the three scheduled spacewalks. Most of the spare parts, which included two steering gyroscopes, a group of tanks, pumps for the ISS cooling system, and a hand for a robotic arm, would remain packed indefinitely until a need for them arose. The STS-129 crew was composed of Commander Charles O. Hobaugh; Pilot Barry E. Wilmore; and Mission Specialists Leland D. Melvin, Michael J. Foreman, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Randolph J. Bresnik.(NASA Space Shuttle Mission Archives, “Mission STS-129: Delivering the Goods,” 4 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/sts129/launch/129_overview.html (accessed 21 November 2011); James Dean, “A ‘Picture-Perfect’ Start: Atlantis Hauls Spare Parts to International Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 November 2009.)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Mission’s 3rd and Final Spacewalk,” 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission,” 5 September 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of nine candidates, from among 3,500 applicants, to form the 2009 astronaut candidate class. The six men and three women made up the first group of astronaut recruits in five years and the twentieth class since the selection of the original Mercury astronauts in 1959. With ages ranging from 30 to 43, the group represented a mix of military and civilian recruits, including a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) technical intelligence officer, two NASA flight surgeons, a space station flight controller, a molecular biologist, two Navy test pilots, a U.S. Air Force test pilot, and the special assistant to the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the Pentagon. NASA had scheduled the start of the class’s two-year training for August 2009. With the SSP slated to end in 2010, the likelihood that any member of the 2009 class would fly aboard the Shuttle was extremely low. Therefore, the new astronauts would likely train only for ISS missions and for flight aboard the Russian Soyuz vehicles, as well as aboard the Shuttle’s replacement spacecraft.(NASA, “NASA Selects Nine New Astronauts for Future Space Exploration,” news release 09-149, 29 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-149_New_Astronauts.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA Unveils Astronaut Class that Will Never Fly on Shuttle,” Space.com, 26 June 2009, http://www. space.com/6900-nasa-unveils-astronaut-class-fly-shuttle.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
NASA astronauts David A. Wolf and Timothy L. Kopra successfully completed the first of the five spacewalks scheduled at the ISS for STS-127. Over the course of 5 hours and 32 minutes, the duo installed the 1.9-tonne (4,189-pound or 2.09-ton) Japanese Exposed Facility (JEF), with the assistance of four crew members, who operated the Canadarm2 from inside the ISS. Koichi Wakata and Douglas G. Hurley used the robotic arm to help remove the structure from the Shuttle’s cargo bay, and Julie Payette and Mark L. Polansky maneuvered it over to Kibo, the Japanese research module. NASA described the JEF as a “type of porch for experiments that require direct exposure to space.” After completing their work with JEF, Wolf and Kopra moved to the ISS truss, to work on attaching two spare-parts platforms. ISS crew had already set up one of the platforms, the Cargo Attachment System. However, during STS-119 the crew had experienced difficulty deploying a platform, when a jammed pin failed to release. Wolf and Kopra had used a new tool, built especially for the task, to unfold the platform successfully. The spacewalk was Kopra’s first and Wolf’s fifth.(Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Endeavour Astronauts Complete First Space Walk,” 19 July 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Astronauts Add Porch to Space Station,” Space.com, 18 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7007- astronauts-add-porch-space-station.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the second spacewalk of STS-128, lasting 6 hours and 39 minutes. The pair collected a new 1,700-pound (771- kilogram) ammonia tank from Discovery, attached it to the ISS, and connected the electrical and fluid lines. The new tank contained 600 pounds (272 kilograms) of fresh ammonia, which would help cool the station’s electrical systems. Olivas and Fuglesang then anchored the old ammonia tank inside Discovery in preparation for its return to Earth on the Shuttle. They had removed the old tank during their spacewalk on 1 September. The pair also had a few “get-ahead” tasks to complete. Fuglesang installed protective covers over cameras on the ISS robotic arm and positioned a portable foot restraint on a solar-power truss, to assist future assembly crews. Olivas was unable to complete his get-ahead task because a cable that he needed was not where flight controllers had expected it to be.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Spacewalk Performed Despite Approaching Space Junk,” 4 September 2009; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Spacewalkers Install Bulky Coolant Tank: Space Junk Not a Threat,” 4 September 2009; William Harwood, “Spacewalk No. 2 Complete,” Spaceflight Now, 4 September 2009.)
NASA announced that, in 2012 and 2013, it had signed a US$306 million modification to its ISS contract with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos for crew transportation and related services. According to Alexei B. Krasnov, Director of Human Flight Programs at Roscosmos, NASA would pay US$51 million per astronaut aboard the Soyuz craft. The modification covered all necessary Soyuz training and preparation for launch, crew rescue, and landing of a long- duration mission for six individual ISS crew members. The agreement covered four Soyuz launches—two in the spring of 2012 and two in the fall of 2012, with landings scheduled for the fall of 2012 and the spring of 2013—as well as postflight rehabilitation, medical exams, and services. The agreement allowed for limited cargo per person, to and from the station: 110 pounds (49.9 kilograms) launched to the ISS, 37 pounds (16.8 kilograms) returned to Earth, and 66 pounds (29.9 kilograms) of trash disposal.(NASA, “NASA Extends Contract with Russian Federal Space Agency,” contract release C09-024, 28 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_C09-024_Soyuz_Con_Mod.html (accessed 20 June 2011); RIA Novosti, “Russia To Charge NASA $51 Mln for Seats on Soyuz Spacecraft,” 29 May 2009.)
2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
NASA announced that it had successfully demonstrated the Max Launch Abort System (MLAS), an alternative system enabling astronauts to escape their launch vehicle in an emergency. In a simulated launch at 6:26 a.m. (EDT), staged at NASA’s WFF in Virginia, NASA had tested the concept—a system that could safely propel a crew away from a launch vehicle during an emergency on the launchpad or during ascent. For the Orion spacecraft, NASA had selected an LAS that used a single solid launch-abort motor. By contrast, the MLAS used four solid rocket- abort motors. The motors were inside a bullet-shaped composite fairing attached to a full-scale mockup of a crew module. For the test, NASA launched the 33-foot-high (10-meter-high) MLAS vehicle to an altitude of 1 mile (1.6 kilometers), with the demonstration beginning after the four solid-rocket motors had burned out. The mock crew module separated from the launch vehicle approximately 7 seconds into flight and parachuted into the Atlantic Ocean. The test demonstrated the unpowered flight of the MLAS along a stable trajectory; the MLAS’s reorientation and stabilization; the separation of the crew module from the abort motors; and the stabilization and parachute recovery of the crew module. The test represented NASA’s first demonstration of a passively stabilized LAS using a vehicle of this size and weight class. This was also NASA’s first attempt to acquire full-scale aero-acoustic data from a faired capsule in flight. NASA planned to use data from the parachute element to help validate the simulation tools and the techniques for developing Orion’s parachute system. The test also provided staff of NASA’s Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) with experience flight-testing a spacecraft concept.(NASA, “NASA Tests Alternate Launch Abort System for Astronaut Escape,” news release 09-156, 8 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ09_156_MLAS_launch_successful.html (accessed 10 August 2011). 98 Michael Schwirtz, “Going to Mars, But Staying Close to Home,” New York Times, 15 July 2009; Agence France- Presse, “Crew ‘Back on Earth’ After Mars Mission,” 15 July 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael J. Foreman and Robert L. Satcher Jr. undertook the first spacewalk of STS-129. They installed a replacement communications antenna on the ISS’s central truss, connected cables and a handrail, and lubricated the wire snares of two devices that grab and move cargo. Because preliminary checks of tiles and panels covering the Shuttle’s wings, nose cap, and underside did not show any signs of serious damage from launch, NASA considered a more detailed inspection unnecessary. Finding themselves 2 hours ahead of schedule, Foreman and Satcher also released a cargo platform—a task that NASA had designated for the second spacewalk. The spacewalk lasted a few minutes longer than its scheduled 6 hours and 30 minutes.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Get Extra Work Done in 1st Spacewalk,” 20 November 2009; James Dean, “Astronauts Finish First Spacewalk,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 20 November 2009.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of seven astronauts landed safely at 10:48 a.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC, concluding a 16-day mission to the ISS. The mission had delivered to the ISS the final piece of JAXA’s Kibo laboratory, as well as the new ISS crew member Timothy L. Kopra. Koichi Wakata was returning to Earth with the Endeavour crew after living at the ISS for more than four months. When the seven-member Shuttle crew joined the six-member Expedition 20 in residence at the ISS, the mission featured the largest number of people aboard the ISS to date— and the largest human gathering ever to take place in space. Over the course of five spacewalks, STS-127 crew had transported and assembled the final two sections of the US$1 billion Japanese Kibo laboratory, resupplied the station, and upgraded its power supply.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-179, 31 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_179_Shuttle_landing_success.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Eric Berger, “Endeavour Ends Historic Mission,” Houston Chronicle, 1 August 2009; Scott Powers, “Shuttle Landing: Space Shuttle Endeavour Lands at KSC,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 August 2009.)
Astronauts aboard the ISS operated the Japanese robotic arm for the first time, moving two experiments. One of the two experiments would study the effect of the station’s space environment on electronics and devices; the other was an x-ray observatory that would scan the night sky, using an inter-orbit communications system to send images, data, and voice communications to Japan’s Kibo mission control center at Tsukuba Space Center. The ISS’s robotic arm moved the three payloads from JEL to JEF, the porch attached to Japan’s Kibo laboratory. After some initial problems with its grappling device, the 33-foot (10-meter) robotic arm continued its day-long operation as planned. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata helped to drive the robotic arm. Wakata, Japan’s first long-duration ISS resident, had lived aboard the station since March 2009.(Tariq Malik, “Japanese Experiments Moved to Space Station,” Space.com, 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7043-japanese-experiments-moved-space-station.html (accessed 29 August 2011).)
JAXA’s HTV 1 arrived safely at the ISS. NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott used the ISS’s robotic arm to capture the 18-ton (16.33-tonne, or 16,329-kilogram) cargo craft as it hovered at a distance of 30 feet (9.14 meters), marking the first time that the ISS had captured a robotic craft from orbit. Russian and European supply craft used a docking method to arrive at the space station, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk berthed the craft at NASA’s Harmony module. The space agencies had scheduled HTV 1 to remain berthed at NASA’s Harmony module until November, when the ISS would release it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Crew Grabs New Cargo Ship From Orbit,” 18 September 2009; “ISS Crew Snares Robot Ship,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 September 2009.)
ISS Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov successfully completed all scheduled tasks in a spacewalk lasting almost 5 hours. Fincke and Lonchakov installed EXPOSE-R (studies of exobiological processes in outer space), a joint European-Russian scientific experiment involving biological materials. They placed the experiment outside the Zvezda service module, which astronauts had been unable to activate during a December spacewalk because of an internal cable problem. NASA astronaut Sandra H. Magnus assisted in the installation of EXPOSE-R from inside the ISS. Fincke and Lonchakov also rotated a container holding a scientific experiment involving Russian materials and trimmed a set of six straps positioned near the Pirs docking compartment, to prevent their interference with incoming Russian vehicles needing to dock. In addition, they photographed the Zvezda module, as part of a survey to assess its condition after nine years in orbit. The spacewalk was Lonchakov’s second, Fincke’s sixth, and their second spacewalk as a team. Fincke had undertaken all of his six spacewalks wearing a Russian spacesuit.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: ISS Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Upgrade Space Station,” Space.com, 10 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6396- spacewalkers-upgrade-space-station.html (accessed 12 May 2011).)
Commander Scott D. Altman eased Atlantis up to within 30 feet (9.1 meters) of HST. Operating the Shuttle’s robotic arm, K. Megan McArthur captured the telescope at 1:14 p.m. (EDT), on her first attempt. An hour later, still using the robotic arm, McArthur successfully secured the telescope in its berth at the back of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. A communication glitch slowed the procedure—the astronauts had sent commands to the telescope to ease the capture, directing it, for example, to shut off the gyroscopes. However, the astronauts were unable to discern whether HST had obeyed their commands. Instead, the crew had to relay the information through the telescopes control room at NASA’s GSFC.(Dennis Overbye, “Astronauts Grab Hubble for Repairs,” New York Times, 14 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “What a Catch! Hubble Grabbed for Spacewalking Repairs,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 2009.)
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino and Michael T. Good undertook the fourth spacewalk at HST, attempting to fix the spectrograph and to replace worn insulation on the telescope. To fix the spectrograph, Massimino first needed to remove a handrail, but a stripped bolt hampered his work. Even using various specially designed tools, he was unable to remove the bolt for 2 hours. As a last resort, after engineers at GFSC conducted two tests on a mock-up, Mission Control in Houston instructed Massimino to “use his muscles.” After successfully pulling the bolt off, Massimino tried to install a special plate to remove 111 tiny screws that held the spectrograph’s cover in place, but the battery of one of the tools became depleted. Massimino returned to the Shuttle, swapped out the batteries, and recharged his oxygen supply, but this task set the spacewalk another half hour behind schedule. After Massimino had successfully replaced the spectrograph’s internal electronics power-supply card, the astronauts still faced more than 90 minutes of cleanup and closeout work. Therefore, spacewalk coordinators decided to delay the insulation task until the fifth and final spacewalk. The spacewalk lasted more than 8 hours, the sixth longest in NASA history.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Stuck Bolt, Dead Battery Bedevil Hubble Repairs,” 18 May 2009.)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), an independent group of experts that had evaluated NASA’s safety performance since 1968, released its 2008 annual report. ASAP agreed that continuing to operate the Shuttle fleet would minimize the gap between Shuttle retirement and the first Orion flights, but the panel did not favor that approach because of NASA’s diminished Shuttle manufacturing and support capabilities. NASA had been closing out contracts with Shuttle component manufacturers and supporting vendors since 2004. According to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), operating the fleet beyond 2010 would require NASA to recertify the entire Shuttle system and to draw funds from the Constellation Program, thereby impeding its effort to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. ASAP saw little likelihood that NASA could field Ares-I rockets and Orion spacecraft before March 2015, even if Congress provided additional funding. ASAP had concluded that no evidence indicated that the commercial sector could develop cargo and crew transport services in time, or that commercial spacecraft were appropriate to transport NASA personnel, or that commercial spacecraft could safely dock with the ISS. In addition to ASAP’s annual report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) had released a report analyzing budget scenarios for fulfilling President George W. Bush’s 2004 space exploration plan. Each scenario predicted schedule slips requiring additional congressional funding. The CBO had found that, at current funding levels, NASA must delay development of Ares I’s and Orion’s initial operating capabilities until late 2016, delay the return of humans to the Moon for three years, and delay 15 out of 79 science missions beyond 2025.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel Releases Annual Report,” media advisory M09-061, 16 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_M09-061_ASAP_Annual_Report.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Todd Halvorson, “Independent Safety Experts Call for Shuttle Shutdown,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009; Eun Kyung Kim, “Report: NASA Needs Extra Billons To Maintain Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009. See also U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, “The Budgetary Implications of NASA’s Current Plans for Space Exploration” (report, Washington, DC, April 2009), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/ doc10051/04 -15-NASA.pdf.)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a follow-on contract to Computer Sciences Corporation of Fort Worth, Texas, to support NASA’s aircraft used for astronaut training and flight research. The follow-on, potentially valued at approximately US$163 million, continued services provided under a previous contract, which had been in effect from 1 March 2004 through 31 August 2009. The new contract would be in effect 1 September 2009 through 28 February 2010. Under the Aircraft Maintenance and Modification Program, Computer Sciences Corporation would continue to provide flight-line, intermediate, and depot-level maintenance, repairs, modifications, and engineering support for NASA aircraft.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Aircraft Maintenance,” news release C09-040, 25 August 2009.)
With the assistance of K. Megan McArthur, who operated the robotic arm, astronauts John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel undertook a spacewalk to upgrade HST for the first time in seven years. The mission was Grunsfeld’s third visit to HST and Feustel’s first space mission. The team’s primary task was to replace the 16-year-old Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 with the new Wide Field Camera 3. Feustel and Grunsfeld struggled with a pair of bolts on the old camera, setting them 30 minutes behind schedule. However, Feustel managed to work the bolts loose without breaking them, which would have blocked installation of the new US$132 million camera.(Mark Carreau, “Spacewalkers Equip Hubble with New Computer,” Agence France-Presse, 15 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Hubble Repair Passes ‘Speed Bump’,” USA Today, 15 May 2009.)
NASA successfully launched its PharmaSat nanosatellite at 7:55 p.m. (EDT) from its Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) aboard a four-stage U.S. Air Force Minotaur-1 rocket. The rocket also carried the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory’s TacSat-3 satellite, which was the primary payload, and other NASA CubeSat Technology Demonstration experiments—Aerocube 3, CP 6, and Hawksat 1—three 4-inch, cubed satellites developed by universities and industry to measure electron collection, radiation testing, and guidance and control systems. PharmaSat’s mission was to investigate the effects of antifungal agents on the growth of yeast in microgravity, to help scientists better understand how microbes might become resistant to drugs used to treat sick astronauts on long-duration flights. PharmaSat separated from the rocket approximately 20 minutes after launch and entered low Earth orbit at an altitude of 285 miles (458.7 kilometers). Following the checkout period, ground controllers planned to command PharmaSat to initiate its biological experiment, scheduled to last 96 hours. The satellite would transmit radio signals to Ground Control stations at two California locations and would send mission data to the NASA Mission Management Team at ARC. The satellite could continue to transmit this data for as long as six months.(NASA, “NASA Flight Facility Successfully Launches Nanosatellite,” news release 09-114, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-114_PharmaSat_Launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667; Matthew Jones, “Rocket May Launch a Promising Future for Wallops Island,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 20 May 2009.)
University of California at Irvine announced the publication of a NASA-funded study about bone strength among astronauts. Although previous studies had examined bone-mineral density, this study was the first to evaluate bone strength. Joyce Keyak, a professor of orthopedic surgery and biomedical engineering at University of California at Irvine, led the study. She and her research team used a novel computer program that Keyak had developed to identify hipbone fracture risk in people with osteoporosis. They analyzed hipbone CT (computed tomography) scans of one female and 12 male astronauts who had spent four to six months aboard the International Space Station (ISS). The researchers found that, on average, the astronauts’ hipbone strength decreased 14 percent. However, three astronauts experienced losses of 20 to 30 percent—comparable to those seen in older women with osteoporosis. The research team published its findings in the online version of Bone, the journal of the International Bone and Mineral Society.(University of California at Irvine, “Astronauts on International Space Station Lose Alarming Amounts of Hipbone Strength,” news release, 26 January 2009, http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/news/article/ 19371 (accessed 2 February 2011); Kristen Schott, “UCI Study Finds Astronauts at Risk for Bone Loss,” OC Metro (Newport Beach, CA), 27 January 2009.)
The U.S. Senate confirmed retired U.S. Marine Corps general and former astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. as NASA’s twelfth Administrator, marking the first appointment of an African American as NASA’s Administrator. During his 34-year career with the Marine Corps, Bolden had spent 14 years as a member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, which he had joined in 1980. As an astronaut, he had traveled to orbit four times aboard the Space Shuttle, between 1986 and 1994. On two of those trips he had served as Commander of the Shuttle. His missions had included the deployment of the HST and the first joint U.S.-Russian Shuttle mission. While he was an astronaut, Bolden had fulfilled many technical assignments, serving as Astronaut Office Safety Officer; Technical Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations; Special Assistant to the Director of JSC; Lead Astronaut for vehicle test and checkout at KSC; Chief of the Safety Division at JSC, where he oversaw safety efforts for the return to flight after the 1986 Challenger accident; and Assistant Deputy Administrator at NASA Headquarters. In May 2006, NASA had inducted Bolden into the Astronaut Hall of Fame. The Senate also confirmed Lori B. Garver as NASA’s new Deputy Administrator. Like Bolden, Garver was returning to NASA for a second period of service. Between 1996 and 2001, she had served as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and Senior Policy Analyst for the Office of Policy and Plans, before becoming Associate Administrator of that office.(NASA, “Bolden and Garver Confirmed by U.S. Senate,” news release 09-165, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-165_Bolden_and_Garver.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Bolden Confirmed as NASA Administrator,” 16 July 2009.)
Three new ISS residents arrived at the space station aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, bringing the outpost’s full staff to six for the first time in its 10-year history. Also, for the first time, each of the major space station partners had a representative on board: Roman Y. Romanenko and Gennady I. Padalka of Russia, Michael R. Barratt of the United States, Koichi Wakata of JAXA, Belgian astronaut Frank De Winne of ESA, and Robert B. Thirsk of CSA. The first ISS crew had arrived in the year 2000, two years after the launch of the first part of the station. Since that time, the ISS had expanded to nine rooms, including three full-scale laboratories, five sleeping compartments, two toilets, two kitchens, and two mini-gyms, making the station 81 percent complete. The increased crew size also ushered in a new era of station operations that would allow astronauts and cosmonauts to focus on scientific research rather than on the assembly and maintenance of the ISS.(Marcia Dunn, “Space Station Crew Finally at Full Staff of 6,” Agence France-Presse, 30 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “At Space Station, the House Is Packed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 June 2009.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched on STS-127 at 6:03 p.m. (EDT) from NASA’s KSC in Florida, on a 16-day mission to the ISS. The mission would include five spacewalks, deliver the final segment to the JAXA Kibo laboratory, and deliver a new crew member for the ISS. The launch was STS-127’s sixth attempt—NASA had aborted two earlier attempted launches of the mission in June, after poor weather and the discovery of potentially hazardous fuel leaks had caused three scrubs since 11 July. The crew was composed of Commander Mark L. Polansky; Pilot Douglas G. Hurley; and Mission Specialists Christopher J. Cassidy, Thomas H. Marshburn, David A. Wolf, Timothy L. Kopra, and CSA astronaut Julie Payette. Kopra would replace ISS crew member Koichi Wakata, who had been aboard the ISS for more than three months. Kopra would return to Earth with STS-128, which NASA had scheduled to launch in August 2009.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Launches To Complete Japanese Module,” news release 09-160, 15 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-160_STS-127_Launches.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Blasts Off from Cape Canaveral,” 16 July 2009.)
NASA astronauts Randolph J. Bresnik and Robert L. Satcher Jr. undertook the third and final spacewalk of STS-129. The pair began their spacewalk an hour late because of difficulty with a valve on the drink bag of Satcher’s spacesuit. However, the team quickly worked to get ahead of schedule, finishing at 2:06 p.m. (EST), just after the originally scheduled ending time. With the assistance of a robotic arm, the pair installed a 1,200-pound (544-kilogram) oxygen tank at a NASA air lock on the ISS, the main objective of the spacewalk. They filled it with high-pressure oxygen for future spacewalks, connected the gas line, and conducted a check for leaks. The pair also installed science experiments on the outside of the station, including the MISSE, which would help NASA scientists understand how substances and coatings react to direct sunlight, radiation, atomic oxygen, and extreme temperatures. NASA intended to use the results of these experiments in the design of future spacecraft. Additionally, Bresnik and Satcher removed two orbital-debris shields from the air lock, making room for the oxygen tank; loosened a bolt on an ammonia tank; and worked on fluid jumper lines.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk No. 3 After Suit Snag,” 24 November 2009; Ryan Flinn, “Spacewalker’s Final Sortie Tests Materials for Future Craft,” Bloomberg News, 24 November 2009.)
Using two robotic arms, astronauts moved a 1.2-ton (1.09-tonne, or 1,088-kilogram) experiment carrier, the Japanese Experiment Logistics (JEL) Module Exposed Section known as Jelly, from Endeavour’s cargo bay to the JAXA Kibo laboratory’s new porch, known as JEF. STS-127 crew members used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to remove Jelly from the cargo bay, handing it to the ISS robotic arm for installation on Kibo. The platform was a temporary addition. NASA had scheduled astronauts to move the experiments from the platform to JEF later in the week, using Kibo’s robotic arm. JAXA needed to ship its first experiments to the ISS on a separate carrier because the Kibo’s porch would have been too wide to fit into Endeavour’s cargo bay if the porch had shipped with the experiments attached to its side.(Tariq Malik, “Astronauts Tackle Tricky Crane Work in Space,” Space.com, 21 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7023-astronauts-tackle-tricky-crane-work-space.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
NASA astronauts Nicole P. Stott and John D. “Danny” Olivas undertook the first spacewalk of STS-128, which lasted 6 hours and 30 minutes. The pair completed the EVA early, with all objectives accomplished. They removed from the ISS’s central truss an ammonia tank that had been in use since 2002. Olivas lifted the 1,300-pound (589-kilogram) tank, which measured 5 feet by 7 feet by 4 feet (1.52 meters by 2.13 meters by 1.22 meters), onto the end of the station’s robotic arm, where it would remain until the installation of a fresh pair of tanks during the next spacewalk. The pair also retrieved from ESA’s Columbus laboratory two sets of experiments, so that the Shuttle could return them to Earth. After removing the ammonia tank, Olivas noticed that the index finger of his right glove had begun to fray. Mission Control evaluated the problem and, after determining that the frayed stitching was minor, decided that Olivas could remain outside and continue the EVA. A few minutes later, Stott noticed a high reading of her carbon dioxide levels. She reported that she was not experiencing any symptoms. Mission Control decided that Stott’s suit was operating fine, and that she, too, could remain outside. The astronauts also experienced a 30-minute communication outage with Mission Control because of a thunderstorm at a satellite-relay station in Guam. The spacewalk was Stott’s first. She was KSC’s third employee to become an astronaut and the center’s first employee to embark on a spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Spacewalkers Tackle Hefty Tank Removal in Orbit,” 2 September 2009; James Dean, “Ex-KSC Engineer Works Outside ISS,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 September 2009; Stockton Record (CA), “Astronauts Embark on Their First Spacewalk,” 2 September 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn embarked on the fourth of the five spacewalks scheduled for STS-127. During the spacewalk, they finished replacing batteries, a task that they had begun during the 22 July spacewalk but had been unable to complete. Mission Control had terminated the 22 July spacewalk early because of rising levels of carbon dioxide in Cassidy’s spacesuit. During today’s spacewalk, which lasted 7 hours and 30 minutes, Cassidy and Marshburn successfully replaced the last four of the six batteries storing power generated by the ISS’s oldest set of solar arrays. These batteries provided power to the American laboratory Destiny when the station was orbiting in darkness.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Install Fresh Batteries on Spacewalk,” 24 July 2009; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Duo Keep Station Going and Going,” 25 July 2009.)
NASA announced the successful conclusion of the third round of testing of the Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (CECE) technology, intended to return astronauts to the lunar surface safely. Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne in West Palm Beach, Florida, had conducted the tests to gather data on the concept engine. Engineers had designed the CECE with the flexibility to reduce thrust from 100 percent to 10 percent, allowing a spacecraft to land gently on the lunar surface. The test set a record, with the engine successfully throttled to 104 percent of its potential and then reduced to 8 percent. A careful assessment of test results from the first two rounds of testing had shown pressure oscillations in the engine at lower throttle levels, known as “chugging.” The vibrations from the chugging could potentially resonate with the structure of the rocket, causing problems for the lander and the crew. However, in the third round of testing, engineers successfully eliminated engine chugging. To achieve this, they controlled the flow of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen to the combustion chamber, using a new injector design and propellant feed system that carefully managed the pressure, temperature, and flow of propellants.(NASA, “NASA Tests Engine Technology for Landing Astronauts on the Moon,” news release 09-005, 14 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-005_Cryo_engine_test.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at 3:14 p.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC in Florida, completing its 13-day mission to the ISS. The crew of STS-119 had delivered, installed, and deployed the space station’s final set of solar-array wings, thus completing the station’s truss and supplying full power; replaced a failed unit for a system that converts urine to potable water; and performed important tasks in preparation for future upgrades and additions. STS-119 spacewalkers had failed to deploy fully an external cargo carrier on the Port-3 truss segment but had secured it in place. Mission Control had cancelled the installation of a similar payload attachment system on the starboard side, tasking NASA engineers with evaluating the problem. NASA planned to complete the installation during future spacewalks. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata had remained aboard the ISS, replacing Flight Engineer Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the space station for more than four months.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-072, 28 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09072_STS-119_Landing.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
After receiving clearance to return home, astronauts aboard the orbiting Space Shuttle Endeavour successfully deployed two sets of small satellites. Endeavour had undocked from the ISS on 28 July in preparation for the return flight of STS-127. Endeavour’s crew first deployed a pair of small satellites from the Shuttle’s payload bay—the student-built DRAGONSAT (Dual RF Astrodynamic GPS Orbital Navigator Satellite), part of a study to demonstrate autonomous rendezvous and docking technologies, as well as GPS systems. The crew later jettisoned the two 19-inch (48-centimeter) spheres that comprised the Naval Research Laboratory’s ANDE-2 (Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment-2) mission. Although identical in size, each sphere had a different mass. Researchers planned to observe differences in the spheres’ orbits, as part of a study of the density of Earth’s atmosphere.(Tariq Malik, “Shuttle Astronauts Deploy Satellites Ahead of Landing,” Space.com, 30 July 2009, http://www. space.com/7078-shuttle-astronauts-deploy-satellites-landing.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, and spaceflight participant Charles Simonyi, who had visited the ISS for the second time, landed safely in a Soyuz spacecraft in the steppes of southern Kazakhstan after undocking from the station on 7 April. The Russian federal space agency Roscosmos had delayed the landing for one day after discovering that spring flooding had affected the original landing site. Roscosmos had moved the landing to a location further south. Fincke and Lonchakov were returning from Expedition 18. During that expedition, the ISS had gained full power and had begun water-supply recycling in preparation for the station’s first six-person crew. In addition, the crew of Expedition 18 had performed scientific experiments, including many experiments designed to gather information about the effects of long-duration spaceflight on the human body.
NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev launched aboard Soyuz TMA-16 from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 a.m. (CDT), to become the next residents of the ISS. Also aboard was spaceflight participant Guy Laliberté, the Canadian founder of Cirque du Soleil, who was flying to the ISS under an agreement with Space Adventures and the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Laliberté had paid US$35 million to travel to and from the ISS and to reside at the ISS for nine days. He planned to use his experience to publicize a growing global problem—the shortage of clean water.(NASA, “New Space Station Crew Launches; In-Orbit News Conference Set,” news release 09-226, 30 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-226_Soyuz_Exp21_Launch.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Canadian Circus Billionaire Heads to Space Station,” 30 September 2009.)
Astronauts Steven R. Swanson and Richard R. Arnold II successfully completed a 6-hour spacewalk, installing the 31,000-pound (14,061-kilogram, or 14-tonne), 45-foot-long (13.7- meter-long) girder with solar arrays, to complete the final piece of the ISS’s structural backbone. Swanson and Arnold helped align the truss while, inside the station, astronaut John L. Philips used a robotic arm to lower the truss into place on the starboard end of the station. Then, Arnold used a high-technology ratchet wrench to link the two pieces of the station. With the new addition, the solar power truss measured 356 feet (108.5 meters). The ISS crew had assembled the truss from nine large segments that the Space Shuttles had delivered between 2000 and 2009. Before reentering the ISS, Arnold and Swanson disposed of four thermal covers from the new framework by tossing them out into space, and then watched the accordion-style radiator on the segment unfold.(Robert Block, “Discovery Astronauts Install Solar Wings,” Los Angeles Times, 20 March 2009; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Go Spacewalking, Install Last Set of Solar Wings at International Space Station,” 20 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “First Space Outing a Walk in the Park,” Houston Chronicle, 20 March 2009.)
NASA astronaut Michael R. Barratt, Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka, and U.S. software engineer Charles Simonyi launched aboard a Soyuz spacecraft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:49 a.m. (CDT), on a flight to the ISS. Barratt and Padalka would join JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata to form the Expedition 19 crew at the space station. The first space tourist to make a second flight to the ISS, Simonyi had previously visited the station in April 2007. He was flying under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Simonyi would return to Earth with Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, who had been aboard the station since October 2008. The Expedition 19 crew would continue conducting scientific investigations and preparing for the arrival of the station’s first six-person crew.
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino, a mechanical and robotics engineer on this third spacewalk, and Michael T. Good, a former U.S. Air Force test pilot on his first space mission, undertook the second of five planned spacewalks to repair the HST. The spacewalk agenda consisted of the most important task of the 11-day mission—to replace the gyroscopes that kept the telescope pointed in the correct direction—and to replace three batteries. Working from inside the telescope, Good and Massimino had difficulty installing the second set of new gyroscopes and resorted to using a spare that did not initially fit either. The extra work extended the spacewalk to 8 hours—1.5 hours longer than scheduled—making it the tenth longest spacewalk on record.(Dennis Overbye, “Astronauts Work on Replacing Hubble’s Gyroscopes,” New York Times, 16 May 2009.)
ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka and NASA Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt undertook a 4-hour, 54-minute spacewalk to install a pair of antennas for automated rendezvous equipment. The astronauts undertook the work to prepare for the arrival of the Russian Mini Research Module 2 (MRM 2), which would serve as an additional docking port for Russian vehicles. Padalka and Barratt also connected each antenna to a series of power cables and photographed them from aboard the long Strela extension pole. Padalka operated the Strela boom, while Barratt took pictures from multiple vantage points, to allow Russian mission control to analyze the antennas and to ensure that the crew had installed them correctly.
Astronauts Steven R. Swanson and Joseph M. Acaba undertook the second STS-119 spacewalk at the ISS, primarily to lighten the workload for future crews. As their first task, the pair loosened bolts holding down batteries at the end of the ISS’s power-grid framework, in preparation for the batteries’ replacement during the next Shuttle visit, scheduled for June 2009. As Swanson and Acaba finished that task, the gyroscopes maintaining the position of the ISS- Shuttle complex became overloaded, setting off an alarm in the ISS. Discovery quickly assumed control with its thrusters, and Mission Control ordered Swanson and Acaba to continue with their tasks. The two astronauts had trouble with their next task, deploying an equipment-storage platform, because Acaba accidentally inserted a pin upside down. Mission Control instructed them to move on to other tasks—installing a global positioning system (GPS) antenna and using an infrared camera to photograph a pair of radiators, one of which had a peeling cover. Before reentering the ISS, Swanson tied down the equipment-storage platform to prevent it from moving around. NASA assembled a team to determine a means of prying or hammering the pin loose during the spacewalk scheduled for 23 March.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Go on 2nd Spacewalk at Space Station,” 22 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “To-Do List Keeps Astronauts Busy on 2nd Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 22 March 2009.)
Astronauts John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of the HST servicing mission. They successfully renewed the telescope’s batteries, which provide power when the solar panels are not receiving light; replaced a fine-guidance sensor; and fitted three thermal blankets to protect the craft’s electronics. The spacewalk was Feustel’s third and Grunsfeld’s eighth—with 58 hours and 30 minutes of spacewalking time, Grunsfeld became the world’s fourth most experienced spacewalker during the HST servicing mission.(BBC News, “Fifth Spacewalk Energises Hubble,” 19 May 2009; Tariq Malik, “Astronauts Give Hubble Telescope One Last Hug,” Space.com, 18 May 2009, http://www.space.com/6714-astronauts-give-hubble-telescope-hug.html (accessed 19 July 2011).)
NASA announced that it had concluded two weeks of technology-development tests on two prototype lunar rovers in the Arizona desert at Black Point Lava Point, as part of the decade-old program Desert RATS (Research and Technology Studies). The annual Desert RATS excursions allowed NASA to analyze and to refine technologies and procedures in extreme environments on Earth. For the lunar-rover test, two crew members—an astronaut and a geologist—had simulated a 14-day mission, living for more than 300 hours inside NASA’s prototype Lunar Electric Rover and scouting the area for features of geological interest. They had worn spacesuits to conduct simulated moonwalks in which they collected samples; docked to a simulated habitat; driven the rover across difficult terrain; performed a rescue mission; and made a four-day trip across lava. Before the test, NASA’s K10 scout robot had identified areas of interest for the crew to explore. NASA’s All-Terrain Hex-Legged Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (Tri-ATHLETE), a heavy-lift rover, had carried the simulated habitat to which the rover had docked.(NASA, “NASA Concludes Robotics Tests for the Moon in Arizona,” news release 09-214, 15 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-214_Desert_RATS_concludes.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA announced that its Centennial Challenges program had awarded US$350,000 to a pair of designers who had won first and second place for the designs they had entered in the 2009 Astronaut Glove Challenge. Peter K. Homer of Southwest Harbor, Maine, won US$250,000 for his design, and Ted Southern of Brooklyn, New York, won US$100,000 for his. The 2009 competition required that gloves meet all the basic requirements of NASA’s current spacesuit gloves but exceed NASA’s flexibility requirements. NASA had asked all teams to develop a complete glove, including the outer, thermal-micrometeoroid-protection layer and the inner, pressure-restraining layer. Homer and Southern had tied in several categories, but Homer, who had won US$200,000 in the first Astronaut Glove Challenge in 2007, won first prize again by outscoring his rival in the joint-flexibility and pressure tests. The joint-flexibility tests involved 30 minutes of pinching and gripping tests, as well as other tests requiring finger flexing and the manipulation of small objects. The pressure test involved filling the glove with air in a tank of water until it burst. Homer’s glove had held out without bursting until pressure reached 20 pounds per square inch (9 kilograms per square centimeter), whereas Southern’s glove had made it to 17 pounds per square inch (7.7 kilograms per square centimeter). Engineers from NASA’s JSC and KSC, as well as NASA’s spacesuit manufacturer ILC Dover of Dover, Delaware, had measured and evaluated the designs.(NASA, “NASA Awards $350,000 to Winning Astronaut Glove Designers,” news release 09-277, 20 November 2009; Nicholos Wethington, “Astronaut Glove Challenge Winners Announced,” Universe Today, 20 November 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael J. Foreman and Randolph J. Bresnik undertook the second spacewalk of STS-129. The spacewalk, which began late because of false alarms on the ISS overnight, was Bresnik’s first. The pair installed a set of antennas on the Columbus laboratory. The antennas would track ships at sea, relocate a device that measured the build-up of electrical charge outside the ISS, and deploy a cargo-storage platform outside the station. Working ahead of schedule, the astronauts also installed a wireless video system for the cameras used in the helmets of spacewalkers; completed a few odd jobs, such as reconnecting a power cable for a space-to- ground antenna that crew had installed on the previous spacewalk; and deployed a second storage platform outside the ISS, a task that NASA had scheduled for the third spacewalk of STS-129. The excursion lasted 6 hours and 8 minutes.(James Dean, “Second Atlantis Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Astronauts Speed Through Second Spacewalk,” Space.com, 21November 2009, http://www.space. com/7579-astronauts-speed-spacewalk.html (accessed 21 November 2011).)
Five hours into the third of five scheduled spacewalks, Mission Control instructed STS-127 crew members Christopher J. Cassidy and David A. Wolf to return to the inside of the ISS, after a canister for removing carbon dioxide from Cassidy’s suit apparently stopped functioning properly. Because of the curtailed spacewalk, the astronauts had to leave two of four new, uninstalled batteries outside the station. When Mission Control told them to stop work, the two astronauts were behind schedule because they had been unable to remove some stubborn bolts. They had removed three of the nine-year-old batteries, which NASA had installed in 2000, and had plugged in two new ones. The large nickel hydrogen batteries stored the power that the ISS solar wings had collected. NASA had designed the batteries to last six-and-a-half years and wanted to replace them before they stopped working. Mission Control planned to complete work on the batteries during one of the next two spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Cut Spacewalk Short Due To Suit Trouble,” 23 July 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Add New Batteries to Space Station,” Space.com, 24 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7051- spacewalkers-add-batteries-space-station.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis arrived at the ISS on mission STS-129. With the assistance of a robotic arm, NASA astronauts immediately unloaded one of two ELCs: a 16-foot-by-14-foot (5-meter- by-4-meter) platform, containing pumps, storage tanks, and other equipment weighing hundreds of pounds apiece. All of the equipment was too large to launch aboard any vehicle other than the Shuttle. With only five launches to go before the scheduled 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle program, NASA planned for the Shuttles to carry to the ISS as many spare parts as possible in the time remaining. In addition to spare parts sent to the ISS for storage, Atlantis had also carried thousands of microscopic specimens. NASA intended to use the specimens in experiments studying the effect of gravity on human muscle development and physiology. Upon the docking of Atlantis with the ISS, NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had been on board the ISS for approximately three months, became a member of the Shuttle crew. Stott would return home on board Atlantis at the conclusion of STS-129.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station, Unloads Parts,” 19 November 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Shuttle Atlantis Docks with Space Station,” 19 November 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. Barratt and Kevin A. Ford used a robotic arm to remove the 13.5- ton (12.3-tonne, or 12,247-kilogram) Leonardo cargo module from Space Shuttle Discovery’s cargo bay. An hour later, the astronauts had successfully attached the module to the Harmony module’s Earth-facing port and had begun the process of checking for leaks and pressurizing a vestibule between Harmony and the cargo module.(William Harwood, “Cargo Module Mounted to Space Station for Unloading,” Spaceflight Now, 1 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 5:53 p.m. (PDT), ending a successful 14-day mission to the ISS. Weather prevented the crew from landing at KSC in Florida. STS-128 had delivered to the ISS NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had begun a three-month mission as a resident, replacing Timothy L. Kopra. Kopra had returned home with Discovery’s crew. Discovery had also delivered to the ISS 9 tons (8.16 tonnes, or 8,165 kilograms) of supplies, to sustain the six-person crew and to equip the station for more science experiments. The delivery had included two refrigerator-sized science racks for the station—one for conducting experiments on materials such as metals, glass, and ceramics, and the other for studying how fluids react in microgravity. In addition, Discovery had delivered a freezer for samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air-purification system, and a treadmill named for the comedian Stephen Colbert. The crew had undertaken three spacewalks, to replace experiments outside ESA’s Columbus laboratory and to empty an ammonia-storage tank.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery Returns to Earth After Successful Mission,” news release 09-212, 11 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-212_Discovery_Lands.html (accessed 15 September 2011); James Dean, “Storms Prevent KSC Landing, Divert Discovery to California,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 September 2009; William Harwood, “Shuttle Glides to a California Landing,” New York Times, 12 September 2009.)
NASA announced the award of an interim letter contract to Oceaneering International of Houston, to begin designing, developing, and producing a new spacesuit system for the Constellation Program. The interim contract required Oceaneering International to begin work on the basic period of performance, while NASA and the company negotiated the final terms. The interim contract, valued at US$9.6 million, would be in effect from 2 March 2009 until NASA and Oceaneering had defined the full contract—no later than 29 August 2009. NASA had initially awarded this contract to Oceaneering International and to five subcontractors in June 2008. However, a losing bidder, Exploration Systems and Technology, had protested the award. Exploration Systems and Technology was a joint venture between Connecticut-based Hamilton Sundstrand and Delaware-based ILC Dover, the two companies that had developed the spacesuits worn by NASA’s Shuttle and ISS astronauts. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) had evaluated the protest, which had led to the termination of NASA’s contract with Oceaneering International in August 2008. NASA had reopened the competition in November 2008, at which time Hamilton Sundstrand and ILC Dover had joined Oceaneering International to submit a single proposal.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Constellation Spacesuit for the Moon,” news release C09-008, 27 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-008_Constellation_Spacesuit_ Contract_Letter.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Mark Carreau, “Houston’s Oceaneering International Inc. Wins Once Disputed NASA Space Suit Contract,” Houston Chronicle, 2 March 2009.)
Soyuz TMA-16 docked with the ISS Zvezda service module at 4:35 a.m. (EST), safely delivering to the ISS NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams, Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev, and Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté. Williams and Suraev were joining ISS Expedition 21 as flight engineers. The docking marked the first time that three Soyuz craft had docked at the space station at one time. The automated docking system worked flawlessly.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: Crew Docks Safely at Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 October 2009. 147 NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Impacts Lunar Crater in Search for Water Ice,” news release 09-236, 9 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-236_LCROSS.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Moon Crash: Public Yawns, Scientists Celebrate,” 10 October 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at 8:39 a.m. (PDT) at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending a successful 13-day mission to HST. Weather conditions had prevented Atlantis from landing at KSC. Astronauts had performed five spacewalks to repair, replace, and upgrade the instruments and computers on HST. These repairs and upgrades had not only restored the telescope, but had also expanded its capabilities. NASA considered the unprecedented mission historic, because of the complexity of the repairs and because the mission had been the last time human beings would go to space to repair an orbiting scientific instrument. NASA had placed HST in low Earth orbit at 600 kilometers (373 miles) to facilitate repair missions, but the location was suboptimal for space telescopes. NASA had planned to place HST’s successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) away from Earth, at L2, and, therefore, had designed JWST to function without repairs or upgrades. In addition to making HST repairs, astronauts had performed a commercial drug experiment aimed at finding a vaccine against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and other microbes.(NASA, “NASA’s Space Shuttle Returns to Earth After Hubble Mission,” news release 09-120, 24 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-120_STS-125_Landing_Edwards.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Houston Chronicle, “This Is Why We Fly: Hubble Repair Mission Showcases the Value of the Manned Space Program,” 26 May 2009; Daniel Holz, “The Last Fix,” Discover Magazine, 26 May 2009, http://blogs. discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2009/05/25/the-last-fix/ (accessed 21 July 2011); Frank Morring Jr., “Drug Experiment Performed on Atlantis,” Aviation Week, 20 May 2009.)
NASA announced that it had begun the process for testing in water a full-scale mockup of its Orion crew module, under simulated- and real-landing weather conditions. On 23 March, at the Naval Surface Warfare Center’s Carderock Division in West Bethesda, Maryland, NASA had begun the Post-Landing Orion Recovery Test (PORT), its goal to determine the types of motions the astronaut crew could expect to experience after landing, as well as conditions the recovery team could face outside at the landing site. The Carderock facility provided a controlled environment in which crew recovery personnel could familiarize themselves with the capsule before commencing with tests in the uncontrolled waters of the Atlantic Ocean off the Florida coast on 6 April. NASA expected that PORT would help in the design of landing recovery operations, including equipment, ship, and crew necessities.(NASA, “NASA’s Constellation Program Tests Orion Recovery Procedures,” news release 09-068, 25 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-068_Orion_PORT_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011). 47 NASA, “King Retires as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-071, 26 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-071_MSFC_King_Retires.html (accessed 4 May 2011). 48 NASA, “New Astronaut Crew Launches to International Space Station,” news release 09-069, 26 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-069_Exp19_Launch.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Russia’s Soyuz TMA-17 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:52 p.m. (CST), carrying NASA astronaut Timothy J. Creamer, Russian cosmonaut Oleg V. Kotov, and JAXA astronaut Soichi Noguchi to the ISS. The three crew members, scheduled to remain at the ISS until May 2010, would join Expedition 22 crew members American Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian Maxim V. Suraev aboard the space station, bringing the station crew total to five. The mission was Creamer’s first. The launch marked the first time a Soyuz craft had launched at night in winter.(NASA, “Crew Lifts Off From Kazakhstan To Begin Science and Construction Work Aboard the International Space Station,” news release 09-295, 20 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09- 295_Soyuz_launch_ex22.html (accessed 16 December 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Astronauts Blast Off for Christmas Space Mission,” 21 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Launches Toward International Space Station,” Space.com, 21 December 2009, http://www.space.com/7693-crew-launches- international-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiment’s purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASA’s LaRC.(Diane Tennant, “NASA Opens Suitcase from Space,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, “MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening,” LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 11:59 p.m. (EDT) on STS-128, to deliver supplies, equipment, and a new crew member to the ISS. The STS-128 crew comprised Commander Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow; Pilot Kevin A. Ford; and Mission Specialists Patrick G. Forrester, Jose M. Hernandez, John D. “Danny” Olivas, and ESA astronaut A. Christer Fuglesang. Also aboard was Nicole P. Stott, who would begin a three-month mission in residence at the ISS, replacing NASA’s Timothy L. Kopra. Discovery carried in its cargo bay the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module, a pressurized “moving van” that the crew would temporarily install at the ISS. Leonardo would deliver storage racks, materials and fluids science racks, a freezer to store research samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air purification system, and a treadmill named after comedian Stephen Colbert. Colbert had received the most entries in NASA’s online poll to name the station’s Node 3, but NASA had named Node 3 “Tranquility.” As a consolation prize for Colbert, NASA had decided to name the treadmill COLBERT (Combined Operational Load Bearing External Resistance Treadmill).(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Enhance Space Station Science,” news release 09-196, 29 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-196_STS-128_Launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA astronauts David A. Wolf and Thomas H. Marshburn made the second of STS-127’s five scheduled spacewalks, transferring to storage a spare KU-band antenna, a backup 1,300-pound (590-kilogram) coolant-system pump module, and a robotic-arm-transporter drive motor. The tasks were part of an effort to stow critical spare parts, to ensure that the ISS had everything it needed when the Shuttle fleet retired. The 6-hour-and-53-minute spacewalk took longer than expected, causing flight controllers to instruct Wolf and Marshburn to defer their final planned task of installing a television camera on the new JEF platform. Instead, Marshburn installed insulation on cables used to route station power to the Shuttle, and Wolf packed up tools and equipment. Marshburn experienced one potentially dangerous incident during the spacewalk when he lost track of his 85-foot (26-meter) safety tether, but he remained safely attached to the ISS with his 55-foot (17-meter) tether.(Todd Halvorson, “Station Stocks Up on Parts,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 July 2009; William Harwood, “Spacewalk No. 2 Ends,” Spaceflight Now, 21 July 2009.)
ISS Expedition 20 and 21 crew members ESA astronaut Frank De Winne, cosmonaut Roman Y. Romanenko, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz TMA- 15 capsule. Soyuz TMA-15 landed in Kazakhstan at 2:15 a.m. (EST) in icy weather, ending a 188-day mission to the ISS. Although poor weather conditions had grounded the eight Mi-8 helicopters normally used in the recovery process, recovery crews in all-terrain vehicles were able to reach the spacecraft within 15 minutes of touchdown. Astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev remained on board the ISS, representing the smallest space station crew since July 2006.(William Harwood, “Space Station Crew Lands in Frigid Kazakhstan,” Spaceflight Now, 1 December 2009; James Dean, “Soyuz Makes Safe Return to Cold Earth,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 December 2009.)
NASA announced that its twin STEREO (Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory) spacecraft had provided scientists with their first view of the speed, trajectory, and three-dimensional shape of solar coronal mass ejections (CMEs). The spacecraft’s capabilities had dramatically improved scientists’ ability to predict the impact of CMEs on Earth, enabling them to determine when CMEs would occur. In addition, scientists could now predict whether a CME would merely cause an auroral display or would produce a type of cosmic ray that is potentially hazardous to astronauts, spacecraft, and Earth technologies such as GPS signals and power grids. NASA had launched the two spacecraft in 2006 on a mission to make simultaneous observations of CMEs from different vantage points. The successful production of three-dimensional observations had enabled solar physicists to determine when a CME would reach Earth and to predict how much energy the CME would deliver to Earth’s magnetosphere. Because of the two vantage points of the twin STEREO spacecraft, the craft were able to provide data that Earth-based observatories were unable to capture, regarding the direction and speed of solar storms. STEREO could also sample the contents of solar storms and gauge the magnetic properties of the eruptions. Before the STEREO mission, scientists could not make measurements or collect subsequent data about CMEs until the ejections had arrived at Earth—typically three to seven days after their occurrence.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Show Three Dimensional Anatomy of a Solar Storm,” news release 09-083, 14 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-083_STEREO.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Anne Minard, “First 3-D Pictures of Solar Explosions Created,” National Geographic News, 15 April 2009.)
In the third spacewalk at HST, John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel carried out a set of unprecedented tasks—no astronaut had ever tried to take apart any of HST’s scientific instruments in space. The work proceeded smoothly, unlike the two previous spacewalks, and the astronauts completed all tasks within the allotted 6.5 hours. Grunsfeld and Feustel successfully connected the US$88 million Cosmic Origins spectrograph, a task that required them to remove the corrective lenses that had restored HST’s vision in 1993. The newer scientific instruments had built-in corrective lenses, rendering the 1993 lenses unnecessary. Grunsfeld then fixed the ACS using a set of specially designed tools. Working from a dark work site at an odd angle and wearing stiff, heavily padded space gloves, Grunsfeld cut off a grate and removed 36 tiny fasteners and four circuit boards. The new cards and the power supply pack slid smoothly into place.(Marcia Dunn, “Spacewalkers Pull Off Toughest Hubble Repairs Yet,” Agence France-Presse, 17 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Spacewalkers Easily Pull Off Tricky Hubble Fix,” USA Today, 17 May 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of Dina E. Contella, Scott Stover, and Edward Van Cise as new flight directors to manage and carry out Shuttle flights and ISS expeditions. John A. McCullough, Chief of the Flight Director Office at JSC, remarked that all three new flight directors were senior flight controllers with lead management experience and an average of 10 years of flight-control experience. McCullough added that this group would help NASA transfer the knowledge and experience from the existing human spaceflight programs into the development and execution of the next-generation exploration program with the new Orion spacecraft. Contella had worked for NASA since 1990, when she had begun working in NASA’s cooperative education program while she completed her bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering. She had served as Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Controller and Astronaut Instructor since 1995, responsible for planning, training for, and executing spacewalks. Since 2008, Stover had supported six Space Shuttle flights for ISS assembly and had led the team that managed the ISS electrical power system. Van Cise had worked with NASA since 2000 in a variety of roles. He had been a member of the Operations Support Officer (OSO) team that coordinated ISS repair, maintenance, and assembly operations; served as Special Assistant to the Director of Mission Operations; led the Mechanisms and Maintenance Training Group, training astronauts and flight controllers in skills and techniques related to the repair, maintenance, and assembly of the space station; served on staff in the Flight Director Program Integration Office; and worked as an ISS Flight Controller for the OSO and for the Telemetry, Information, Transfer, and Attitude Navigation (Titan) groups.(NASA, “NASA Chooses Three New Flight Directors To Lead Mission Control,” news release 09-133, 12 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-133_New_Flight_Directors.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Doug Messier, “NASA Chooses 3 New Flight Directors,” Parabolic Arc, 15 June 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at NASA’s KSC at 9:44 a.m. (EST), successfully ending an 11-day mission to the ISS. Atlantis crew delivered and equipped the ISS with nearly 30,000 pounds (13,608 kilograms, or 13.6 tonnes) of critical spare parts. Atlantis crew also conducted three spacewalks in which astronauts completed extra tasks. The Shuttle crew also worked with five U.S., Russian, and European astronauts on board the ISS, to establish power, cooling, and airway connections ahead of the scheduled February arrival of the Tranquility module. The Shuttle and ISS crews also installed new external communications systems to facilitate future maintenance of the space station. Atlantis returned with ISS resident Nicole P. Stott, who had spent 91 days in space. NASA expected that Stott’s return would be the Shuttle’s last rotation of a station crew member.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Crew Returns Home After 11-Day Mission,” news release 09-279, 27 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-279_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Mark Carreau for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Lands Back on Earth,” 30 November 2009.)
Former science teachers and rookie NASA astronauts Richard R. Arnold II and Joseph M. Acaba undertook the third and final spacewalk of STS-119 at the ISS. The spacewalk, which lasted nearly 6.5 hours, was the second spacewalk for both astronauts, their first spacewalk together, and their first without Steven R. Swanson. One of their priority tasks was to free the pin that had prevented Swanson and Acaba from deploying an equipment-storage platform during the previous spacewalk on 21 March. Arnold managed to free the pin, but the platform remained stuck. Mission Control ordered them to use four straps to secure the partially deployed platform to the port side of the ISS’s central truss and then to move on to other tasks. Acaba, riding on the end of the ISS’s robotic arm, moved a rail cart from one side of the station’s central truss to the other, in preparation for future assembly and maintenance work. Arnold and Acaba also performed maintenance work on the robotic arm, including lubricating the grappling end of the arm with grease.(Houston Chronicle, “Spacewalkers Leave One Item for Next Team,” 24 March 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Platform Causes Trouble in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Space Teachers Team Up in Spacewalk,” Space.com, 23 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6478-space-teachers-team-spacewalk.html (accessed 13 May 2011).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 7:43 p.m. (EDT). STS-119 carried the fourth and final set of solar-array wings, which would complete the ISS’s truss when installed. The schedule for the 13-day mission included three spacewalks to install the S6-truss segment on the starboard side of the ISS and to deploy the solar arrays. The seven-member crew was composed of Commander Lee J. Archambault, Pilot Dominic A. “Tony” Antonelli, and Mission Specialists Joseph M. Acaba, Steven R. Swanson, Richard R. Arnold II, John L. Phillips, and JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata. Wakata would remain at the ISS, replacing Expedition 18 crew member Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the station for more than four months. Acaba and Arnold, former teachers who had become fully trained NASA astronauts, were on their first mission, scheduled to undertake critical spacewalking tasks. STS-119 was one month behind schedule; NASA had delayed the launch four times because of fragile valves inside the Shuttle’s propulsion system. On 11 March, NASA had postponed Discovery’s launch because, during fueling, engineers had detected a leak associated with the gaseous hydrogen venting system. Because of the delays, NASA had shortened the STS-119 mission by one day and had dropped one of the four spacewalks originally scheduled.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Fully Power Space Station,” news release 09-060, 15 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-060_Discovery_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, “Discovery Heads to International Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 March 2009.)
The astronauts of STS-119 unfurled the 115-foot (35-meter) blue and gold solar panels from the US$298 million girder they had attached to the ISS on 19 March, encountering none of the problems that had challenged previous missions when unfolding the solar arrays. For example, in 2007, the last time NASA had unfurled solar panels, one wing had caught on a guide wire and had ripped, requiring additional spacewalks to make emergency repairs. To avoid similar problems, NASA had instructed the crew to unfold the wings in stages. The crew opened each wing halfway and then waited nearly an hour before proceeding. They allowed the partially opened wings to soak up sunlight, thereby rendering them less likely to jam. The array, which stretched 240 feet (73 meters), from tip to tip, brought full electrical power to the space station and doubled the amount of power available to perform scientific experiments, from 15 kilowatts to 30 kilowatts.(Robert Block, “Space Station’s New Solar Wings Unfurl,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 21 March 2009; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Space Station’s New Solar Wings Open Easily,” 21 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “Panels Unfold Without Incident,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 2009.)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of STS-127 at the ISS, focusing on odd jobs and unfinished tasks, which they completed in 4 hours and 54 minutes. The duo rewired power cables for the ISS’s American- built attitude-control system; secured loose insulation on a Canadian-built maintenance robot; and added to JEF a pair of television cameras, which would provide good views of Japan’s new unpiloted cargo ship, the H-2 Transfer Vehicle, scheduled to make its maiden flight in September 2009. The only task that the astronauts left unfinished was the installation of a cargo attachment system, a task that Mission Control had decided would require too much time. Instead, Mission Control instructed Cassidy and Marshburn to tend to some “get-ahead” tasks—attaching wire ties to external cables and installing new handrails and work-site attachments on the Kibo laboratory. The five spacewalks tied the record for the most EVAs (extravehicular activities) performed on the ISS while a Space Shuttle was docked at the station.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Wrap Up Space Station Service Call,” Space.com, 27 July 2009, http://www.space. com/7059-spacewalkers-wrap-space-station-service-call.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
SpaceX announced that it had conducted its first Dragon spacecraft operations training in October 2009 at its headquarters in Hawthorne, California, for a group of NASA astronauts and personnel. The training had focused on how the crew would interface with the spacecraft as it approached and docked at the ISS. NASA had assigned astronauts Tracy Caldwell Dyson, Shannon Walker, and Douglas H. Wheelock to be on board the ISS when the Dragon made its inaugural visit under the COTS program, scheduled for February 2010. The training had been the first time the NASA astronauts scheduled to interact with the Dragon were actually inside the flight vehicle. This first training session marked a key step toward SpaceX’s provision of the alternative craft that NASA would use to transport cargo to and from the ISS after the Space Shuttle program ended. In the session, SpaceX had briefed the NASA astronauts on all aspects of the Dragon related to cargo transport—how to open the spacecraft’s hatch, how to enter the craft, and how to send commands as the craft approached the station.(Space Exploration Technologies, “SpaceX Hosts Preliminary Training for NASA ISS Astronauts in Preparation for Dragon Spacecraft Rendezvous and Station Berthing,” SpaceX news release, 3 December 2009, http://www. spacex.com/press.php?page=20091203 (accessed 19 December 2011); Robert Block, “SpaceX Trains Its First Batch of NASA Astronauts,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 2009.)
