leading Istanbul newspaper, Milliyet, reported Turkish newsmen’s reactions after seeing movies of both the Shepard and Gagarin space flights: “When the film was over the journalists asked the Soviet consul general: ‘In the Shepard film we followed all phases of his space flight, but in yours we followed only Khrushchev. * * * Why don’t you show your space flight too?’ The Tass correspondent on behalf of the consul general answered: * * We are mainly interested in people’s excitement and reaction. This is what we wanted you to see.’ Gagarin may have gone into space, but this is not the impression of the journalists who saw both films: Shepard really went into space, not Gagarin, and in front of the whole world, too.”
15 flown to record 3,614 miles per hour by NASA’s Joseph A. Walker at Edwards Air Force Base.
Comdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., awarded the Theodore Roosevelt Distinguished Service Award in New York City.
May Day parade in Red Square, Moscow, reviewed by Maj. Yuri Gagarin beside Premier Khrushchev.
Dr. Edward R. Sharp, Director Emeritus of the NASA Lewis Research Center since his retirement in January, died. Joining NACA in 1922, Dr. Sharp was the first Manager of the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1941, and became its Director in 1947. He had received the U.S. Medal for Merit from President Truman in 1947.
FAI (Federation Aeronautique Internationale) officially recognized the first space flight records claimed by U.S.S.R. and the United States: Yuri Gagarin (April 12, 1961): Duration in orbital flight, 108 minutes; greatest altitude in Earth orbital flight, 203 miles; greatest mass lifted in Earth orbital flight, 10,395 pounds. Alan Shepard (May 5, 1961: Altitude without orbit, 115.696 miles; greatest mass lifted without Earth orbit, 4,031.7 pounds.
Dr. Joseph F. Shea was appointed Deputy Director for Systems Engineering, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA headquarters, reporting to D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA’s Director of Manned Space Flight. Dr. Shea came to NASA from Space Technology Laboratories.
The Freedom 7 Mercury capsule in which Alan B. Shepard, Jr., made the first suborbital space flight, was presented to the National Air Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. In his presentation, NASA Administrator Webb said: “To Americans seeking answers, proof that man can survive in the hostile realm of space is not enough. A solid and meaningful foundation for public support and the basis for our Apollo man-in-space effort is that U.S. astronauts are going into space to do useful work in the cause of all their fellow men.” “Such flights as those of Freedom 7 are not stunts. They are not antithetical to sober scientific and technological research. Interpreted properly, these dramatic events can add much to public understanding and excite creative interest in extending the base on which public support must rest.”
In article in New York Times, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “In my view, we [the United States] do not have a division between peaceful and nonpeaceful objectives for space. Rather, we have space missions to help keep the peace and space missions to enable us to live better in peace.”
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, a former aid to Senator Symington, was nominated by the President to be the Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council,
NASA Space Task Group selected John H. Glenn, Jr., Virgil I. Grissom, and Alan B. Shepard, Jr., to begin special training for first manned Mercury space flight.
USAF-USN-NASA X-15 flown to 108,600 feet and a record speed of 3,900 miles per hour, piloted by Joseph Walker at Edwards, Calif.
Freedom 7, manned Mercury spacecraft (No. 7) carrying Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as pilot, was launched from Cape Canaveral by Mercury-Redstone (MR-3) launch vehicle, to an altitude of 115.696 miles and a range of 302 miles. It was the first American manned space flight. Shepard demonstrated that man can control a vehicle during weightlessness and high G stresses, and significant scientific biomedical data were acquired. He reached a speed of 5,100 miles per hour and flight lasted 14.8 minutes.
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., commander, U.S. Navy, and Virgil I. Grissom, captain, U.S. Air Force, were awarded the first astronaut wings (almost identical design of a shooting star imposed on the traditional pilot’s badge) in a joint ceremony by their respective services.
NASA-USAF-USN rocket research X-15 flown to 169,600 feet by Joseph A. Walker, NASA pilot, the highest altitude ever reached by man and which included 2 minutes of weightlessness at the top of his climb. The X-15, powered by XLR-99 rocket engine designed to thrust it to 50 miles altitude and speeds of up to 4,000 miles per hour, was only run at three-quarters throttle. March SO: USAF announced reduction of the B-70 program contract commitments to North American, Westinghouse, and other firms. Five major subcontracts were canceled and four others sharply reduced.
Yuri Gagarin reported in Pravda that “I was in the center of a whirl of flames” when his Vostok spacecraft reentered the atmosphere on April 12. His book, “Road to Outer Space,” was being serialized in Pravda.
William J. O’Sullivan, Jr., of Langley Research Center awarded the Second NASA Invention and Contribution Award for conception and development of the inflatable space vehicle. Proposed in January 1956 to the U.S. IGY Committee, O’Sullivan’s invention led to two successful NASA experiments, Echo I and Explorer IX, and U.S. Patent No. 2,996,212, entitled “SelfSupporting Space Vehicle ” issued to the NASA Administrator in behalf of the United States on August 15, 1961.
Soviet Academy of Sciences revealed that the pulse rate of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin had risen to 158 beats a minute in his Vostok flight, according to a report circulated by Tass.
Dr. Edward R. Sharp, former Director of Lewis Research Laboratory (1942-61), was presented NASA’s first Outstanding Leadership Medal by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden.
Atlas E fired successfully from Atlantic Missile Range. May 26-June 4: Freedom 7, Mercury spacecraft in which Alan B. Shepard, Jr., made his space flight on May 5, was a major drawing card at the Paris International Air Show. Details of the spacecraft and of Shepard's flight were related to about 650,000 visitors.
President Kennedy presented the Robert J. Collier Trophy to Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Jr., who had directed the development to the Polaris IRBM.
President Kennedy awarded the Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy jointly to the three X-15 test pilots. The first joint award in the liistory of the trophy went to A. Scott Crossfield of North American, Joseph A. Walker of NASA, and Maj. Robert M. White, U.S. Air Force.
NASA Office for the United Nations Conference headed bjr Dr. John P. Hagen was closed, effective this date. Continued uncertainty of arrangements for a conference on the peaceful uses of outer space within the United Nations made such a move necessary. Sustained NASA responsibility in this regard was assigned to the Office of International Programs.
15 (No. 1) flown to 49,780 feet by John B. McKay, NASA test pilot, at Edwards, Calif.
Reported from Cape Canaveral that Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had moved into “ready room” quarters. NASA had made no announcement whether a man would ride in the next Mercury capsule.
U.S.S.R. announced that Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin had successfully orbited the Earth in a 108-minute flight in a 5-ton Vostok (East), the first man to make a successful orbital flight through space.
Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1961 announced as going to three winners for the first time—X—15 rocket research airplane pilots: A. Scott Crossfield, of North American; Joseph A. Walker, of NASA, and Maj. Robert A. White, U.S. Air Force.
15 flown to record speed of 3,300 miles per hour by NASA test pilot, Joseph Walker, at Edwards Air Force Base.
U.S.S.R. announced policy of resumption of nuclear weapon testing which had been suspended March 31, 1958, and that bombs can be delivered anywhere in the world by “powerful rockets like those Majs. Yuri Gagarin and Gherman Titov rode to begin their unrivaled space flights around the Earth.” During August: NASA site selection team headed by John F. Parsons, Associate Director of Ames Research Center, toured possible sites for a manned spacecraft center.
National Aeronautic Association announced selection of Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Jr., to receive the Robert J. Collier trophy for his direction of the Polaris missile program.
Second NASA honor awards ceremony in Washington: Dr. Abe Silverstein, new Director of the Lewis Research Center, received NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal; William O’Sullivan of Project Echo received the NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award; and George D. McCauley received the Sustained Superior Performance Award. Other NASA personnel who had received NASA or non-Federal awards during NASA’s third year were also recognized.
In an interview with C. L. Sulzberger, Premier Khrushchev reviewed the world crisis in detail. “In a strange Darwinian interpretation of the advance of nations,” Sulzberger reported, “Mr. Khrushchev jokingly considers that the United States is still in the stage of ‘jumping’ while the Soviet Union has learned how to ‘fly.’ This refers to the Earth-orbiting successes of the Soviet spacemen, Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin and Maj. Gherman S. Titov.”
Mercury-Atlas 5 launch from Cape Canaveral placed Mercury spacecraft carrying chimpanzee “Enos” into orbit; retro-rockets were fired on second rather than planned third orbit because of developing malfunction of attitude control system. Mercury capsule was recovered 1 hour and 25 minutes after water landing by the destroyer Stormes, and well-performing “Enos” recovered in excellent condition. Project Mercury officials named John H. Glenn as prime astronaut for the first manned orbital mission with M. Scott Carpenter as backup, and Donald Slayton as prime astronaut for second manned orbital mission with Walter Schirra as backup.
Cleveland extension (SNPO-C) of the joint AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO) activated, located on Lewis Research Center and headed by John L. Wilson.
Biomedical results of Mercury-Redstone space flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., publicly reported at a special conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, National Institutes of Health, and the National Academy of Sciences. Shepard’s heart reached a maximum of 138 beats per minute during the flight.
Interviewed in the Netherlands West Indies, en route to Brazil, Maj. Yuri Gagarin said that his next assignment would be a flight to the Moon. Asked about U.S. efforts, he reportedly stated that “there is a place on the Moon for everybody.”
Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Mercury astronaut, was awarded NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal by President Kennedy in a special White House ceremony. It was followed by an informal parade to the Capitol by the seven astronauts for lunch, and a press conference at the State Department auditorium.
