usaf B-58 Hustler bomber claimed 3 transcontinental speed records after a Los Angeles-to-New York-to-Los Angeles nonstop flight: round trip, 4 hrs. 42 min. 12 sec.; west-to-east, 2 hrs. 1 min. 39 sec.; east-to-west, 2 hrs. 15 min. 12 sec. Flying most of the way at 50,000 ft. and at an average speed of 1,044.3 mph, the B-58 trailed a 40-mile-wide sonic boom along the ground in its wake. Crew was: Capt. Robert Sowers, pilot; Capt. Robert MacDonald, navigator; and Capt. John Walton, defense systems operator.
William H. Evans was appointed by nasa as Director of the Pacific Launch Operations Office, Lompoc, Calif. In this assignment he represents nasa in its relationships with pmr, coordinates use of range facilities, and provides necessary services and support for nasa technical programs and projects at pmr. Prior to his association with nasa since January 1961, Evans was Head of the Satellite and Space Vehicles Division of pmr, and before 1957 had served with the Naval Air Missile Test Center at Point Mugu since 1946.
Dr. Joseph A. Conner, Jr., of nasa, said in aaas paper that there will be an arbitrary retirement age for astronauts, not in terms of years but in exposure to penetrating radiation in space.
Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, presented cash invention awards totaling $1,750 to 5 employees on behalf of the nasa Inventions and Contributions Board. Award of $750, highest at msfc to date, went to engineer Billy C. Hughes for feeder restrictor for gas-bearing gyros to be used for Saturn guidance platform. Other inventors honored were John R. Rasquin and Robert J. Schwing-hamer ($500 jointly) for device that electronically measures roll during rocket assembly; Wilhelm Angole and Hans G. Martineck ($400 jointly) for an electrical cabling system; and Martineck ($100 singly) for plug and connector for miniaturized circuits.
Winners of the 1962 Harmon International Trophies were announced as follows: Aviator’s Trophy—Lt. Col. William R. Payne (usaf), for his May 1961 non-stop, record-speed flight of B-58 from Carswell afb, Texas, to Paris, via Washington and New York; Aviatrix Trophy—Jacqueline Cochran, for setting 8 world class records with T-38 jet trainer and for flying F-104 jet fighter at twice the speed of sound, between August 24 and October 12, 1961; Aeronaut’s Trophy—Cdr. Malcolm D. Ross (usn) and the late LCdr.Victor A. Prather (usn), for their record-altitude balloon flight of May 4, 1961, over the Gulf of Mexico.
President John F. Kennedy, in nationally televised address, commented on the “extraordinary achievement of the Soviet Union” in double manned flights of vostok iii and iv. He stated that the U.S. was behind the U.S.S.R. in space exploration, and that it would “be behind for a period in the future. . . . [But] we are making a major effort now, and this country will be heard from in space as well as in other areas in the coming months and years.”
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, speaking before the American Management Association in New York, said: “We believe that the soundness of our present engineering program can be illustrated by the correlation between predicted events and time of occurrence in John Glenn’s recent flight. Indeed, the time from lift-off to impact in this mission was within one second of the pre-flight calculations.”
The Astronautics Committee of the 51-nation F&lliration Aeronautique Internationale, meeting in Paris, certified Soviet Cosmonaut Gherman Titov as holder of two new world records for space flight: duration of flight, 25 hrs. 11 min.; and length of flight, 436,911 mi. In certifying Titov’s records, the committee relaxed its rule that the pilot must land with his vehicle (Titov parachuted to earth). The heaviest payload in orbital flight stlli belongs to the other Soviet cosmonaut, Yuri Gagarin (10,419 lbs.).
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker to 197,000-ft. altitude and 3,784 mph speed (mach 5.13), in 9-min. flight near Delamar Lake, Nev., to evaluate new re-entry technique. Automatic roll damper ceased operating at 100,000-ft. during descent, causing X-15 to go into a simultaneous rolling and yawing motion. Pilot Walker regained stability with manual control and landed safely.
In talk at National Conference on Peaceful Uses of Space, William H.	Meckling, rand Corp. economist, stated that space-age economic payoffs are being exaggerated: “The exploration of space is a very exciting affair, indeed. ... If glamour displaces science in guiding national policy, however, the results may be disappointing. ... “A communications satellite system that charges prices not very much different from present prices and that must be constantly subsidized and protected from competition, is not much of an accomplishment. . . . “How much is it worth ... to have improved weather forecasts? In the absence of a market in which weather forecasts or weather information is sold, it is nearly impossible to answer such questions. . . . “Who is it in foreign nations that is impressed by our space accomplishments? How are their attitudes changed as a consequence? How does that change in behavior affect me as a citizen of the United States? . . .”
aurora 7 with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) as pilot, launched on MA-7 orbital mission by Atlas booster from Cape Canaveral, the second U.S. manned orbital flight and the fourth U.S. manned space flight. Almost faultless countdown, launch was delayed only briefly by ground fog, and Mercury spacecraft was placed into orbit at 17,532 mph (apogee: 167.4 miles; perigee: 99 miles; period: 88.3 minutes). Astronaut Carpenter performed series of space science and technical development experiments including visual and photographic observations of star fields and “white particles,” consumption of solid foods, release of tethered multi-colored balloon to test sighting, and observation of separated Atlas booster. 81,200-mile flight featured attitude stabllization and control pilotage for completion of three orbits, and monitoring of control-systems fuel for proper retrofire attitude. Re-entry caused landing impact point over 200 miles beyond intended area and beyond radio range of recovery forces. After landing, Carpenter egressed through top of capsule and climbed on inflated raft awaiting rescue, to be joined by two usaf paramedics, Airman John T. Heitsch and S/Sgt. Ray E. McClure, who inflated Stulken collar to prevent capsule from sinking. After three hours on water, Astronaut Carpenter was picked up by a helicopter from U.S.S. Intrepid, and his capsule was retrieved by the destroyer Pierce. Astronaut Carpenter was reported in good physical condition, and flown to Grank Turk Island in the Bahamas for 48-hour debriefings and medical examinations.
Dr. John F. Clark was appointed Associate Director and Chief Scientist for nasa Office of Space Sciences. He was formerly Director of Geophysics and Astronomy Programs.
Senator John L. McClellan recommended establishment of a Senate commission on science and technology to study Government’s growing scientific programs, including the desirability of a Cabinet post for science and technology.
Four American scientists led by Dr. William A. Cassidy, research scientist at Lamont Geological Observatory of Columbia University, left New York on three-month expedition to Argentina, where they hoped to find and unearth a 13)£-ton meteorite. Supported by National Science Foundation grant, the expedition would seek the huge meteorite which was reported in late 1700’s by Indians of north central Argentina.
usaf announced names of 10 additional officers to be trained as space pilots, engineers, and program managers for X-20 (Dyna Soar) manned space flight programs: Capt. Alfred L. Atwell; Capt. Charles A. Bassett; Maj. Tommie D. Benefield; Capt. Michael Collins; Capt. Joe M. Engle; Maj. Neil R. Garland; Capt. Edward G. Givens; Capt. Francis G. Neubeck; Capt. James A. Roman, Capt. Alfred H. Uhalt.
Two-stage Caleb rocket successfully air-launched over pmr from Navy F4H Phantom jet piloted by Lt. A. Newman (usn), Caleb reaching an altitude of 1,000 miles with 120-lb. nrl payload designed to measure ion composition of the earth’s upper atmosphere. Project Hi-Hoe, of which this shot was a part, was a series of inexpensive air-launched high-altitude probes under development by the Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake.
nasa test pilot Joseph A. Walker, key speaker at 40th Anniversary and 1962 Annual Meeting of National Aeronautic Association in Washington, said: “I feel very strongly that the source of our strength in the air in commerce and in National Defense is gradually drying up. Looking at the attrition of small airports, the cost o! flight instruction, the attitude of local residents near airports, and the increasing restrictions upon use of airspace and facilities, I cannot help becoming alarmed. . . . The supply of individuals with skills capable of supplying the demand for pilots will inevitably decrease from old age and retirement. . . . “Two things are apparent. One, that the present outlook is gloomy. Two, that history and foresight give us grounds for expecting that there will be plenty of need for pilots in space as well as in the atmosphere. . . . The need for pilots will not be confined to the cockpit. Engineers with pilot training have a better understanding of the cockpit problems. We need the understanding of the cockpit problem in operations, in maintenance and repair, in management and in planning. Beyond doubt, pilot experience can be an effective tool and augment business administration as well as engineering and accounting. . . . “The space programs are depending upon qualified, experienced test pilots. It is my belief that they don’t happen, they are made, and they are made just about the time of the first solo.”
Separation of the disciplines of geology and geophysics in U.S. universities is “nothing short of an intellectual outrage,” Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner told the American Geophysical Union in Washington when that organization presented him with its first John Adams Fleming Award. Only three American universities were moving toward broad programs in geophysical study, he said. He urged the nas and universities to work toward programs that would recognize that geology and geophysics are now “intimately intertwined.”
American Airlines 707 jet transport crashed in Jamaica Bay, N.Y.. seconds after takeoff from New York International Airport, and all 95 persons on board were kllied, the highest toll in U.S. history in the crash of a single airplane. The crash occurred about one hour before the start of the giant parade in honor of Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr.
Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller told 1962 conference of upi editors and publishers that recent U.S. nuclear tests in the Pacific had “not been quite satisfactory” and that it was his guess “that the Russians are ahead of us in the nuclear race today.”
Dr. John A. Simpson, of the University of Chicago’s Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Studies, said in a Voice of America broadcast that space probes and satellites have offered the scientist the first tools for direct measurement and study of electrodynamics in the interplanetary medium, explorer x, for example, had recorded a density of protons in space substantially below predicted values and “almost one million billion times less than the best vacuum that man creates in the laboratory. “Such experiments in space emphasize the fact that there occur phonemena in nature which cannot be scaled down without losing the essence of their physical properties.”
nasa announced that LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn) would be the pilot on the next Mercury orbital space flight (MA-7). Major Donald K. Slayton (usaf), the astronaut originally scheduled for the flight, was disqualified because of an “erratic heart rate,” after the medical findings had been reviewed by an Air Force medical board and a board of civilian cardiologists. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was named as Carpenter’s backup pilot.
Official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug announced that U.S. Astronauts John Glenn and Alan Shepard would join U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin, Gherman Titov, Andrian Nikolayev, and Pavel Popovich at International Astronautical Congress in Bulgaria, September 23 to 29.
John L. Sloop, nasa’s Director of Propulsion and Power Generation, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “. . . some of the new solid propellants promise an increase in performance of over 18 percent. ... If applied to our new Surveyor spacecraft designed to land instruments on the moon, this 18 percent increase in solid propellant specific impulse could make possible an increase in the weight of instruments aboard by more than 50 percent.”
Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee opened hearings to determine whether the U.S. has paid “unnecessary and excessive profits” to companies working on dod contracts. Sen. John L. McClellan, chairman of the committee, announced 40 that investigation would begin with the Army's family of Nike missiles, to be followed by the usaf’s Atlas.
Dr. John W. Findlay, deputy director of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., said Echo-type reflective orbiting balloon and West Ford-type copper-needle belts were potential threats to science of radio astronomy. Writing in Science magazine, Dr. Findlay said these objects would contribute to “noise” in radiotelescope reception and “would cut down sharply on an antenna’s ability to receive faint signals.”
John Dykstra, president of Ford Motor Co., told American Ordnance Association meeting that a great potential defense capability lay untapped in industry—particularly in heavy, mass-producing manufacturing. Asserting that the problem of developing and maintaining broad defense and space capability throughout industry had not been adequately realized or defined, Dykstra suggested reorganizing U.S. productive resources and putting “much more of our heavy manufacturing industry in a state of preparedness to switch readily from peacetime to wartime production. Such preparedness would mean, at a minimum, that heavy industry would be kept current in matters of defense technology in areas of natural interest to it. Such preparedness could also involve a broader distribution of space and defense research and development effort, as well as of production, on a systematic basis. . . . “Whatever form an Industrial National Guard might take, I believe the concept is essential. In view of the enormous demands now being made on all our resources of brainpower, we cannot afford to make less than the best possible economic and efficient use of them. ...”
In nas lecture for Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Joseph W. Chamberlain of the University of Chicago’s Yerkes Observatory predicted that space-age research techniques may soon provide final answers to questions about the aurora that have eluded scientists for centuries. “Better understanding of physical processes producing the aurora,” he said, “should allow the spec-troscopist to derive even more information from his observations of the auroral spectrum about the physics and chemical processes in the high atmosphere.” He suggested that space probes may detect auroras on other planets which wlli provide an entire new set of data different from terrestrial phenomena with which to test hypotheses for auroral bombardment mechanisms.
Vice Adm. William F. Raborn (usn) wrote in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings that ability to control weather might bring about greater changes in warfare than did explosion of first nuclear bomb, adding: “The capabllity to change the direction of destructive storms and guide them toward enemy concentration may exist in the future arsenal of the Navy tactical commander. . . . We already have taken our first steps toward developing an environmental warfare capability. We are using satellite weather from tiros ii for current tactical operations and more accurate long-range weather predictions. . . . Some experiments in fog dissipation have shown promise, and some exploratory research has been conducted on ways to change the heading of major storms. . . .” Admiral Raborn said usn was planning 10-year study of the atmosphere (“atmos”) which would be coordinated with separate research on oceans. During December: Soviet Prof. V. Nikiforov, in article entitled “Chemistry in the Cosmos and on the Moon” which appeared in Soviet journal Aviation and Cosmonautics, suggested use of a chemical foam envelope on the moon to protect cosmonauts from great temperature changes, solar radiation, and materials on the lunar surface.
Astronaut Donald K. Slayton underwent physical examination by heart specialist Dr. Paul Dudley White in Boston.
In opinion poll taken in Ohio Congressional District (23) by Congressman William E. Minshall on whether the U.S. should enter into a cooperative space program with Russia, 47% replied affirmative, 39.6% replied negative, and 13.3% made “no opinion” replies.
Astronaut John Glenn and Cosmonaut Gherman Titov appeared on abc-TV program, “The Nation’s Future.” Col. Glenn pressed Major Titov on possible Soviet space mishaps, but no new information was forthcoming.
usaf named first two test pilots of the mach three RS-70: Lt. Col. Joseph F. Cotton, of Rushville, Ind.; and Maj. Fitzhugh Flliton, of Talladega, Ala.
Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, speaking at Danish-Soviet Friendship Advancement Society in Copenhagen, attacked U.S. space projects. He charged U.S. launched satellites which spied on other countries, endangered space travel by its atmospheric nuclear tests, and put millions of copper needles in space, making space research difficult. He added: “I also know a certain country is considering plans to set up bases on the moon from which attacks on other parts of the world can be made.”
Donald F. Conaway, national executive secretary of American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, announced he had requested a conference with European counterparts to discuss minimum pay scales for performers appearing on future Telstar satellite relays. He added: “Telstar is a great challenge. We cannot realistically set an international rate for performers until many problems are settled with the countries.” During July: Outfitted in pressure suits in a simulated space environment, five nasa scientists of msfc and msc completed study determining how an astronaut could work on J-2 rocket engine during actual space flight, at Rocketdyne. Maintenance, repair, replacement, and adjustment of components of the hydrogen-fueled J-2 were performed along with research on the design of special tools and pressure suits.
John Jay Ide, European representative of naca (1921-40, 1946-50) and U.S. representative at numerous international air law and commerce conventions, died in New York. He was a founder and fellow of the ias, a board member of the naa, and an honorary member of the Royal Aeronautical Society. Mr. Ide had contributed to world aviation in making known the results of naca research and in acquiring information on European progress, as well as helping the establishment of transatlantic commercial air routes.
Congressman John J. Rhodes (Ariz.) polled his district, receiving 5,000	replies to a series of current questions. To the question— “Are you in favor of United States-Kussian space cooperation?”— the response was: 19% said “Yes”; and, 70% said “No.”
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Michael E.	Lipschutz discovered diamonds in meteorite that fell in India 90 years ago, the findings published in Science. Dr. Lipschutz, an astrochemist, is first lieutenant in U.S. Army on active duty with nasa. His research was made with minute portion of the Dvalpur meteorite, which fell to earth May 8, 1872. Dr. Lip-scnutz observed two sizes of diamond crystallites in the meteorite—a few large crystals and many small ciystals. He concluded that diamonds in Dyalpur meteorite were formed by shock when meteorite’s parent body collided with another body in space. December 17: Although relay power supply remained low, Nutlev, N.J., ground station was able to obtain about 10 min. of usable telemetry data from the nasa satellite. Engineers were conducting intensive analysis of telemetry data in effort to diagnose cause of relay’s low battery voltage.
X-15 No. 2, piloted by nasa’s John B. McKay, was flown to 129,000-ft. altitude (24.4 mi.) and 3,716-mph speed (mach 5) in test of aircraft’s performance without its electronic flight-control system and without its ventral fin. Pilot McKay induced the most severe yawing motion thus far in tests to check the craft’s re-entry stability under severe strain. Although pilot McKay later reported “the whole airplane shook for about three minutes,” the stability test was considered very successful. Altitude and speed were greatest ever achieved in X-15 flights without the lower tail-fin.
Mercury officials debriefing Astronaut John Glenn at Giand Turk Island announced that he was in “excellent physical condition.” Dr. Robert B. Voas, psychologist and training officer, said that it was “quite significant” that Glenn had been unable to detect any ill effects during almost five hours of weightlessness. Voas pointed out that longer flights such as the 17 orbits of Cosmonaut Titov are required to document the physical effects of prolonged weightlessness.
Two-week meeting of Study Group IV of the International Radio Consultative Committee (ccir) of the International Telecommunication Union (itu) concluded in Washington, D.C. Study Group IV reviewed technical phases of space communications, including the selection of frequencies for telecommunications with and between space vehicles. Over 200 representatives from 30 countries participated in these sessions, Dr. John P. Hagen serving as head of the U.S. delegation.
U.S. Army claimed a new world speed record for helicopters, when Capt. William F. Gurley (usa) flew a YHU-lD Iroquois helicopter over a closed-circuit course near Fort Worth, Texas, at 133.9 mph, shattering a two-year-old Soviet mark of 88 mph.
Congressman Joseph E. Karth (Minn.), chairman of space sciences subcommittee, said in press interview that planned mission schedule for Saturn launch vehicle “doesn’t appear to be the best way to use a vehicle on which we have spent so much money.” Mr. Karth said the powerful vehicle might prove useful in “speeding up the interplanetary research program, which may not be ambitious enough.”
usmc gold medal was presented to Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc) at usmc 187th anniversary dinner, Washington. Medal commemorated Astronaut Glenn’s Project Mercury orbital space flight Feb. 20, 1962 (MA-6).
Drew Pearson referred to Cosmonaut Titov’s recent denial of Pearson’s report of February 23, 1962, that five Russian cosmonauts had been lost in previous manned space flight attempts. He pointed out that the unsuccessful attempts were not orbital shot, rather were suborbital “rocket rides” such as that of Cdr. Alan Shepard.
Astronaut John H. Glenn was awarded the Hubbard Medal of the National Geographic Society “for extraordinary contributions to scientific knowledge of the world and beyond as a pioneer in exploring the ocean of space.” Awarded only 20 times since it was struck in 1906, the Hubbard Medal honorees have included Adm. Robert E. Peary, Charles A. Lindbergh, Roald Amundsen, and Adm. Richard E. Byrd.
Spokesman said that the comsat corporation created by an act of the Congress would be named the Space Communications Corporation by decision of the board of incorporators. The board also decided to lease Tregaron, estate of Mrs. Herbert May and her former husband, the late Joseph E. Davies, as temporary headquarters in Washington, D.C.
Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, announced construction of $12.3-mlliion space radiation effects laboratory wollid begin in March and wollid be completed in about two years. Facility, to be operated by nasa and three -Virginia colleges, wollid be used to study effects of radiation on space vehicle materials and components; it wollid simulate radiation hazards astronauts and spacecraft wollid encounter in space. Facility wollid be used also in graduate studies program in conjunction with the three colleges—Univ. of Virginia, College of William and Mary, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
In a Pentagon ceremony, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., was awarded the Navy’s astronaut wings and a new Marine Corps device—a winged rocket superimposed on a globe—that would also be given to all future Marines who orbited the earth in a space capsule.
Subcommittee on Patents of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics released its report following three years of study of the operation of the patent provisions of the Space Act of 1958. The report of the subcommittee headed by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario contended the patent provisions that gave the Government title to most inventions resulting from NASA-financed research were damaging to small business, cost the taxpayer money, diluted the national space effort, and made industry reluctant to market the products of such research. Recommended that patent ownership in most cases be turned over to industry, with Government retaining royalty-free use. A minority report by Rep. William F. Ryan pointed out that with almost 95% of Government research money “going to big business, retention of title by the contractors will inevitably bring about concentration of technology and economic power.”
nasa named Charles H. Zimmerman as Director of Aeronautical Research in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology. Zimmerman, who had joined naca in 1929 and served as associate head of the Aerospace Mechanics Division of Langley Research Center since August 1959, succeeded John Stack who retired last month. Zimmerman would be responsible for the expanding nasa aeronautical program, which supports and conducts research for national goals in military and commercial aircraft, including v/stol aircraft, supersonic transports, long-range flight at hypersonic speeds, technical support of the usaf X-20 (Dyna Soar) and full responsibility for the X—15 research airplane program.
President John F. Kennedy, in message to U.S.S.R. Premier Nikita Khrushchev, said: “I send to you and to the Soviet people the heartiest congratulations of the people and the Government of the United States on the outstanding joint flights of Maj. Nikolayev and Col. Popovich. This new accomplishment is an important forward step in the great human adventure of the peaceful exploitation of space. America’s astronauts join with me in sending our salute to Maj. Nikolayev and Col. Popovich.”
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
nasa Administrator Webb introduced Robert R. Gilruth and Astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn to nasa Headquarters’ personnel assembled in fob No. 6, Washington.
Astronauts John Glenn and Scott Carpenter, and George M. Low, nasa Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, testified before House Subcommittee on qualifications for astronauts. Low testified that qualifications would be raised rather than lowered for Project Apollo, that the sex of pilots had never been a requirement, but that if any resources were diverted for a woman in space effort “we would have to slow down on our national goal of landing a man on the moon in this decade.” Astronaut Glenn said on women astronauts: “I couldn’t care less who’s over there [in the next seat] as long as it’s the most qualified person. . . . I wouldn’t oppose a women’s astronaut training program; I just see no requirement for it.” nasa had not found one woman to date who met all astronaut requirements: American citizenship; excellent physical condition; degree in physical or biological sciences or engineering; and experimental jet flight-test experience.
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc) was awarded the Alfred A. Cunningham Trophy for being selected as the Marine Aviator of the Year. Mercury Astronaut Glenn orbited the earth three times in first U.S. manned orbital flight MA-6, February 20, 1962.
Monetary awards under $1,000 were made to nasa employees for patentable inventions: nasa Ames Research Center—Vernon L. Rogallo; Joseph R. Smith, Jr.; John V. Foster; and Albert E. Clark, Jr.; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center—Harold J. Peake, Stephen Paull, and William A. Leavy; nasa Langley Research Center—William J. O’Sullivan, Jr.; George F. Pezdirtz; George F. Look; Frank M. Ballentine, Jr.; Virgil S. Ritchie; Howard F. Ogden; Eldon E. Kordes; Donald H. Trussed; Deene J. Weidman; George E. Griffith; Blake W. Corson, Jr.; and Emanuel Schnitzer; nasa Lewis Research Center—Paul F. Sikora; nasa Manned Spacecraft Center—Warren Gillespie, Jr.; nasa Marshall Space Flight Center—Donelson B. Horton.
Representative Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.), speaking at House Education Subcommittee hearing, criticized nasa’s hopes to recruit 1,000 graduate students into space research each year during this decade: “That’sj25 per cent of our production of Ph.D.’s in the space-oriented sciences. That’s an incredible share of our brainpower to concentrate on one agency.” John F. Clark, Associate Director and Chief Scientist, nasa Office of Space Sciences, defended nasa aim as being commensurate with nasa’s share of total Government expenditures for research.
aec announced Dr. Edward Teller would be awarded the Enrico Fermi Award at ceremony on Dec. 3. Citation accompanying the award would praise Dr. Teller “for contributions to chemical and nuclear physics, for his leadership in thermonuclear research, and for efforts to strengthen the national security.” Dr. Teller, now a professor at University of California, is most noted for his role in development of thermonuclear bomb.
National Aeronautic Association announced John Stack, former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, would receive 1962 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy. Stack was cited for his major contributions to aeronautical research and for “his leadership and vision” during 34 years with naca and nasa.
nasa scientists reported to cospar session that data from explorer ix indicated that the upper atmosphere was heated by sun spot activity. In 1957 and 1958, when solar activity was at the maximum of its 11.1-year cycle, air density at a height of 350 miles was 10 times higher than in 1961 when activity was nearer its minimum. This suggests that “with a decrease in solar activity the upper atmosphere becomes cooler and shrinks to the earth, so that the air density at a given altitude decreases.” Report on explorer ix, the 12-ft. inflated satellite sensitive to density changes, was made by William J. O’Sullivan, Claude W. Coffee, Jr., and Gerald M. Keating.
At national conference of American Geophysical Union at Stanford Univ., scientists John D. Anderson and George Null of jpl reported mariner ii fly-by of Venus produced the most accurate estimate yet of the mass of that planet—0.81485 times the mass of the earth, with probable error of 0.015 per cent. Final analysis might slightly alter value and further reduce error.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, was awarded the Arnold Air Society’s trophy as the civilian who had made the most outstanding contribution to aerospace science and national security in 1961.
Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Sen. John J. Sparkman of Alabama as acting chairman) announced plans for hearings on international aspects of the communications satellite bill. Plans called for testimony by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, other State Department officials, and representatives of Defense Department, Commerce Department, and Justice Department, as well as
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., visited the White House at the invitation of the President.
Reported that Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had received less than half the heavy primary cosmic radiation dosage expected during his 4.5-hr. orbital flight MA-6. According to Dr. Hermann J. Schaefer of usn Biophysics Branch, Pensacola, the MA-6 spacecraft walls and capsule instrumentation probably absorbed many of the rays and kept the total dosage lower than expected.
Army launched Nike-Zeus missile in what was described as a successful intercept of a simulated icbm nose cone. Apriif!: nasa sponsored a day-long technical symposium in Washington on results of the MA-6 three-orbit space flight. Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and officials of Project Mercury reviewed the findings of the Feb. 20 flight and stressed the conclusion that the presence of the astronaut had been indispensable to successful completion of the three-orbit mission. On the Glenn effect—the firefly-like particles Glenn reported seeing outside Ms capsule during each of the three sunrises—Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief, Theoretical Division, Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that study had shown them to be flakes of paint from the spacecraft.
President Kennedy presented aec’s Enrico Fermi Award for 1962, carrying a $50,000 prize, to nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller, the citation reading: “For contributions to chemical and nuclear physics, for his leadership in the thermonuclear research and for efforts to strengthen national security.”
Seven X-15 pilots and Paul F. Bickle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center, were awarded the first John J. Montgomery Award for aerospace achievement by the National Society of Aerospace Professionals and the Aerospace Museum of San Diego. The X-15 pilots were : Scott Crossfield, naa; Maj. Robert M. White, usaf; Neil A. Armstrong, nasa; John B. McKay, nasa; Joseph A. Walker, nasa; Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen, usn: and Maj. Robert A. Rush worth, usaf. During September: Ground rehearsals for onr-nsf-nasa Stratoscope II balloon-carried telescope experiment took place in Norwalk, Conn., the 36-in. telescope focusing on the planet Jupiter. Later in month, telescope was disassembled and transported to Palestine, Tex., where it would remain in hangar until first flight, in February or March 1963. To be lifted above,most of the earth’s atmosphere by two balloons, telescope would be stabilized at 80,000-ft. altitude throughout each observing night, where it will make a variety of astronomical and planetary observations.
Reported that Neil Armstrong, nasa X-15 tost pilot, was studying approaches and abort maneuvers for Dyna Soar project by flights in an F5D aircraft.
In speech at Lubbock, Texas, Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said that Armed Forces Day 1962 has a special meaning: “It means John Glenn and our rising capabllities in space. It means our desire to share space for peaceful purposes with the rest of the world. And it underscores our determination to see to it that no nation is disfranchised in space . . . “The primary purpose of our arms has always been peace, not war . . . “Space is the new measure of our problems as well as our opportunities. The principal responsibilities for the nation’s space program are vested in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Air Force. We work together as a team, not rivals. And together we are doing the spadework for the space technology of tomorrow. “Today, space is still free and open. It must stay that way. We can not allow it to be pre-empted tomorrow for use as a military staging area by those who hope to dominate the world. “I believe with President Kennedy that space is a great opportunity as well as a great task. ...”	_
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov visited the White House and toured the Mall in Washington, D.C. At joint press conference at the National Academy of Sciences, Glenn and Titov both spoke about possible international cooperation in manned space flight, Titov suggesting that the diplomats would first have to reach agreement on disarmament. Titov said that the Soviet press conference on August 14, 1961, held at Ludnicki, at which the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Matislav Keldysh discussed the rocket boosters of vostok ii, contained all useful information available on the Soviet rockets. Titov also said that the released photograph of vostok ii was of a mockup.
House of Representatives passed a resolution declaring February 20 to be John Glenn Day, sent it to the Senate.
X-15 made its 50th successful flight from Edwards afb, Calif., with nasa's Joseph A. Walker as pilot. The X-15 No. 1, testing an emergency flight control system, reached a speed of 3,920 mph (mach 5.84) and an altitude of 150,000 ft.
President John F. Kennedy presented the Robert J. Collier Trophy, aviation’s most distinguished award, to four X-15 pilots: Major Robert M. White (usaf), A. Scott Crossfield (naa), Joseph A. Walker (nasa), and Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen (usn). Following the White House ceremony, the pilots received personal miniatures of the Collier Trophy at a luncheon co-sponsored by the Aero Club of Washington and the National Aeronautic Association.
Edward R. Murrow, Director of usia, testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: “Having contributed to developing the [communications satellite] system, Government should not be on a parity of payment with other commercial users. We strongly believe that affordable rates for our agency’s use is an appropriate partial repayment for that national investment.” He replied, in answer to question, that he would endorse the bill as it was.
Senate debate on legislation to permit private ownership of communications satellite systems began, with Sen. John O. Pastore as floor manager of the White House-backed bill.
nasa’s Director of Aeronautical Research, John Stack, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke of nasa support of dod missile programs: “Included in this work are such as Pershing, Atlas, Nike, Nike-Zeus, Eagle, gar-9 and Skybolt. The nasa contributions have been in two areas, one providing critical aerodynamic information for performance determination and control system characteristics and the other in suggesting configuration improvements to improve the over-all characteristics.”
Two usn pilots, in separate flights, officially claimed two world flying records held by U.S.S.R. since 1940. LCdr. Fred A. W. Franke reached 27,380-ft. altitude in UF-2G Albatross amphibian with 4,410-lb. load; LCdr. Donald E. Moore reached 29,460-ft. altitude in same aircraft with 2,205-lb. load. Both flights were made from New York nas, Floyd Bennett Field.
John Rubel, Director of dod Office of Research and Development, testified before subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that it was “highly doubtful that dod would undertake a new weather satellite program at this time,” and stated the military interest in weather satellite development was adequately protected by existing nasa and Weather Bureau programs.
Monetary awards for patentable inventions were made to nasa employees under provisions of the Incentive Awards Act of 1954 as follows: George A. Smith of nasa Ames Research Center; Arlen F. Carter, George P. Wood, and Adolf Busemann of nasa Langley Research Center; David G. Evans, Warner L. Stewart, Edward F. Baehr, H. Allen, Jr., C. C. Ciepluch, E. A. Fletcher, Samuel Stein, David M. Straight, and John W. Gregory of nasa Lewis Research Center; William J. D. Escher and Thomas L. Greenwood of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Mercury Astronaut Donald K. Slayton had been named “Coordinator of Astronaut Activities.” Slayton wollid be responsible for assignment of training and engineering duties of all the astronauts.
In ejection capsule test, brown bear “Big John” rode in capsule ejected from B-58 at 1,060 mph and 45,000 ft. and parachuted to earth near Edwards afb, Calif.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was selected as the National Father of the Year. Earlier this month, Ms mother had been selected as World Mother of the Year.
James A. Martin, nasa X-15 Program Manager, in letter to the Washington Evening Star clarified the method of computing mach number in high-speed flight. “Mach number is a direct function of atmospheric temperature at the altitude at which the vehicle is flying. This temperature varies from day to day for the same altitude. Because of this, it is possible that the same number of feet per second at the same altitude can be more or less than a given Mach number.” He pointed out that on November 9, 1961, Major Robert White flew the X-15 to speed of 6,005 feet per second; on June 27, 1962, Joseph Walker flew to 6,020 feet per second, at about the same altitude as Major White. However, because of differences in atmospheric temperatures for the two days, Major White attained higher mach number (M 6.04) than Walker (M 5.94).
In press interview in Houston, Astronauts Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn) said television pictures of Maj. Cooper would be transmitted to ground stations during MA-9 flight by means of miniature transmitter inside the Mercury spacecraft. Pictures could not be viewed live on commercial TV because transmissions would be on different scan speed. Astronaut Cooper also said that a rendezvous maneuver had been considered for MA-9 flight, but decision had been made not to attempt the maneuver. MA-9 is considered to be the last Project Mercury flight, to be followed by Project Gemini. November 23-December 2: Space Science Fair, held in Cleveland and cosponsored by nasa and Cleveland Plain Dealer, included extensive exhibit covering “virtually all topics of space technology” as well as series of lectures for junior and senior high school students by aerospace scientists and engineers Honorary co-chairmen of the fair were nasa Administrator James E. Webb and former nasa Administrator T. Keith Glennan, President of Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland.
nasa announced Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, Jr. (usaf), had been selected for 18-orbit Project Mercury flight MA-9. The day-long space flight would be made no earlier than April 1963. Astronaut Cooper, youngest of original seven astronauts, was back-up pilot and technical adviser for Astronaut Walter M. Schirra in flight MA-8. Back-up pilot for MA-9 would be Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., who made first U.S. manned space flight (suborbital flight, MR-3) on May 5, 1961.
John Stack, former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research and naca aerodynamicist, was awarded Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy—sterling silver model of Wright Brothers’ Kitty Hawk airplane—at Wright Memorial Dinner, Washington. Earlier in the day, ceremonies at Kill Devil Hills near Batty Hawk, N.C., commemorated 59th anniversary of Wright brothers’ historic flight.
Pope John XXIII at Vatican summer palace stated to several thousand pilgrims that U.S. telstar satellite had “helped strengthen brotherhood among peoples,” its use “marked a new stage of peaceful progress.”
Results of a usia poll in Britain showed that 82% of people questioned had identified telstar communications satellite by name, compared to 78% able to identify sputnik i in 1957. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science gnd Astronautics, Robert Mayer Evans, special assistant to usia Director Edward R. Murrow, reported the survey’s results and said they showed “an extraordinary level of awareness” of the communication satellite in its first weeks of existence.
Lt. Col. John A. Powers, addressing the Texas Associated Press Broadcasters Association, said that the next manned space flight (MA-8) might be as many as seven orbits. “We’ll go for the full seven if all systems work perfectly,” the Project Mercury spokesman stated.
In emergency landing of X-15 No. 2, piloted by nasa’s John McKay, it went out of control when nosewheel broke off, the craft skidding nose down and sideways, then stopping in upside-down position. McKay sustained only superficial injuries; X-15 nose gear, wings, and tail were damaged. Flight was supposed to have reached 120,000-ft. altitude in test of stability during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere, but engine failed to develop power when X-15 was released from B-52 mother ship at 45,000 ft. and McKay glided to emergency landing at Mud Lake, Nev. Flight was 31st made in X-15 No. 2, seventh in X-15 by McKay, and first X-15 flight involving any injury to personnel.
Lt. Col. Joseph A. Connor, Jr. (usaf) of nasa Office of Manned Space Flight received Air Force Legion of Merit for establishing and directing nuclear safety board for transit iv-a satellite. Lt. Col. Connor’s work on the project was done more than a year ago when he was assigned to the aec.
Ejection capsllie test at Edwards afb, Chief W/O Edward J. Murray (usaf) was ejected from B-58 flying at 565 mph and capsllie parachuted to earth successfully. During February: Kenneth C. Sanderson of nasa’s Flight Research Center was named Chairman of the Dyna-Soar Instrument Development Team, a joint USAF-NASA-Industry group formed to provide technical direction over the development of sensors, communications systems, signal conditioners, airborne recorders and telemetry, ground recovery devices, and data processing equipment. Sanderson succeeded Frank Smith of nasa’s Langley Research Center.
nasa’s nine new astronauts were named in Houston by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center (msc). Chosen from 253 applicants, the former test pilots who would join original seven Mercury astronauts in training for Projects Gemini and Apollo were: Neil A. Armstrong, nasa civilian test pilot; Maj. Frank Borman (usaf); Lt. Charles Conrad, Jr. (usn); LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn); Capt. James A. McDivitt (usaf); Elliot M. See, Jr., civilian test pilot for General Electric Co.; Capt. Thomas P. Stafford (usaf); Capt. Edward H. White, II (usaf) ; and LCdr. John W. Young (usn). Dr. Gilruth stressed that they wollid not all necessarily make actual space flights. “Assignment to flight crews will depend upon the continuing physical and technical status of the individuals concerned and upon the future flight schedllie requirements.”
nasa awards of less than $1,000 for inventions were made to the following nasa employees: D. H. Buckley, R. L. Johnson, Earl W. Conrad, R. J. Weber, F. D. Kochendorfer, John C. Nettles, Glen E. McDonald, Gerald Morrell, L. A. Baldwin, V.	A. Sandborn, C. J. Blaze, C. G. Richter, and Marcus F. Heid-mann of Lewis Research Center; and David H. Schaefer of Goddard Space Flight Center.
Joseph A. Walker, Chief Research Pilot for nasa’s Flight Research Center, was awarded an honorary Doctor of Aeronautical Sciences degree from Washington and Jefferson College, Washington, Pa. Walker had been graduated from Washington and Jefferson in 1942 with a major in physics.
X-15 (No. 3) flown to 3,715 mph and 133,000 ft. in test of new autopilot control system, nasa’s Neil Armstrong as pilot.
The Television Academy announced annual Emmy Award nominations. The orbital flight of Astronaut Glenn and Mrs. John F. Kennedy’s tour of the White House—regarded as top TV events—were not considered because they had been cooperatively covered by the three major networks.
U.S.S.R. submitted information on 16 Soviet space flights for inclusion in the U.N. public registry on space launchings. Included were the manned orbital flights by Majs. Yuri A. Gagarin and Gherman S. Titov. U.S. submitted a similar list to the U.N. on March 5, covering U.S. space launchings to Feb. 15, 1962, that were still in orbit.
X-15 No. 3 flew to 207,000 ft. and 3,818 mph (mach 5.33) in a test of a special adaptive control system. Flight was made from Edwards afb, Calif., nasa’s Neil Armstrong as pilot.
Joseph A. Walker (nasa) flew Xyl5 No. 3 in test of the research aircraft’s ability to automatically correct undesired yaw. In nine-minute flight, the X-15 reached maximum altitude of 147,000 ft. and speed of 3,445 mph (mach 4.99).
Representative Joseph E. Karth, chairman of a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced that hearings on four communications satellite systems would begin August 15, to determine whether duplication existed among the projects (Relay, Syncom, Advent, and Telstar).
X-15 No. 1 flown to an altitude of approximately 246,700 ft. (46.7 mi.) with nasa’s Joseph A. Walker at the controls. The record altitude was achieved in a climbing attitude of about 38°; top speed attained was 3,443 mph. Previous altitude record was 217,000	ft., achieved on October 11, 1961, by Major Robert White (usaf). The speed record of 4,093 mph was set on November 9, 1961, by Major Robert White.
New York Academy of Sciences conference revealed disagreements on evidence presented on extraterrestrial life. Dr. Bartholomew Nagy of Fordham University, Dr. George Claus of NYuMedical Center, and Dr. Warren G. Meinchein of Esso Research presented evidence, first reported last year, that they had found “organized elements” in the Orgueil meteorite. Dr. Frank W. Fitch and Dr. Edward Anders of the University of Chicago reported that the Fordham group found “probably nothing more than earthly contaminants such as ragweed pollen and starch grains.” Dr. Harold Urey of the University of California (La Jolla) stated that the U.S. is spending $25 billion to go to the moon to answer this and other questions. All agreed that the question of extraterrestrial life was of basic scientific significance.
Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, predicted in a press conference at Sunnyvale, Calif., that one of the next two attempts to impact the moon with a Ranger spacecraft would be a partial success. He reported that ranger iii was now more than 500,000	miles from the earth and moving into a solar orbit at 2,600 mph.
usaf announced selection of seven usaf officers and one usn officer for the second class in the usaf’s space pilot school. The class, to begin on June 18 at Edwards afb, Calif., would include LCdr. Lloyd N. Hoover (usn), Majs. Donald M. Sorlie and Byron F. Knole (usaf), and Capts. Albert H. Crews, Jr., Charles C. Bock, Jr., William T. Twin ting, Robert W. Smith, and Robert H. McIntosh (usaf).
Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (usn), the first U.S. astronaut, and Lt. Col. R. G. Robinson (usmc) were awarded the fai DeLaVaulx Medal—Shepard for achieving 615,300-ft. altitude in his suborbital Mercury flight (MR-3) and Robinson for setting closed-course speed mark of 1,606.5 mph in McDonnell F4C aircraft.
Mercury astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn appeared before both the House Science and Astronautics Committee and the Senate Aeronautics and Space Committee, answering a variety of questions on future manned space flight. Dr. Robert Seamans, nasa Associate Administrator, summarized specific nasa program, manpower, and money requirements before the House Committee.
First African showing of friendship 7, Astronaut John Glenn’s space capsule, drew record crowds, usia reported that over 40,000	persons had viewed the capsule in Accra, Ghana, in three days, more than at previous showings in London, Paris, Madrid, and Belgrade.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc), was chosen as Marine Aviator of the Year for 1962-63. This was the first annual award of the Alfred A. Cunningham Trophy.
In private audience with Pope John XXIII, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson presented the Pope with a small model of telstar communications satellite.
Mr. John Stack, Director of Aeronautical Research, nasa, speaking before the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences in New York, advocated a variable-wing, variable-fuselage configuration for the nation’s supersonic transport aircraft. Not only were these practicable for the state of the art but the only way he saw to gain the necessary subsonic vs. sonic flight characteristics and load flexibility to make the aircraft economically usable.
American Newspaper Publishers Association meeting in New York, set up a scientific advisory committee to make a year’s study of possible application to newspapers of space technology, nuclear energy, computer technology, and other developments. Members appointed were: Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, Dean of U. of Minnesota’s Institute of Technology, chairman; Trevor Gardner, President of Hycon Manufacturing Co.; and Dr. John R. Pierce of Bell Telephone Lab.
William L. Gill, Chief of Crew Systems Div. Radiation Branch, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said walls of Apollo spacecraft would provide most of radiation shielding required for crew. Astronauts would have special shielding devices only for their eyes.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, stated that the U.S. program for peaceful development of space was not inconsistent with military space development, in a speech before the National Capitol Section of the ars. “The true mission of our military strength is to protect the peace,” he said. “If we do not take adequate care of our national defense, we will not have a chance to do any of the other things in space—at least as free men.”
Senators Joseph S. Clark of Pennsylvania and Wayne Morse of Oregon, leaders of the Senate opposition to pending communications satellite bill, stated on radio and television interview that they still insisted the communications satellite system must be owned and controlled by the Government. However, they added that they were not committed to Government operation, and that they were “perfectly willing to consider working out a lease or a license” with at&t, rca, or any other communications company.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on $3.7-blliion nasa authorization request. Administrator Webb, Robert R. Gilruth (Director msc), and Astronauts Glenn, Grissom, and Shepard appeared as witnesses. Mr. Webb outlined nasa’s projected program to be covered in detail in subsequent testimony: (1) total ten year program ahead may cost over $35 blliion; (2) new astronaut training program to include scientists wlli be announced shortly; (3) future manned spacecraft wlli be capable of landing on land or water; (4) nasa is opposed to using astronauts as goodwlli ambassadors, as they are needed on the current program; (5) 92% of nasa’s budget wlli be spent through industry and universities. Astronaut Glenn pointed out that the Nation “must be prepared” for failures in future manned space flights. “We don’t envision every flight,” he said, “coming back as successfully as the three we have had so far ... I hope we wlli always have the confidence in the program that we now have despite the fact there wlli be times when we are not riding a crest of happiness and enthusiasm as we now are.”
nasa Inventions and Contributions Board made awards of less than $1,000 to the following nasa employees: Wade E. Lanford, Langley Research Center; Billy C. Hughes, John R. Raskin, Robert J. Schwinghamer, Wilhelm Angele, and Hans G. Martineck, Marshall Space Flight Center.
Soviet Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov and Yuri A. Gagarin hinted in a press interview that the U.S.S.R. would attempt prolonged manned orbital flight some time during 1962. Colonel Gararin remarked: “Recently in Japan I said that new flights through space are not far off and expressed confidence that they wollid certainly take place this year.” Major Titov then added: “I also am of the same opinion and want to add that the time already is past when the length of cosmic flights wlli be only hundreds of thousands of kilometers. I think that flights of future cosmonauts wlli be more prolonged and the route of their cosmic ships wlli measure mlliions of kilometers.”
The Senate passed nasa authorization for FY 1963 (H.R. 11737) of $3,820,515,520. Amendments submitted by Senator William Proxmire to require competitive bidding on space projects and to establish a presidential commission to study the impact of the space program upon the nation’s manpower were both defeated by lopsided votes. Senate authorization restored $116 million cut by the House.
usaf announced selection of four usaf and two nasa pilots as “pilot-engineering consultants” for the Dyna-Soar program. A decision would be made later whether the men would actually fly the spacecraft, usaf officers selected were: Maj. James W. Wood, Capt. Henry C. Gordon, Capt. Russell L. Rogers, and Capt. William J. Knight, nasa pilots selected were: Neil A. Armstrong and Milton O. Thompson. During March: White House panel headed by Dr. Paul Beeson of Yale University, assisted by Dr. James Hartgering, special assistant in the President’s Scientific Adviser’s office, recommended that nasa make greater use of usaf capabilities in bioastronautics.
Dr. Edward Teller, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended a program for establishing a large and independent colony on the moon, as a means of having a working base in space and control of near space from a standpoint of national security. A nuclear reactor should be developed to operate on the moon, eventually to furnish the power to extract water from the moon’s rocks and soil, he said.
Rodney D. Steward was named RL-10 rocket engine program manager at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Steward replaced William D. Brown, who resumed full-time duties as deputy chief, Engine Management Office, msfc.
telstar satellite was used to relay exchange of reports of action on New York and Paris stock exchanges, in 10-min. test transmission of telephone call between Michael W. McCarthy, chairman of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner, and Smith, Inc., to Frederick J. Sears, manager of Merrill Lynch’s Paris office.
afsc announced invention of Bio-telescanner—compact and portable instrument to determine biological properties of other planetary soil—by Dr. William G. Glenn, sam research immunobiologist, and Wesley E. Prather, electronics expert. Designed to answer basic questions about extraterrestrial life, the instrument would analyze samples gathered by travelers to Mars or other planets and would telemeter its findings back to earth. It could be adapted to operate automatically, to gather and analyze soil samples before man set foot on the planet. Use of the Biotelescanner would preclude necessity to bring samples of other planetary crust back to earth—an operation which could be dangerous if alien micro-organisms were present in the sample.
National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board report on the atmospheres of Mars and Venus released. Prepared by William W. Kellogg of rand and Carl Sagen of the University of California, it reported that available evidence suggests the existence of life on Mars and that space flights during the next decade would probably resolve this question.
John A. Johnson, General Counsel of nasa, testifying before the Senate Subcommittee on Monopoly, stated that as of Feb. 28, 1962, a total of 297 inventions had been reported by nasa contractors under the patent provisions of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. Of these, 268 had been determined to be Government property, 29 had been or are being considered for waivers.
John Glenn Day in New York City. An estimated four mlliion people lined the streets to cheer the Mercury astronauts. Mayor Robert Wagner presented the city’s highest award, the Medal of Honor, to Col. Glenn and Robert R. Gilruth.
Atlas icbm launched by usaf squadron from Vandenberg afb, two Polaris A-2 irbm’s successfully launched from submerged u.s.s. John Marshall off Cape Canaveral, and a usaf Minuteman exploded 50 seconds after launch from silo at Cape Canaveral.
Bell Aerosystems engineers, John N. Cord and Leonard M. Seale, recommended in paper to the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences meeting in Los Angeles that a U.S. astronaut be landed upon the moon with the means of survival, perhaps for as long as three years, until an Apollo vehicle could be sent to return him to earth. The astronaut could do valuable scientific work and would be on “a very hazardous mission but it would be cheaper, faster, and perhaps the only way to beat Russia.”
nasa announced that John Stack, Director of Aeronautical Research, would retire June 1 after 34 years of Federal service with naca and nasa. No successor was announced. Mr. John Stack achieved world-wide eminence for his wind-tunnel research and conception of the rocket airplane as a research tool, beginning with the X-l and the D-558, and culminating with the X-15. He was awarded the Collier Trophy in 1951 for solution of the transonic wind tunnel problem. In 1947, he shared the Collier Trophy with Maj. Charles Yeager and Lawrence D. Bell for the X-l which made the first flight through the speed of sound. Stack also received many other awards, including the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award of the ias and the annual medal of the Swedish Society of Engineers. He was a fellow of the ias and the Royal Aeronautical Society (England).
A simple satellite plotter costing only a few hundred dollars and accurate to within 10 miles on any orbit was devised by Major William Gamble of the Canadian Defence Research Board. The Defence Research Board would use the device to give quick fixes on satellite orbits to radar stations.
Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, in a Tass interview, said: “It is now necessary to determine how long a man can operate in outer space without prejudice to his health—five days, ten days, or more. This is one of the main tasks before proceeding to more complex flights to the moon, for example, or to the establishment of orbital or interplanetary stations.” He criticized the U.S. for being “reluctant” to file details of the Glenn flight with the U.N. “The best information about outer space has been obtained in the U.S.S.R. The Americans can benefit more by our experience than we by theirs. Some people in America are not interested in exchanges of scientific information.” The U.S. had submitted information concerning the Glenn flight to the U.N. on April 3,1962.
Federal District Judge Joseph Lieb signed injunction against International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 267, ordering the union to stop allegedly unfair labor practices—refusing to operate cranes unloading heavy equipment at Cape Canaveral missile launch complex.
Announced at the Manned Spacecraft Center that a large “innertube” or “flotation collar” may be used to keep Mercury capsule afloat after a water landing. Collar would be installed by Navy frogmen. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard took part in proving tests conducted on Chesapeake Bay.
Three-man crew “survived” a simulated week-long, round-trip to the moon, in simulation chamber at Martin Co. plant, near Baltimore. Crew in the simulator, which resembled Apollo spacecraft in size and shape, consisted of 3 nasa civilian test pilots: Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream of Langley Research Center, and Glenn W. Stinnett of Ames Research Center. During the simulated flight, made in July, the men took turns as pilot, co-pilot, and navigator, and each made a simulated landing on the moon’s surface in the special one-man capsule designed by Langley scientists.
The Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) received the Edward Warner Award granted every second year by the International Civil Aviation Organization (icao) Council, for “outstanding contributions to the development of international civil aviation.”
In interview with Science Service, Dr. John O’Keefe of nasa said that pattern of re-entry of pieces of MA-6 booster rocket reinforced the theoiy that tektites originate from the moon. Tektites are black, glossy rocks scattered on the earth’s surface, and the wide area covered by MA-6 rocket pieces was a similar pattern.
Dr. John P. Meehan of the University of Southern California reported that “Enos,” 37-lb chimpanzee who orbited the earth in MA-5 on November 29, 1961, developed temporary hypertension during flight due to frustration and confusion caused by equipment malfunction.
At annual nasa awards ceremony, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Group Achievement Awards: to four groups at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Assistant Directorate for Engineering and Development, Preflight Operations Division, Mercury Project Office, and Flight Operations Office; and to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Directorate for Tracking and Data Systems, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards to Robert E. Bourdeau and John C. Lindsay, both of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Outstanding Leadership Awards to Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director for Engineering and Development, msc; George B. Graves, Jr., Assistant Director for Information and Control Systems, msc; George M. Low, Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of Manned Space Flight; and John W. Townsend, Jr., Assistant Director for Space Science at GSFC.
Pope John XXIII, addressing diplomats gathered in Consistorial Hall of the Vatican, called upon men of all nations to join in cooperative and peaceful exploration of outer space. “The church applauds man’s growing mastery over the forces of nature. Thanks to those men who harbor thoughts of peace, mankind could dedicate itself, in noble rivalry, not only to the great economic and social tasks which confront it but to the continuing exploration of space and to the bold achievements of modern technology . . .”
X-15 No. 2 was flown by nasa pilot John B. McKay in a relatively low-level flight to obtain information on aerodynamic heating. Maximum speed was 3,204 mph (mach 4.85) at 73,000 ft.; maximum altitude was 82,000 ft.
In later nasa press conference at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut John Glenn described his three-orbit flight. He related his observation, his pilotage during almost two orbits, and his concern when burning fragments of the retrorocket package during re-entry appeared to indicate to him that the heat shield was breaking up. He referred to “weightlessness” as a “very pleasant” sensation to which he is becoming “addicted.” Administrator Webb and Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, Robert Gilruth, spoke briefly. This conference, like all events associated with the MA-6 flight, was fully covered in all detail by the entire American press, radio, and TV.
Virginia State Exchange Clubs awarded Distinguished Virginian Award to William J. O’Sullivan, head of the Space Vehicle Group at Langley Research Center. Representative Thomas N. Downing, member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, made the presentation to O’Sullivan in recognition of his concept, design, and development work with the Echo satellite.
nasa announced that Mercury Astronaut Donald K. Slayton (Major usaf) would assume new operational and planning responsibilities. Extensive medical observation and examination of Slayton’s irregular heart action (atrial fibrillation) by msc medical staff, by groups of Air Force specialists, and Dr. Paul Dudley White agreed that he should not be considered for solo space flights.
In interview at Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet physicist Dr. Sergei N. Vernov stated he believed particle acceleration accounts for outer radiation belt of the earth. Deep-space probes have not detected enough high-energy particles to prove the outer belt is replenished by high-energy particles ejected from the sun. Dr. Vernov believes the particles acquire their energy within the belt—through some as yet unknown accelerating mechanism. He believes there are two such means of acceleration, one sustaining the day-to-day energy level and the other accounting for its increases when a cloud of erupted solar gas reaches vicinity of earth, causing magnetic storms. Dr. Vernov suggested inner belt is sustained by protons formed by neutrons which decay upon bombardment by cosmic rays; some of the high-energy protons are trapped by earth’s magnetism to become the inner radiation belt.
In prepared press statement, Astronaut John H. Glenn commented on September 13 televised remarks by Astronaut Walter Schirra, and said: “I will continue to support his flight [Astronaut Schirra’s orbital flight MA-8] just as well as I possibly can. . . . I don’t want to add any more statements to a situation that has all the aspects of a tempest in a teapot. Scheduling of my time for maximum benefit from a technical and national space program standpoint has been continually reviewed by both Dr. Gilruth and the management of nasa.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, stated there was no real controversy over Col. Glenn’s position in the space program or on other questions raised by Cdr. Schirra.
United Technology Corp. announced development of new technique for throttling rocket engines involving use of helium mixed with liquid fuel. Depending on ratio of gas to liquid, the engine will exert either more or less thrust; system would permit throttling of an engine of 10,000-lb. thrust down to as low as 100 lbs. utc director of research and advanced technology, William J. Corcoran, pointed out that a practical method of throttling liquid rocket engines had never before been attained.
National holiday in the Soviet Union, the anniversary of orbital flight of Yuri Gagarin. In ceremony in the Kremlin’s Congress Hall, Cosmonaut Gagarin declared: “We are on the threshold of more new space launchings. When these space ships return to earth, the Soviet people will have more holidays to celebrate.” Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev and Cosmonaut Titov also made short speeches, while Matislav Keldysh, President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, made the major address.
jpl scientists reported that Venus-bound mariner ii was successfully transmitting data from nearly two million mi. in space. John W. Thatcher, staff engineer of jpl’s Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (dsif), said, “We fully expect that we will be able to track it and follow it well beyond Venus.” Signals were reported coming in relatively “loud and clear” at receiving stations in Goldstone, Calif.; Johannesburg, So. Africa; and Woomera, Australia.
nasa received patent (3,016,693) for electrothermal rocket invented by John R. Jack and Wolfgang E. Moeckel of Lewis Research Center.
nasa announced contract award for research in communications between man and dolphins, results of which could apply if man encounters other species on distant planets. The $80,800, one-year contract was awarded to Communication Institute of St. Thomas, V.I., directed by Dr. John C. Lilly. Dr. Lilly’s research had already determined that dolphins communicate with each other and that they could be taught to mimic human speech.
In a nasa press conference on the X-l 5 additional research program, Mr. John Stack, nasa’s Director of Aeronautical Research, said: “. . . when I was talking about the total research airplane program, this started really because two men in high positions in a time of great stress also had time to think of the future, and I refer to General Arnold and Dr. George W. Lewis. And when this approach, this sort of thing, was put to them in late ’42—and you can readily appreciate General Arnold and Mr. Lewis were pretty busy men at that time—they did under the stress of all that find time to think also of the future. And this kind of a program that has progressed is a kind of a monument to the foresight of those two men.”
usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories announced that it wollid conduct a series of high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments during 1962 and early 1963. Primary objective wollid be to get more complete and accurate information about the moon, Venus, and Mars. Scientific director of the project wollid be Dr. John Strong of Johns Hopkins University.
National Aeronautic Association announced that U.S. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard wollid receive fai medal on September 28 for his suborbital space-flight records May 5, 1961. Also to receive medals: U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Gherman S. Titov, for their record-setting orbital flights in 1961. Another American, Lt. Col. R. G. Robinson (usmc), would receive award for closed-course, aircraft speed record of 1,606.5 mph in F4H over Edwards afb, Calif., November 22, 1961.
X-15 No. 1 flown to 3,716 mph by nasa pilot Joseph Walker and put through a series of high-speed sharp-angle maneuvers involving banks and testing at three angles of attack. Skin temperatures may have reached 1,000°; the rocket engine developed some roughness in the course of the flight.
In speech to the American Astronautical Society, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, submitted that Russia could match the U.S. in space “only if we place short-run convenience ahead of our nation’s future. . . . There are those who seem to take for granted that a country like Soviet Russia, with less than half the per capita income of the United States, can afford a major successful space program, while we can not. That is, at best, ridiculous, and, at worst, deliberate sabotage.”
X-15 No. 1 flown to near 100,000 feet to begin descent maneuvers with yaw damper off, nasa’s Neil Armstrong as pilot, in test of re-entry control with electronic equipment turned off. X-15 No. 1 was grounded after this flight for installation of telescopic cameras for future research flights.
Edward R. Murrow, Director of usia, quoted on floor of the House by Congressman Ryan as stating that the Voice of America cannot financially afford to use telstar satellite for its overseas transmissions if the rates charged were the same as rates charged for use of undersea cables.
Senator John L. McClellan addressed the Senate on S. 2631, designed to prevent strikes which would “obstruct our vital missile, space, and other programs, the success of which are indispensable to national prestige, security, and well-being.”
At American Rocket Society Honors Night Banquet in Los Angeles, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award, highest aes honor, for “general eminence in the field of rocket engineering and space flight.” Other 1962 ars awards: Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., nasa astronaut, received the aes Astronautics Award; Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Special Projects Office, received the James H. Wyld Memorial Award; Samuel K. Hoffman, president of naa Rocketdyne Div., received aes Propulsion Award; Dr. Howard S. Seifert, of Stanford Univ. and United Technology Corp., received the G. Edward Pendray Award; Theodore Forrester, director of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., Ion Physics Dept., received the aes Research Award; and John R. Winckler, prof, of physics at Univ. of Minnesota, received the first ars Space Science Award.
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was promoted from major to lt. colonel in the Soviet Air Force.
House of Representatives defeated by voice vote a bill sponsored by Rep. William F. Ryan which would have provided for Government ownership of the U.S. portion of a communications satellite system.
Mercury spacecraft (Capsule 13), friendship 7, was launched into orbit by Atlas booster (109D), Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., (usmc), as astronaut. After three orbits (apogee: 162.5 mi.; perigee: 98.9 mi.), friendship 7 re-entered and parachuted into Atlantic some 166 miles east of Grand Turk Island in the Bahamas. Picked up by the destroyer Noa, Glenn remained inside capsule until on deck. Beyond being the first U.S. manned orbital space flight, MA-6 flight of friendship 7 provided aerospace medical data during 285 minutes of weightlessness, including consumption of solid and liquid food and disorientation exercises. Astronaut Glenn was forced to “fly by wire” (i.e., pilot the spacecraft) during 2nd and 3rd orbits due to troubles with the automatic pilot. Glenn was pronounced “hale and hearty” after his 81,000-mile flight of 4 hrs. 56 min.
Reported in the press that a 3-ft. by 2-ft. metal fragment found on a farm in South Africa on February 21 was identified by numbers stamped on it as a part of the Atlas booster that placed Astronaut John Glenn into orbit on February 20. Local reports of an explosion about 1 AM on February 21 indicated that the fragment came to earth after about 8 hours in orbit. Fragment was reported as 4 ft. by 2-ft. “stainless steel” in Capetown telegram to nasa Feb. 26, 1962.
John Glenn Day in Washington, D.C. An estimated 250.000	persons lined the rain-drenched parade route from the White House to Capitol Hill. In 20-minute address to the joint session of the Congress, Astronaut Glenn paid tribute to the Project Mercury team and pointed to the unbounded future of space exploration: “. . . I feel that we are on the brink of an area of expansion of knowledge about ourselves and our surroundings that is beyond description or comprehension at this time. “Our efforts today and what we’ve done so far are but small building blocks on a very high pyramid to come . . . “We’re just probing the surface of the greatest advancement in man’s knowledge of his surroundings that has ever been made . . . There are benefits to science across the board. Any major effort such as this results in research by so many different specialties that it’s hard to even envision the benefits that will accrue in many fields. “Knowledge begets knowledge. The more I see, the more impressed I am not with how much we know but with how tremendous the areas are that are yet unexplored . . .”
nasa reported it had received more than 700 requests for personal appearances by the Mercury astronauts for the July 4th holiday, but there was little likelihood that any would be accepted. Astronaut John Glenn had received more than 8,000 requests for appearances since his orbital flight on Feb. 20, 1962.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was welcomed in his home town of New Concord, Ohio, by a crowd estimated at 50,000 people (normal population of New Concord, 2,127).
In speech on the floor of the House of Representatives, Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, paid tribute to Astronaut Scott Carpenter, stating in part: “Science is the beneficiary of his operation. . . . Commander Carpenter’s success is a compliment to the program; it is a tribute to American ingenuity and American ability to solve the mysteries of outer space. . . “To Scott Carpenter, to Alan Shepard, to Gus Grissom, and to John Glenn, this House and the American people owe a great debt of gratitude. From a scientific standpoint, I am happy to announce to you today the great success of this orbital flight.”
President Kennedy presented 1961 Harmon International Aviation Trophies to four pilots: Lt. Col. William R. Payne (usaf); Jacqueline Cochran; and Cdr. Malcolm R. Ross (usnr) and Lt. Cdr. Victor E. Prather (usn) (posthumously).
In extended action on the floor of the Senate, Senators Russell B. Long, Albert Gore, Estes Kefauver, and Wayne Morse opposed the passage of the Administration’s amended communications satellite system bill (S. 2814) previously brought out of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Senator Long charged that the Senate had been subjected to lobbying “the like of which the Congress had never seen before” on the private ownership of the proposed communications satellite system, and he was questioned by Senator John O. Pastore, the bill’s floor manager.
nasa announced the appointment of Dr. Richard B. Morrison as Director of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion Programs, Office of Space Sciences, in nasa Hq., succeeding Col. Donald Heaton (usaf). Dr. Morrison was previously professor of aeronautical engineering and supervisor of the Aircraft Propulsion Laboratory at the University of Michigan.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, told Air Force Association convention in Las Vegas that “the objective of our [national space] policy is to obtain and maintain leadership in space activities for the benefit of man’s freedom, man’s well-being, man’s understanding, and man’s scientific progress. The details of the policy are not quite so clear, as those who have studied our budgets and public documents have reason to know. It is clear, however, that our policy includes going to the moon during this decade. It includes developing an operational communications satellite system as well as navigation and meteorological systems on a world-wide basis. The specifics are less clear as to the roles of man in space and what can and should be done to maintain peace in outer space. This lack of clarity, however, is partly due to the difficulty of knowing what can be done and what cannot be done. Continuing efforts wlli be made to clarify policy, while keeping it necessarily flexible. . . .” September 21: Replying to September 20 statement by aec Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg regarding U.S. nuclear propulsion capabilities for a 1970 Mars mission, nasa spokesman said: “There is no such approved program for such a flight at this time, but the joint aec-nasa program is aimed at giving such a capability, and at this time it appears it may be feasible to conduct such a flight.”
Dr. Charles M. Herzfield, Washington physicist, reported that the luminous particles sighted in space by both Col. John Glenn and Maj. Scott Carpenter probably were particles of solid nitrogen trapped in the extreme upper atmosShere. “As the temperature rises, the luminosity disappears. To other systems seem to have all the requisite properties. These particles may exist independently at the altitudes involved. They may be produced from leaks of gas from the capsule or from fas trapped in various portions of the vehicle. . . .” Dr. lerzfield presented his evaluation in report to American Association for the Advancement of Science.
British scientist Sir John Cockcroft, addressing the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Manchester, said the British had a “good deal to learn from some American organizations who have a consistent record of success in developing new products by objective basic research and applied research.” He cited three discoveries of Bell Laboratories of New Jersey as “among the principal promoters of economic growth today”: extraction of pure crystals of the metal germanium; creation of strong magnetic fields in tin-and-niobium alloy; and development of the maser (molecular amplification of stimulated emission of radiation).
nasa’s Associate Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., moderated a panel discussion on “Reliabllity—The Key to Space Operations,” at the 8th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control in Washington. Panelists John H. Rubel, Assistant Secretary of Defense; Dr. C. Stark Draper, Head of the Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, mit; Dr. Simon Ramo, Exec. VP of Thompson Ramo Wooldridge, Inc.; and Dr. Jack A. Morton, VP Device Development, Bell Telephone Laboratories discussed means of comprehensive, planned efforts to increase the Nation’s percentage of success in space launchings and operations.
nasa announced that friendship 7, the Mercury capsule in which Astronaut John Glenn orbited the earth three times, would be lent to usia for a world tour, with some 20 stops on the itinerary and touching all continents. In mid-August the capsule would be displayed at the Century 21 Exhibition in Seattle, Washington, before being presented to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., for permanent exhibition.
John Rubel, dod Deputy Director of Research and Engineering, told the Aerospace Luncheon Club in Washington that dod was supporting two programs in space—one “directed at clear, identifiable military needs and requirements” and the other, less well defined, designed to provide “building blocks” as “insurance against an uncertain future.” Replying to charges that military space activities should be expanded, he noted that dod’s military space program exceeded $1.5 billion this year and probably would be greater next year; dod expenditures on space developments were “remarkably high in relation to viable concepts for military applications in space.” He concluded that the military space program was adequate and well balanced, although “we probably err on the side of allowing too generous a margin of safety for the effects of these uncertainties.”
Reported from Cairo, Egypt, that Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin has said that the United States “eventually” would orbit a man around the earth.
Three fliers were credited with breaking two Soviet world records by flying their B-58 Hustler supersonic bomber to 85,360-ft. altitude with cargo of 11,023 lbs., dod announced. Fliers were: Maj. Fitzhugh L. Fulton (usaf), pilot; Charles R. Haines, civilian flight test engineer; and Capt. William R. Payne (usaf), navigator.
John Hodges, director of Canada’s Regina Observatory, said in an interview that vostok iii and iv were orbiting in space at a time when millions of meteorites were bombarding the earth’s atmosphere in an unusually heavy concentration, and that scientists and astronomers were keenly interested in the outcome of meteorites colliding with the Soviet spacecraft.
Cosmonaut Titov wrote in Pravda on his arrival in Moscow: “I returned home, heaved in a breathful of clear spring air, and told the comrades welcoming me: Despite all the comforts of America, there is no land on earth better than our dear, wonderful Soviet homeland.” He indicated that American astronauts Alan Shepard and John Glenn have been invited to visit the Soviet Union.
At nasa news conference at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter gave a detailed chronological account of his three-orbit flight in aurora 7. He quoted Mercury training psychologist Dr. Robert B. Voas, who had told Carpenter that data-collection is the “heart and soul of science.” Carpenter said: “And that’s true. Isolated data points mean nothing. We now have two data points on nearly everything. His [John Glenn’s] flight confirms jmine [and [mine confirms his . . . .” Carpenter said of weightlessness that “there was the sensation of floating . . . Every function is easier when you are weightless. It’s the only time I’ve ever spent in that [space] suit that was comfortable.” He reported briefly on his launch into orbit, his scientific observation, re-entry, and recovery, full scientific reports of which would be forthcoming in future weeks.
Project Stargazer balloon landed after 18'(-hr. trip to 82,000-ft. altitude, in southwestern New Mexico, by Capt. Joseph A. Kittinger, Jr. (usaf), and William C. White, astronomer from U.S. Naval Test Station at China Lake. White had clearest view of heavens of any astronomer in history by using telescope mounted on top of gondola. J. Allen Hynek, director of usaf oar’s Project Stargazer, predicted great future for balloon astronomy.
X-15 No. 2 was flown by nasa pilot John B. McKay in longest engine run to date (127 sec.), the craft reaching 67,000-ft. altitude and 2,693-mph speed (mach 4.08) in successful 9-min. flight near Edwards afb, Calif. Flight tested heat transfer rates over X-15’s skin, craft’s stability without its ventral fin, and newly designed windshield’s resistance to heat.
nasa was studying the problem of falling fragments from orbital objects and the possibility of injury or damage to persons or property on earth. Four fragments from the Atlas booster that put Astronaut John Glenn into orbit were recovered on earth, the first pieces known to have re-entered from an orbiting object without burning up. Statistically the chances of injury to anyone on earth would be extremely small, especially since the orbits are over water about 80% of the time, nasa pointed out that some 100 meteorites weighing two pounds or more struck the U.S. every year, yet there had never been a report of anyone being struck by one.
Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin visited Japan, the 30th country Major Gagarin had visited since his space flight.
In answer to question on Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter’s history of motion sickness, John Powers, Mercury information officer, said that Carpenter had no such history. He noted that Cosmonaut Titov had reported that he had only 350 hours of pilot flight time before his space flight, which compares to at least 1,000 hours for each of the seven Mercury astronauts. “Titov never saw his space capsule until 60 days before he flew it,” Powers said, “whereas the astronauts have become familiar with their capsules over a period of three years.”
The Boys Clubs of America honored Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., for his example of good citizenship to youth, presenting him with the “Man and Boy Award” at Alexandria, Va.
Soviet cosmonauts held news conference in Moscow, revealing they had parachuted to earth from their space capsllies, landing about 124 mi. apart. Maj. Nikolayev reported that he and Col. Popovich had unstrapped themselves and floated weightless in their cabins for an hour, maintaining communications with each other at the same time. He also stated that the flight program had not called for rendezvous of vostok iii and iv, and that the closest the two capsules had come to each other was 5 kilometers (a little over 3 mi.). Col. Popovich reported they both had observed the glowing particles seen by Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov and by U.S. Astronaut John Glenn. Popovich said they believed the particles had been “merely the exhaust of the rocket motors.” It was stated that the results of the cosmonauts’ flights would be published after the collected data had been processed.
Department of Defense has issued a directive providing for closer and more effective cooperation between dod and nasa, dod’s Deputy Director of Research and Engineering John H. Rubel told the Senate Aeronautical and Space Committee. The directive gave the usaf authority to work with nasa on all levels for purposes of coordinating efforts and exchanging technical information but reserved to dod the responsibility for establishing new programs and assigning mllitary support to nasa.
Royal Aeronautical Society announced that John C. Wimpenny had made first extended manned flight under his own power in his pedal-powered Puffin. A design engineer, Wimpenny flew 993 yards at an average speed of 19K mph and an altitude of 5 to 8 feet.
Congressman John E. Moss, Chairman of the Government Information Subcommittee, wrote to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara asking why 1959 Army report “Project Horizon” was not yet declassified. Originally classified “Secret,” the study proposing manned lunar program culminating in 1965 lunar landing had 10 separate security reviews by 4 agencies, but it was still classified “official use only.” Congressman Moss observed that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics had requested declassified version of “Project Horizon” on Aug. 3, 1961, but had never received it.
naa announced that the 1961 Robert J. Collier Trophy, U.S. aviation’s highest honor, was awarded to four test pilots of the X-15 rocket research airplane: Scott Crossfield (naa), Joseph Walker (nasa), Major Robert White (usaf), and Cdr. Forrest Petersen (usn). Co-sponsors of the annual award, National Aeronautic Association and Look magazine, said the Collier Trophy was awarded to the pilots “for invaluable technological contributions to the advancement of flight and for great skill and courage as test pilots of the X-15.”
In answering Premier Khrushchev, Dr. William Pickering, Director of jpl, stated: “On April 26, at 4:47.50 AM, Pacific standard time, ranger iv was tracked by the Goldstone receiver as it passed the leading edge of the moon. At 4:49.53 it crashed on the moon at a lunar longitude of 229.5 degrees East and lunar latitude of 15.5 degrees South.” After 64 hours of tracking, the trajectory of ranger iv was precisely known and it was only 110 miles from the surface when it vanished behind the moon.
H. Douglas Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., aerospace technologists at nasa Langley Research Center, awarded $1,000 for invention of Horizon Scanning Active Attitude Orientation of Stabilized Space Vehicles. James S. Albus, engineer at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, awarded $1,000 for his invention of a Digital Solar Aspect Sensor. Invention awards of less than $1,000 were made to following nasa employees: William H. Kinard and Sidney A. Batterson, Langley Research Center; Estin N. Baker, Jess S. W. Davidsen, Ralph L. Mossino, and Gilbert G. Robinson, Ames Research Center; Wilhelm Angele, Marshall Space Flight Center.
nasa test pilot John McKay predicted X—15 would soon attain speeds seven times speed of sound at altitudes up to 500,000 ft. during a new series of flights.
usaf B-52H claimed a world record for nonstop, non-refueled distance flight over a closed circuit, having flown 11,400 miles in 22 hours, 38 minutes, 41.8 seconds, with an average speed of 510 mph. The closed-circuit course ran from Seymour Johnston afb, N.C., to Bermuda; Sondrestrom, Greenland; Anchorage, Alaska; Los Angeles, Calif.; Key West, Fla.; and back to Seymour Johnson. Pilot was Capt. William M. Stevenson (usaf) ; copilot was Capt. Floyd J. Schoendiest (usaf). Present record is held by Lt. Col. J. R. Grissom (usaf), who on December 14, 1960, flew a B-52G a distance of 10,078.84 miles.
In address before joint American Assembly-British Institute for Strategic Studies conference at Brighton, England, John J. McCloy urged Western Europe to forego its aspirations to become a third space power and to cooperate with the U.S. in the exploration of space. Mr. McCloy, chairman of the General Advisory Committee to the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, appealed to the 70 delegates that once the leaders of the Soviet Union “sensed a united position on the part of the West, they are prepared to moderate their views accordingly.” When dealing with the Soviet Union on space issues, McCloy stated: “Questions of international prestige quickly emerge and we are still plagued with the almost frenetic antipathy of the Soviet Union to inspection.”
Michael Friedlander, associate professor of physics at Washington University, St. Louis, was preparing to send up a series of huge balloons for cosmic ray experiments, beginning about August 15, from Calvina, South Africa.
X-15 No. 1 flown to 107,000 feet at speeds up to 3,733 mph by Joseph A. Walker, in series of seven “roller-coaster dips” in test of the alternate stability augmentation system.
nasa test pilot John B. McKay flew X-15 No. 2 in sustained heat test, reaching peak altitude of 84,500 feet and speed of 3,375 mph (mach 5.11) in flight which created an estimated temperature on the leading edge of the wings of 1,100° F for more than a minute, and 1,290° F for a few seconds when leaving and re-entering the atmosphere.
Relationship between very low frequency (vlf) hiss and aurora australis (Southern lights) was confirmed after six months of research by two scientists, it was reported. Ward Helms and John Turtle, working at Byrd Station, Antarctica, believe they have confirmed the theory of Henry Morozumi, Stanford Univ. scientist, when they found peaks of auroral display and vlf hiss were identical in intensity and coincided repeatedly. Helms said he was “not certain that vlf hiss is part of the aurora, per se, but I’m sure that since the aurora and hiss peaks are simultaneous there is reason to think the same particles generating the aurora also generate the hiss.”
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded the Aero Club’s Godfrey L. Cabot Award in Boston, as America's first man in space.
Mercury astronauts visited the United Nations, and John Glenn, during an informal reception given by Acting Secretary-General U Thant, said: “To be here at the United Nations this morning and have all these tributes to our project and all the people that are working on it from people of this calibre, is indeed overwhelming all over again after yesterday. . . . “As space science and space technology grows stlli further and our projects become more and more ambitious, we will be relying more and more on international teamwork. “And the natural center for this teamwork is the United Nations . . . .” Colonel Glenn also expressed the gratitude of Project Mercury to those countries who had cooperated in the flight operations.
U.S. submitted to the U.N. a supplemental list of U.S. space launchings, covering the period of Feb. 15 to March 15, 1962, updating the coverage of the first U.S. list submitted on March 5, 1962. This second official list did not include Astronaut John Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, since the U.S. contended that the U.N. roster was supposed to contain only those space objects still in orbit, not those that had already re-entered. U.S.S.R. listed all its space flights in its report to the U.N. on March 26. Although MA-6 flight was not registered, the U.S. submitted information on the Glenn flight to the U.N. on April 3.
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded an honorary Master of Arts degree by Dartmouth College.
usaf named six men selected to pilot X-20 (Dyna Soar) orbital spacecraft. The pilots, all from Edwards afb, included five Air Force officers and one nasa civilian: Capt. Albert H. Crews, Jr.; Maj. Russell L. Rogers; Maj. James W. Wood; Maj. Henry C. Gordon; Capt. William J. Knight; and Milton O. Thompson (nasa). usaf also displayed full-scale mock-up of X-20 at Air Force Association convention, first public showing of the space glider.
Dr. Frank E. Bothwell, Chief Scientist of the Center of Naval Analysis, Franklin Institute, received the Navy’s highest civilian award, the Distinguished Civllian Service Award, for his work on design and development of the Polaris ballistic missile. June 27: X-15 No. 1 flown to unprogramed but record speed of 4,159 mph (mach 6.09) by nasa’s Joseph A. Walker at Edwards, Calif. Record speed was achieved at 96,000 ft. on climb to an altitude of 120,000 ft. In test of X-15 re-entry stabllity, Walker glided in at 23-degree angle of attack, highest angle flown to date, and placed X-15 into 80-degree bank.
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin in Tokyo said: “The U.S.S.R. is at present constructing a giant spaceship which cannot be compared to those I and Titov rode in size.”
Re-entry and disintegration of sputnik iv reported by Edward A. Hallbach, director of Milwaukee Astronomical Society. Hall-bach and others observed the satellite as it broke into about 24 pieces, most of which fell from orbit toward Green Bay, Wise., area and Lake Michigan. Law officers in a wide area of northern Wisconsin reported seeing flaming objects at about the same time. sputnik iv was launched by U.S.S.R. on May 15, 1960.
nasa announced William B. Taylor, nasa systems engineer and Assistant Director for Flight Systems, Office of Manned Space Flight, had received citation for meritorious service for his work with Army Corps of Engineers Sept. 1960-April 1962. Taylor was praised for his “outstanding leadership, technical competence, and dedicated service . . .” while serving as Deputy Director of Army Engineers’ Geodesy, Intelligence, and Mapping Research and Development Agency (gimrada), before he joined nasa in May 1962.
nasa X-15 pilot, Joseph Walker, said that film taken during recent record altitude flight of 246,700 feet showed five or six mysterious objects. Other space pilots on the panel at the National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space at Seattle, all of whom have flown above 100,000 feet, were Cdr. Malcolm Ross (usnr), Capt. Joseph Kittinger (usaf), Col. David Simons (usaf), Neil Armstrong (nasa), Cdr. Forrest Petersen (usn), Maj. Robert White (usaf), and Lt. Col. John H. Glenn (usmc).
X-15 (No. 3) piloted by Joseph A. Walker (nasa) reached 3,886 mph and 157,000-ft. altitude in test of re-entry stability without the craft’s ventral fin. Walker said high climbing speed (186 mph faster than planned) was attained because sun’s glare temporarily prevented his reading instrument panel; thus, re-entry after engine shut-off was faster than planned. Test was seventh in series without X-15’s ventral fin.
In Cleveland, Dr. Joseph F. Shea, nasa’s Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight for Systems, told ars conclave that the manned lunar landing was greatly dependent upon information acquired by the unmanned Ranger and Surveyor payloads. The landing zone for Apollo flights (strip 20° wide along lunar equator) is about the size of Alaska. Maps of two-fifths-of-a-mile to an inch are required, which must be based on photographs which can identify five-or six-ft. objects for navigational fixes and initial exploration. Smallest objects now discernable in the photographs of the moon’s surface by the test telescopes on earth are about the size of a football field.
Dr. William W. Kellogg of the nas Space Science Board reported on the study of the planet Venus at the American Geophysical Union. Bolometer studies of the atmosphere of Venus indicated a temperature of —40° C (presumably the cloud tops), while temperatures deduced from measurements by large radiotelescopes indicated temperatures of about 300° C (572° F) (believed to be surface temperature). A planetary probe could probably answer questions raised on the thickness and nature of Venus’ aerosphere.
U.S.S.R. was building “largest radio telescope in existence” near Serpukhov, it was reported. 20-acre, cross-shaped radiotelescope featured two movable antenna arms of 1-km. length with supporting towers of 65-ft. height, the instrument modeled after cross designed by Dr. Bernard Y. Mills of Australia. Chief character-tic of cross was its ability to collect considerable amount of radio energy emanating from an extremely small area of the heavens. Another instrument at the radioastronomy station was radiotelescope with parabolic antenna 72-ft. in diameter. Station was under direction of Dr. Viktor V. Vitkevich and operated by Lebede Institute of Physics of Soviet Academy of Sciences. November 26: nasa Flight Research Center announced investigation of X-15 No. 2 accident on Nov. 9 had revealed probable cause was succession of equipment failures coupled with landing gear collapse. Inability of rocket engine to attain full power was attributed to faulty governor actuator which prevented engine’s receiving sufficient amount of propellant. Failure in engine’s receiving mechanism did not allow landing flaps to come down and resulted in high load on aircraft’s landing gear. Unusually high landing-load caused collapse of main landing gear soon after the X-15 touched down at Mud Lake, Nev. Pilot John McKay sustained severe bruises, a back injury, and shock; but he had been released from hospital and had returned to work at nasa Flight Research Center. Accident was under continuing investigation by nasa and usaf engineers, with plans calling for mechanical improvement in flap-lowering mechanism before another X-15 flight.
National Academy of Sciences announced that the John J. Carty Medal would be awarded Provost Charles H. Townes of mit for his pioneering work in the development of the maser (microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation). Dr. Townes was credited with the conception of the idea for the maser in 1951, which was subsequently used in radio astronomy in recording and charting minute radio signals emanating from celestial bodies and to receive echoes of a radar signal reflected from the planet Venus.
Soviet Navy Day, Admiral of the Fleet Sergei G. Gorshkov declaring in article in Pravda that rocket-firing atomic submarines are the backbone of the Soviet Navy; “The Soviet fleet is now more modern than the navy of any capitalist country.”
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, presented details of Apollo spacecraft at Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias) meeting in Seattle. During launch and re-entry, 3-man crew would be seated in adjacent couches; during other phases of flight, center couch would be stowed to permit more freedom of movement. Apollo command module cabin would have 365-cu. ft. volume, with 22-cu. ft. free area available to crew. “The small end of the command module may contain an airlock; when the lunar excursion module is not attached, the airlock would permit a pressure-suited crewman to exit to free space without decompressing the cabin. Crew ingress and egress while on Earth wlli be through a hatch in the side of the command module.” During August: Under Secretary of the Air Force Joseph V. Charyk told Seventh Symposium on Ballistic Missile and Space Technology that usaf had flight-tested two Agena D upper-stage vehicles, the first firing occurring in June. Agena D would accommodate a variety of payloads, whereas earlier models Agena A and B had integrated payloads.
James H. “Dutch” Kindelberger, President of North American Aviation (1928-48) and chairman of the Board (1948-date), died in California. After Armistice in 1919, he joined Glenn L. Martin plant in Cleveland with Donald W. Douglas, later following Douglas and supervising the engineering of the DC-1 and DC-2, the first Douglas Aircraft passenger planes. During World War II, naa built 14% of the U.S. military aircraft including the B-25 and P-51, later the famed F-86 Sabre, and more recently the X-15. Under Kindelberger, naa’s Rocketdyne Division pioneered the rocket propulsion development for Navaho, Atlas, Jupiter, Thor, and Redstone engines, naa is presently prime contractor on nasa’s Apollo program and the S-II.
nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center was presented an Award of Honor by the National Safety Council for having logged nearly 4 million working hours without a disabling injury or fatality. During February: Astronaut John Glenn’s orbital space flight produced a great propaganda dividend for the United States, Mr. Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information Agency, said. “The contrast was immediately drawn around the world between the openness, the complete coverage of the flight, compared to the Russian efforts in this area . . . More newspapers normally hostile to the United States had to admit not only the scientific achievement but the fact that we were prepared to let our own people and the rest of the world see the entire operation from beginning to end.”
