Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said in nationwide TV interview that U.S. could and would land a man on the moon: “We need no big, new scientific breakthroughs to complete this, we feel. We do not need the discovery of something as large as atomic power or anything like this in order to make the moon flight. Most of the technical details are known. It is now a lot of veiy hard and long engineering spade work and test procedure to prove out all these details and put them all together on the lunar mission.” (“Meet the Press,” nbc-TV, 4/21/63; AP, Wash. Post, 4/22/63)
Activities at Kitty Hawk, N.C., commemorating 60th anniversary of powered flight (Dec. 17,1903) : Youth Seminar on Flight, with 200 state delegates, observers, and representatives of youth attending, was moderated by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc) . Panel members were Max Conrad, pilot of stock-model business aircraft; Capt. Harold Blackburn, twa jet pilot; James Nields, business pilot; Jacqueline Cochran, record-holding aviatrix; and Maj. Robert Rush worth (usaf) , X-15 pilot. Full-scale replica of the Wright Flyer, built by volunteers from National Capitol Section of aiaa, was installed in museum at Wright Brothers National Memorial. Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges was featured speaker at annual banquet of Kill Devil Hills Memorial Society at Nags Head, N.C. Soaring Society of America presented to Wright Memorial Museum and Visitor’s Center a plaque commemorating Wright Brother’s glider flights. Presentation was made by Floyd Sweet of nasa Hq., past president of the Society. (60th Anniv. Committee Release; Wash. Post, 12/15/63; Soaring Society of America^ Inc. Release, 12/16/63)
Astronaut John H. Glenn said in speech before annual luncheon meeting of Associated Press: “As a result of the space program, tremendous and vast new areas of information appear on the horizon and are increasing daily. Consequently, this space program will undoubtedly serve as a catalyst toward an expansion of information that will dwarf anything we have known heretofore .... “What we need is a national repository for information, organized not along traditional library-type lines, but designed to utilize all the techniques at our disposal for sorting, cataloguing, analyzing, storing and making readily accessible, new information as it becomes available .... “In short, I propose that we lose no time in establishing a National Information Center. Control of such an institution could be by government, private interests, or a combination of appropriate interests . . . .” (Text)
Lt. Col. John Powers (usaf) , msc Public Affairs Officer, announced in Washington he had conferred with nasa Administrator James E. Webb and Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden about “the changing nature of the manned space flight program.” In accordance with this change, brought about by the end of Project Mercury, nasa would “realign our organization and our people, including myself.” (West, Houston Post, 7/26/63)
Dr. John R. Dunning, Dean of Columbia Univ. Faculty of Engineering, said in address before Design Engineering Conference^ of American Society of Mechanical Engineers, ntc, that “if the engineers do not aggressively claim the positions of leadership” in space effort and in exploitation of atomic energy, “this nation will pay an intolerable price for amateur improvisation.” Today’s engineers need knowledge of conventional engineering techniques as well as current developments in science; and some engineering schools are graduating “imitation physicists” and “disguised mathematicians” instead of men trained in the “great art” of systems design. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/63, 35)
Speaking at Symposium on Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recovery at Edwards afb, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said: “. . . It is worth keeping in mind that irrefutable facts and events demonstrate that the Soviets are conducting a vigorous space effort, and the evidence is strong that this program includes a manned lunar trip. “Let me emphasize that we should be making a vigorous effort to go to the moon and that we should continue to do so even if the Russians delete such an objective from their space program.” Dr. Welsh listed some major reasons for manned lunar project: “ (1) There is no other place so near in space where we can test the equipment and the men for future space travel. “(2) Such a clear objective as that of the lunar project gives impetus, order, and efficiency to the program . . . .” Other outstanding reasons he listed were national prestige, economic spin-off, defense spin-off, and scientific advancement. (Text)
Third birthday of echo i balloon satellite, launched into orbit Aug. 12,1960. World’s first artificial passive communications satellite, the 100-ft. inflatable mylar sphere demonstrated use of radio wave reflection for global communications, echo i was still orbiting the earth, having traveled some 425 million mi., and was still usable for communication. nasa announced G. C. Schjeldahl Co. had been selected to build Echo II satellite, scheduled to be placed in orbit this winter. Under $362,000 contract Schjeldahl would build three models, one for static-inflation tests, one for orbital flight, and one for backup. echo ii would be larger and more rigid than its predecessor. (nasa Release 63-183; Rep. Joseph E. Karth, CR. 8/12/63, A5097; AP, NYT. 8/13/63)	_	_
Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., a vice president of Grumman Aircraft, replying to question during testimony before Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said first U.S. astronauts returning from the moon would bring back about 100-(earth)-pound sample of lunar terrain. {L.A. Times, 3/20/63)
Soviet Cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin and Valentina Tereshkova visited the Berlin Wall at the Brandenburg Gate. Later in interview on East Berlin Radio-TV, Cosmonette Tereshkova stated: “There are married women among our female cosmonauts. A friend of mine is married and has children and she has been prepared for a space flight in the same way as I was.” Visit of cosmonauts to Berlin coincided with East German Parliamentary elections. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 10/21/63, A3)
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker to 209,400ft. altitude at speeds up to 3,488 mph (mach 4.73), in nine-minute flight from Mud Lake, Nev. Instrumentation mounted on aircraft’s tail measured radiation in ultraviolet and infrared spectra. Secondary purpose of flight was evaluation of air flow over X-15’s surface conducted at high angles of attack, (frc Release)
X-15 No. 1 flown by Joseph A. Walker (nasa) to 226,400-ft. altitude and 3,631-mph speed (mach 5.07), the X-15 engine burning for 84 sec. Mounted in aircraft’s fuselage was traversing probe, retracting every four sec. and measuring air pressures at varying distances from aircraft skin, (frc Release; frc X-15 Flight Log; nasa Hq. X-15 Proj. Off.)
nasa announced it would negotiate with Lear-Siegler, Inc., of Anaheim, Calif., for an extension of the company’s present $3,753,059 contract for design, manufacture, and installation of equipment for testing subsystems of the Saturn V launch vehicle at msfc. The additional work would include design, manufacture, and installation of instrumentation for a dual liquid-hydrogen test position and an acoustical-model test position at msfc. (nasa Release 63-222) World Conference on Space Communications opened in Geneva with delegates from 70 countries present. U.N. Secretary General U Thant was to have addressed the delegates via Telstar communications satellite, but a technical problem prevented the broadcast. Principal purpose of the conference was to reallocate radio frequencies to provide growth room for future satellite communications needs. (NYT, 10/8/63, 16) Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, received Harry E. Salzberg Memorial Medal for his “distinguished contribution to the field of transportation” and became the 1963 Salzberg Lecturer at Syracuse Univ. (Ltr. of Invitation, 4/18/63) Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., would decide during the week whether he would seek the Senate seat now occupied by Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio), according to George Clifford of the Washington Daily News after an interview with C. Leo DeOrsey, adviser to the astronauts. (Clifford, Wash. Daily News, 10/7/63) nana reported Lufthansa sources in Germany claim that U.S.S.R. is farther along on supersonic transport development than either Britain-France or the U.S. Being designed and built by the famous Ilyushin and Tupolev teams, the Russian entry is reported to be in the same speed class as the British-French Concorde— mach 2.2 (1,500 mph)—and carry about the same passenger load of 100, and to land at quite low speeds, probably through the use of variable-sweep wings. First version of the supersonic transport would be a freight carrier, not only because it can be introduced with a lower safety factor than a passenger version but because the increased friction between Soviet Russia and Communist China dictates a fast priority freight system to eastern Russia, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63) Atlas D icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., but exploded shortly after launch, (upi, NYT, 10/8/63, 28) Lewis awarded study contracts totaling $576,000 to General Dynamics/Astronautics and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation to investigate the possibilities of using “flox”—a mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen—as the oxidizer in the Atlas space launch vehicle. Preliminary studies indicate the combination could result in an 88 per cent increase in payloads for 100-mile high orbits, (lrc Release 63-78, Lewis Chronology, 9) Early October: faa Deputy Administrator Gordon M. Bain said that nasa’s studies of a supersonic commercial air transport (scat) were not in accord with faa thinking—that they derived too much from the B-70 work of some years ago and that they recommended the technical desirability of a mach 3 aircraft, while faa leaned toward a mach 2.5 aircraft as the one economically feasible for airline operation. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,38)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.i said on the Senate floor that “we can and should dedicate America’s great resources to the magnificent challenge of space” but charged nasa with waste and inefficiency. He inserted in the Congressional Record an article of his in which he recommended (1) nasa build into its organization more effective safeguards against waste, duplication, and other “leakage” of funds; (2) Congress acquire skilled investigators to analyze the space program in depth; and (3) “Private individuals and groups should apply their concern about excessive and unnecessary Government spending to the space program.” (CR, 11/5/63,19990-91)
Report by Legislative Drafting Research Fund of Columbia Univ., for National Security Industrial Association, was made public, the report examining statutes covering Federal compensation for deaths, injuries, and property losses caused by defense and space-related accidents. Research found victims of accidents arising from aec activities were almost completely protected under existing laws, but that this was not the case for dod and nasa programs. Accidents in these programs would probably be infrequent but might be “catastrophic,” report said. Entitled “Financial Protection Against Rislrs of Major Harm in Government Programs,” study was prepared under general direction of John M. Kemochan, Director of the Fund. (NYT, 4/15/63)
usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, Calif., was using F-104 and F-106 fighter aircraft to simulate portions of space vehicle re-entry and landing profiles, Capt. Edward J. Dwight (usaf) said' at Howard Univ. in Washington. The F-104 is usually accelerated to mach 2 at 35,000 ft. and continued in powered climb to 75,000, coasts to a top altitude of 90.000 to 95,000 ft., and starts down. “We usually relight the engine at about 60,000 feet and recover from a spin.” When the NF-104, modified to add a rocket engine, was available, this maneuver would be extended to 120,000 to 140,000 ft. The F-106 is used to simulate the landing pattern of a Dyna Soar-type space vehicle, dropping from 20,000 ft. to a high-speed landing. {NYT, 11/10/63, 88) _	_
Donald T. Gregory, Technical Assistant to D Spacecraft Center, addressed nearly 1,000 Dade County educators at workshop for new teachers in Miami, Fla. Noting U.S. requires about 60,000 engineers yearly—while only 33,700 graduated in 1963—Gregory emphasized the importance of teaching all children about scientific and technological events of the space age and stimulating their interest and knowledge in science and engineering at an early age. (msc Release 63-139) August 24: usaf sac crew conducted routine training launch of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1174-63)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said in address before Alabama Society of Professional Engineers in Huntsville: “. . . The lunar program is but one aspe '	' ‘ ’	'	’	1 ical surge which is invading prosper, and maintain the U.S. leadership in the world.” (Huntsville Times, 2/25/63)
Dr. Edward Teller testified before the House Science and Astronautics subcommittee studying the role of the Federal government in science and technology. Dr. Teller suggested that the Congress devote its main effort to the development programs, where most of the Federal money is being spent, but leave the selection of basic research projects largely to the scientists because this kind of research “deals in the unexpected.” Asked to comment on Dr. Wemher von Braun’s statement of the value of the manned lunar landing, Dr. Teller answered: “Von Braun is a competent technician and a superb salesman. Far be it from me to disagree with him.” (Toth, NYT, 10/19/63, 25)
16-in. cannon shot a 475-lb. instrumented capsule 15 mi. into the upper atmosphere from Barbados, first launching of an altitude probe by gun and first such project undertaken by a nongovernmental agency—McGill Univ. of Canada, with support of U.S. Army. Instruments in steel-encased capsule relayed data on conditions in upper atmosphere to ground tracking stations; capsule remained aloft about three min., fell into sea nine mi. southeast of Barbados. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/63) January 27; Lt. Col. John A. Powers, Public Affairs Officer for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 flight may extend to “as many as 22 orbits. If the flight lasts that long it will be a 34-hour flight.” Speaking before Texas Associated Press Managing Editors’ Association, Powers said nasa had not yet decided whether Cooper’s flight would be last of Project Mercuiy; “the decision on whether another [Mercury flight] will be necessary will be made after Cooper’s flight.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/28/63)
usaf oar announced formation of Scientific Advisory Group, composed of 12 leading U.S. scientists: Dr. Joseph Kaplan, chairman; Dr. Oliver G. Haywood, Jr.; Prof. Robert J. Havighurst; Prof. Henry Houghton; Dr. John P. Howe; Dr. Mark Kac; Dr. Carl Kaplan; Dr. Nathan L. Krisberg; Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper; Dr. David B. Langmuir; Prof. Leonard Schieff; and Prof. Frederick Seitz. Group would serve as advisory body to oar Commander, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, (oar Release 7-03—4)
On first anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft friendship 7 was presented to Smithsonian Institution by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. Astronaut Glenn presented to the Smithsonian the flight suit, boots? and gloves he had worn and the tiny American flag he had earned during his three-orbit space flight. Making the presentation, Dr. Dryden remarked: “It is appropriate that John Glenn’s friendship 7 spacecraft should join the Wright Brothers’ first airplane in this hall, dedicated to man’s pioneering efforts in flight. “These two machines . . . stand as constant reminders that mankind aspires to the stars .... “As in the early days of aeronautics we can only dimly foresee the future of space exploration, what we Shall find, and what benefits will come to us. We know only that we must move forward in knowledge and practical accomplishment as we strive to discover the nature of our universe .... “We are surrounded here by the cherished treasures of the Nation. Today, we add still another to bring to mind the promise of the future that men of imagination and courage will always find new frontiers to conquer . . . .” (WasJi. Post, 2/21/63, Bl; Text)
26 persons associated with Project Mercury were presented the John J. Montgomery Award by the San Diego Chapter of the National Society of Aerospace Professionals. Recipients from nasa were Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter, L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., John H. Glenn, Jr., Virgil I. Grissom, Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Donald K. Slayton, and Walter M. Schirra; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; Dr. Walter C. Williams, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator; Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Project Mercury Manager; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Project Mercury Flight Operations Director; Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director of Engineering and Development; Dr. Charles A. Berry, Medical Operations Chief; and Lt. Col. John A. Powers (usaf) Mercury Public Affairs Officer. (San Diego Union, 12/6/63)
President Kennedy witnessed successful firings of six Army missiles at White Sands Missile Range: Honest John, Little John, Sergeant, Hawk, Nike-Hercules, and Nike-Zeus. (M&R, 6/10/63, 12)
Task force from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center sent to Rocketdyne, Canoga Park, Calif., where F-l engine had developed “combustion instability,” William Hines reported in Washington Evening Stan Five-engine cluster of 1.5-million-lb. thrust F-l’s would power first stage of Advanced Saturn (C-5). (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/9/63)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, speaking before the Air Transport Association Engineering and Maintenance Conference in Washington, said: “While much has been said about the Congressional cuts in the nasa budget request, it is noteworthy that the debate was not on cutting back the program. Rather, it was on how much should the increase be. This is, I believe, the key to the public outlook on space.” (Text)
X-15 No. 1 piloted by John B. McKay (nasa) reached 3,856-mph speed (mach 5.57) and 124,200-ft. altitude, 156 mph faster and 26,200 ft. higher than planned because of one-degree error in flight angle. Aircraft was equipped with traversing probe, device that extends itself about three inches from X-15 surface every four seconds, to measure air flow, (fkc Release; NYT, 5/17/63, 19 j	_
A working experimental model of a one-man space scooter was successfully flight-tested at naa’s Space and Information Division. The jet-powered platform was designed by Jack Bell, director of Lunar and Planetary Systems, who made the first flight, and John W. Sandford, research specialist in Advanced Systems. According to Bell, “precision control of platforms can be learned in a few minutes’ flight time.” The vehicle hovers, rotates, or moves in any direction desired. An extremely versatile piece of equipment, the lunar scooter could permit moon explorers to traverse flat, rough terrain where walking is difficult and where surface vehicles would stall; as a “crater hopper,” it would permit a space-suited moon explorer to span or descend into fissures or crevasses; as a “lunescape climber,” it would serve as a vehicle to scale steep cliffs. As a “shuttle bus,” it would transport crew members between orbiting space vehicles, or it might be used to support man in assembling advanced space stations in earth orbit. Finally, its potential for use in military maneuvers on earth is considerable, (said Skywriter, 6/28/63)
Letter from Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, to nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden reporting on his recent visit to U.S.S.R. was inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.). Sir Bernard quoted M. V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, as saying U.S.S.R. had rejected, at least for present, any plans for a manned lunar landing, because of insurmountable problems of radiation in space. According to Sir Bernard, Keldysh said “that the manned project might be revived if progress in the next few years gave hope of a solution of their Sroblems, and that he believed the appropriate procedure would e to formulate the task on an international basis. He stated that the Academy believed that the time was now appropriate for scientists to formulate the task on an international basis (a) the reasons why it is desirable to engage in the manned lunar enterprise and (b) to draw up a list of scientific tasks which a man on the moon could deal with which could not be solved by instruments alone. The Academy regarded this initial step as the first and most vital in any plan for proceeding on an international basis . . . .” nasa Administrator James E. Webb’s reply to this letter also was inserted, in which he said:	“. . . With regard to space research and exploration, as you know, our present relationships with the Soviet Union have developed directly from the correspondence between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev on specific possibilities of cooperation in this field. Dr. Dryden’s discussions with Academician Blagonravov over the past year or so have followed within this framework. There is already a current agreement between the Soviet Academy of Sciences and nasa which represents the first fruit of these early efforts. “Accordingly, if the Soviet Academy is indeed interested in the matters you describe in your letter, we will look forward to the possibility of further explorations by Dr. Dryden and Academician Blagonravov as to their views and desires . . . .” (Letters, CR, 8/9/63, 13903)
The Senate Committee on Commerce confirmed the nominated incorporators of the Communications Satellite Corp.: Edward P. Kaiser, David M. Kennedy, Sidney J. Weinberg, Bruce G. Sund-lun, A. Byrne Litscligi, Beardsley Graham, Leonard Woodcock, Sam Harris, George Feldman, Leonard Marks, John T. Conner, George L. Killion, Leo D. Welch, and Joseph V. Charyk. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/13/63)
Senator Edward M. Kennedy (D.-Mass.), addressing Massachusetts delegates to NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference, Washington, reaffirmed his pledge to foster Government contracts for space and electronics industries in Massachusetts, and said: “It is my responsibility as a member of Congress to see to it that nasa lives up to its responsibility and make sure your case is heard. It it nasa’s responsibility to see to it that the bids made by Massachusetts companies get the fullest examination and the fairest consideration . . .” (Boston Record American, 2/13/63)
Postmaster General J. Edward Day, speaking at a luncheon in Washington honoring the 25th anniversary of the cab, said: “Today, the 11 domestic trunkline carriers serve more than 600 points over routes in excess of 185,000 miles in length. Twenty-four smaller carriers provide service to some 900 smaller communities over routes m excess of 88,000 miles. Three carriers provide domestic all-cargo service to 38 points over routes in excess of 14,000 miles and another 15 carriers are licensed to provide supplemental services. Fifteen carriers are authorized to provide service to a total of 428 points outside the United States over routes in excess of 320,000 miles.” (CR, 6/27/63, A4098)
President John F. Kennedy was buried in Arlington National Cemetery in a state funeral attended by the largest gathering of foreign dignitaries ever to visit Washington. Throughout the four days of stark events, the Nation and the world participated to a degree never before possible by means of round-the-clock TV coverage that raised that young medium to a new dimension for thoroughness, maturity, and sensitivity. relay i communications satellite enabled all of Europe, including the U.S.S.R., to view the funeral ceremonies. The satellite also provided transmission across the Pacific to Japan, where an estimated 95 million persons viewed the ceremonies. (NYT, 11/26/63)
Members of recent U.S. Mt. Everest expedition, William F. Siri, Univ. of California physiologist, and Prof. Maynard M. Miller, Michigan State Univ. scientist, said in New Delhi interview that laboratory study of rock and snow samples from Mt. Everest might provide clues to life on Mars. Siri said environment on Mars is “just a little bit worse” than on Everest’s peak, citing Everest’s thin air, low temperatures, lack of liquid water, and intense solar radiation. (AP, Richmond News Leader, 6/18/63)
Dr. Michael J. Lipschutz, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center astrochemist, reported at American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington that 2,900-1'b. iron meteorite Navititas found in Mexico in 1872 had been on earth for 800,000 years. In addition, meteorite may have traveled through space for 300 million years in asteroid belt before impacting on earth. Age was measured by examination of radioactive age of certain of meteorite’s chemical elements. (Goddard Release)
Brig. Gen. Gerald F. Keeling (usaf) said in address before Fifth Annual usaf—Industry Conservation Conference: “Department of Defense procurement from the aerospace industries for air weapon systems, and research and development, is now running about $20 billion a year .... “The Air Force share . . . totals $10.6 billion a year, which is more than half the dod total .... “With expenditures of this magnitude, both the dod and Air Force have reason to be concerned that conservation, cost reduction, and value engineering be practiced	(Text, afsc Release 36-R—47) Jwne 19-Jitiy 7: First nationwide display of space research innovations with possibilities for industrial applications was held at 1963 Chicago International Trade Fair. Exhibit was sponsored by nasa Office of Technology Utilization and presented by Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (iitri). (nasa Release 63-122) JwrveW: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in speech before Conference on Space Science and Space Law at the University of Oklahoma: “The impact of the space budget ... is greater than its size wnnlH inHipnfo For ovorrmlo q moinr norfinn of if (topg for
President Kennedy announced that he had appointed Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Chairman of the Chemistry Department at Princeton Univ., to succeed Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner as the President’s science adviser and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology. Dr. Hornig has previously been a member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee. The President also announced that Robert H. Charles, a special assistant to the nasa Administrator, would succeed Joseph S. Imirie as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Materiel. (Wash. Post, 11/8/63)
347-acre Government site in Newport News, Va., presented to Commonwealth of Virginia for Virginia Associated Research Center (varc), established by Univ. of Va., vpi, and College of William and Mary, varc would operate the adjacent Space Radiation Effects Laboratory under nasa contract. Speaking at luncheon following site presentation ceremonies, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed role of physicist today: “It seems clear to me that man’s newly won ability to leave the confines of earth and explore the frontiers of space offers a challenging new opportunity for scientists of all disciplines, and for physicists in particular .... “The need ... is for our creative physicists to think of simple devices, or at least small ones, to make the critical physical measurements that will heighten our knowledge of the characteristics of the universe around us. The task is not easy, but the challenge is great, and the opportunities for new findings are, it seems to me, almost unlimited .... “Today space exploration is the great motivating development that can serve to promote the over-all growth of science and enhance its role in the national life .... (Text)
Dr. Joseph Kaplan, U.S. Chairman of International Geophysical Year, declared greatest success of igy was in preparing the way for other international research. Such studies would increasingly fall within scope of United Nations, he said. Dr. Kaplan was speaking before joint meeting of Peninsula Engineers Club and Institute of Aerospace Sciences in Newport News, Va. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/21/63)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Leo D. Welch and President Joseph V. Charyk left Washington, D.C., for 10 days of discussions with Canadian and European communications officials. (Wash. Post, 5/24/63) Development of new helium isotope, Helium 2, was reported by Dr. 'f	and Tlr< T?ivlrvlFr\ _T SIaIvi. drian of Argentine Atomic Energy Commission. Finding opened “whole new vistas for the possibility of holding other experiments of this kind,” Dr. Bilamuk said. (AP, NYT, 5/16/63, 18)
White House announced that Leo D. Welch, retiring board chairman of Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, and Joseph V.	Charyk, Under Secretary of the Air Force, were being nominated by the President as incorporators of the Communications Satellite Corporation (esc). The esc announced that Welch had been selected to be chairman and chief executive while Charyk would become president and principal operating officer. Dr. Charyk became Chief Scientist of the usaf in 1959, was appointed in June 1959 as Ass’t Sec’y of usaf for r&d, and in January 1960 as Under Secretary. (AP, Wash, Post. 3/1/63, A8)
10-day injunction by U.S. District Court Judge William J. Lindberg halted threatened iam strike against Boeing Co. President Kennedy, after receiving report from special board of inquiry, had ordered Justice Dept, to seek the injunction on grounds that such a strike would endanger national security. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/63)
Balloon flight with instrumented payload to study oxygen conditions in stratosphere was conducted successfully from Palestine, Tex., John Sparkman, manager of National Center for Atmospheric Research’s Balloon Flight Station, announced. Balloon rose to 108,000 ft.; its 680-lb. instrument package was recovered in good condition 40 mi. north of San Angelo, Tex. Three similar attempts had failed when balloon split on two occasions and weather forced postponement on a third. Project was sponsored by Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (Houston Post, 8/24/63) ; to Director of nasa Manned
nasa $150 awards to Dr. Karlheinz Thom and Joseph Norwood, Jr., for invention of plasma accelerator, were announced. Accelerator is capable of controlled ignition under very low gas pressures. (nasa Release 63-137)
Dr. Edward P. Ney, Univ. of Minnesota physicist, said in New York Times interview that sightings by Astronauts Glenn, Carpenter, and Cooper during their orbital Mercury space flights represented the “first direct observation” of what probably is cosmic dust in the airglow layer of about 48- to 54-mi. altitude. Major Cooper reported that light of two stars in Big Dipper had been extinguished by airglow layer, and Dr. Ney said this was “strong evidence for the existence of dust” which could block out the light. (Toth, NYT, 8/12/63, 17)
Dr. Edward Teller, Univ. of Calif, physicist, declared at symposium on “open space and peace” held at Stanford Univ. that surveillance from space of every part of the world should be made legal. Noting that “open skies” policy was first proposed in 1955, he stressed that today the security of U.S. and Free World depend in “a most vital fashion on information obtained from Russia.” Surveillance from space should be conducted “publicly, freely and in the interest of the peace of our nation.” (Davies, NYT, 9/6/63,10)
Richard N. Thomas, professor of astrophysics and chairman of Faculty Committee for Astrophysics of Dept, of Physics and Astrophysics, Univ. of Colorado, was awarded Dept, of Commerce Gold Medal for Exceptional Service. (Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, 5/63,9) During March, April, and May: Total of 227 nasa appearances at 70 hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, involving 246 hours. This involved 546 man-hours of primary witnesses, not including backup witnesses, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/88) Jv/ne 1: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., returned to U.S. after vacationing in Japan with his family since shortly after MA-9 manned space flight, during which he had been stationed aboard Pacific tracking ship Coastal Sentry. Glenn’s candidness and openness during visit was said to have “boosted U.S. image” in Japan. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/2/63)
Three ruby-colored spots appeared on the surface of the moon on the night of Oct. 29, 1963, and might have been volcanic eruptions, Dr. John Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., announced. Hall said that James Greenacre found the spots while studying the moon through a 24-in. refracting telescope. The spots stood out against the yellow-white surface of the moon. Greenacre said that in three years of studying the moon’s surface he had never seen spots similar to these, although a Russian astronomer had reported sighting a similar phenomenon in Nov. 1958 or 1959. (upi, Ban Diego Union, 11/1/63; Christian Science Monitor, 11/2/63)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, speaking before the Atomic Industrial Forum Conference in New York, said that nuclear energy was essential to the space program and offered larger potential in space applications than in terrestrial ones. “One of the major defects in space thinking today is that it is too ‘short-run’. There is a tendency to think only from budget to budget rather than from decade to decade. It has taken great effort—not altogether successful—to get people to think as long-run as a manned flight to the Tnr»on In terms nf what, sna.ee travel and snare exnloration #	~	'	T *	^	# ' '	''"	‘	1.	1. mean to this country, the lunar objective is really a short-run target. Yet, some people think of it as the final space goal which is so far in the future that it can be further delayed without serious effects. If we are to think clearly about space, it is important that we recognize the lunar program for what it is, i.e., only one of the initial steps in a very young program. I believe that those who understand and support nuclear energy in space have a responsibility to educate others in the long-run, broad-based view of space. ... I am suggesting that, if we can get people to realize now that space travel and space exploration are permanent features of the economy, the idea of nuclear energy will automatically be considered a major element in the program.” (Text)
“A Report Covering Evaluation of Areas Considered for Proposed nasa Electronics Research Center,” by Robert C. Sellers & Associates, inserted in Congressional Record by Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.). Report concluded: “1. nasa’s statistics on graduate educational capability in the Boston area do not stand up as against that of New York [metropolitan area]. “2. nasa’s inference that the industrial complex in the Boston area offers potential benefits does not stand up m light of the current backlogs in that area without expansion of existing organizations, as against New York’s Long Island area. “3. In reviewing nasa’s statements, the Senate and House committees should also ask: After seeing overexpansion’s disruptive effects in other areas of the Nation, is it good planning to create a new situation when other areas can support their needs with minimal expansion?” (Seller Report, CR, 8/14/63, 14203-04)
Maj. Donald K. Slayton (usaf) one of the original seven Mercury astronauts and the only one of them who was grounded during the course of the project, submitted his letter of resignation to the usaf and would join nasa as a civilian pilot qualified for space flights. (Finney, NYT, 10/17/63)
In speech before Public Relations Society of America luncheon meeting in Washington, msc Public Affairs Officer Lt. Col. John H. Powers (usaf) said preparations for Project Mercury flight MA-9 were proceeding on schedule. Flight was scheduled for mid-May. (AP, Birmingham, Post-Herald, 4/10/63)
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker to record 354,200-ft. altitude (67.08 mi.), the aircraft attaining maximum speed of 3,794 mph (mach 5.58) at 167,000-ft. altitude. Purpose of flight was to obtain data on stability and control in extreme ranges of flight, especially during re-entry from high altitude with X-15’s ventral fin removed. X-15 carried, for first time, an altitude predictor using an internal computer to provide instantaneous measurements of aircraft’s climb angle and rocket engine’s energy; these measurements were then relayed to pilot through use of an altimeter displaying the predicted altitude. Immediately after launch from B-52, X-15 went into steep climb about 44° above horizontal, its engine burning full thrust for 85.5 sec. On upward trajectory pilot Walker applied speed brakes to prevent excessive velocity. For about three min. he experienced near weightlessness. This was 91st flight of X-15 rocket research aircraft, 25th in X-15 by Walker, (nasa Release 63-191; frc Release)
In speech reprinted in the Cong. Record, William O. Bennett, VP for research and engineering of the Bulova Watch Co., cited 145 examples of “technological fallout” from space research that have been produced in consumer byproducts. He also pointed to the development of the electronic timepiece (not developed in space research) powered by a mercury cell which was used in four families of satellites. {CR, 4/30/63, A2595-96)
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
James T. Koppenhaver resigned as Director, Office of Reliability and Quality Assurance, nasa. Deputy Director John E. Condon was appointed Acting Director of the Office, (nasa Announcement 63-198)	...	.
X-15 No. 3 flown to 92,500-ft. altitude at speed of 3,770 mph (mach 5.51) by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker in test to investigate heat transfer rates and unusual air flow over certain parts or the aircraft. More than 400 heat-measuring devices and 25 presssure-measuring devices were mounted on the aircraft to determine how heat caused by air friction is transmitted to aircraft’s surfaces and to record information concerning air flow, (frc Release; upi, N.Y. Herald Trib., 4/19/63 ; M&R, 4/29/63,10)
In White House ceremony, President Lyndon B. Johnson awarded 31 Presidential Medals of Freedom, then added additional awards to the late President John F. Kennedy and the late Pope John XXIII. Among those receiving this new award, created by President Kennedy, were Dr. Alan T. Waterman, Robert A. Lovett, Edwin H. Land, and Mark S. Watson. (Wash,. Poet, 12/7/63, A8)
Dr. John Billingham, British aerospace medicine specialist, was appointed assistant to Dr. George Smith of Environmental Physiology Branch in Crew Systems Div., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Appointment of Billingham was first direct foreign appointment to msc. (msc Release 63-35)
X-15 No. 3 flown by Joseph A. Walker (nasa) to maximum speed of 3,858 mph (mach 5.52) and maximum altitude of 92,000 ft. in flight test near nasa Flight Research Center to investigate heat rates at relatively high speeds and low angles of attack. As secondary mission, pilot performed several maneuvers to check control methods while X-15’s automatic damping system was turned off. (nasa Release 63-119)
President Johnson signed the Executive Order establishing the John F. Kennedy Space Center: “whereas President John F. Kennedy lighted the imagination of our people when he set the moon as our target and man as the means to reach it; and “whereas the installations now to be renamed are a center and a symbol of our country’s peaceful assault on space; and “whereas it is in the nature of this assault that it should test the limits of our youth and grace, our strength and wit, our vigor and perseverance—qualities fitting to the memory of John F. Kennedy: “now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, I hereby designate the facilities of the Launch Operations Center of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the facilities of Station No. 1 of the Atlantic Missile Range, in the State of Florida, as the John F. Kennedy Space Center; and such facilities shall be hereafter known and referred to by that name.” (Marshall Star, 12/11/63, „ 2)
nasa announced that Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director (Systems) , Office of Manned Space Flight in nasa Hq., had been named Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, at msc. He would be responsible for the development of the Apollo command and service modules and for the lunar excursion module (lem). George Low, Deputy Director (Programs) in the Office of Manned Space Flight, would assume the added responsibility for the Systems organization, (nasa Release 63-226; msc Release 63-163)
Five men entered Boeing Co. space chamber, simulating quarters in manned space station or manned lunar base, for 30-day engineering test of integrated life-support system. Designed and built for nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, system included all elements of life support necessary for 150 man-day space mission. Associated with life-support equipment were specific crew tests simulating problems of space flight. Members of test crew: R. H. Lowry, Boeing Chief of Bioastronautics; Maj. Edward Westlake (usaf) of Air Force Systems Cmd.; Roger Barnicki, nasa Flight Research Center X-15 personnel equipment specialist; Charles Proctor, Boeing biochemist and food specialist; and Richard Farrell, Boeing psychologist. ( nasa Release 63-155)
John C. Sanders, chief of Dynamics and Controls Branch, nasa Lewis Research Center, obtained patent for and made preliminary design of interplanetary rocket using solar rays as energy source. Rocket uses 200-ft.-wide aluminized mylar mirror to gather solar rays. (Marshall Star, 1/9/63,3)
John L. Sloop, Director of Propulsion and Power Generation in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified on nasa high-energy propellant program before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: “Our interest in high energy propellants dates back to the middle-forties. A large amount of research on high energy propellants was conducted by naca. This research contributed to the development of the RL-10 engine. It also led to the choice of oxygen-hydrogen for the upper stages of Saturn I and Saturn V . . . . “Let me assure you, however, that we are not thinking or dealing in the past. I firmly believe there are many opportunities ahead to use high energy propellants in space exploration .... One phase of high energy propellant research in the 1953-1959 period is just beginning to reach fruition and offers significant potential gams in payload for existing vehicles and future vehicles. More work remains to be done . . . .” (Testimony)
Radio and optical astronomers of the Mount Wilson and Palomar observatories announced the discovery of what probably are the brightest objects in the universe observed so far. Their brilliance, they believe, may make it possible to penetrate two to three times deeper into space than was considered possible with present-day telescopes. Five of these super-bright celestial bodies have so far been recognized. Radio astronomers detected them by their radiations of energy in the longer wavelengths, at radio frequencies. They were identified in the third Cambridge (England) Catalogue of Radio Sources as 3C—48,3C-196,3C—286, 3C-147, and 3C-273. The objects are so bright that they had been thought to be nearby stars in our own Milky Way Galaxy, but there is now growing evidence that they are very distant galaxies involved in titanic explosions. The study of such distant objects is vital to cosmologists in determining the kind of universe we live in—whether it will continue expanding, stop expanding, or will eventually contract. {NYT, Western Edition, 3/26/63, Wm. L. Laurence) During March: nasa scientists discovered a new “hot spot in the sky” over Wallops Island, Va., where in winter the temperatures 34 to 60 mi. above the earth reach more than 75° F and winds blow at speeds approaching 400 mph. Currently there is no existing scientific theorv to account for the super-high-altitude, jet-streamlike wind and hot air that seems to blow over Washington, Baltimore, and Annapolis during the winter. Details of the discovery were distributed this month in a nasa technical note entitled “Preliminary Measurements of Temperatures and Winds Above 50 KM (31 mi.) over Wallops Island.” Authors of the pamphlet are Dr. William Nordberg and Wendell Smith, of the Goddard Space Flight Center. (Balt. Sun, 3/31/63)
nasa announced the details of a major reorganization of nasa Hq., to become effective Nov. 1,1963. Designed to consolidate authority and responsibility for major program management and for direction of field centers and to realign headquarters management of agency-wide supporting services, the reorganization provided the following: Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Dr. George Mueller) directing the manned space flight program and the related centers, msfc, Msua-nd loc; Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology (Dr. Raymond Bis-plinghoff), directing the advanced research and technology profram and the related centers, arc, frc, Lane, and lrc ; and the ssociate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications (Dr. Homer Newell), directing the scientific explorations of space and {>eaceful applications program and the related centers, gsfc, Wal-ops Station, ploo, and administering the contract for jpl. These program managers would report to the Associate Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Dr. Seamans acquired a deputy, Walter L. Lingle. Also reporting to Dr. Seamans would be four staff functions: Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs (Earl D. Hilbum); Deputy Associate Administrator for Administration (John D. Young); Deputy Associate Administrator for Programming (D. D. Wyatt); and Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense Affairs (Adm. Walter F. Boone (usn, Ret.)). Several agency-wide support functions would report directly to the Administrator: Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs (^Julian Scheer) ; Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning (Dr. George Simpson); Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs (Richard Callaghan); Assistant Administrator for International Programs (Arnold Frutkin); Executive Director of the Policy Planning Board (Paul Dembling); General Counsel (John A. Johnson). In addition to his assistant administrator duties, Dr. Simpson would also become Associate Deputy Administrator, coordinating the staffs reporting to the Administrator and Deputy Administrator. (nasa Release 63-225)
Discovery of radiation belt around planet Saturn, first reported in Physical Review Letters, was described by two physicists of the nrl research team, Joseph M. Bologna and Russell M. Sloanak-er. From 170 radioastronomy measurements of Saturn’s radiation made between July and October 1962, the researchers discovered that radiation from the planet was too intense to be heat emission, and “the only theoretical explanation is radiation from electrons spiraling in a magnetic field.” Their research indicated Saturn’s radiation belt circles the planet from north to south, theoretically not so likely as equatorial belts such as those of Earth and Jupiter, but Sloanaker said further studies were planned with 300-ft. radiotelescope at Green Bank, W. Va., to clarify uncertainties. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, wrote a letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb asking for an explanation of the statements made at the summary conference on Project Mercury that there had been poor workmanship on the Mercury spacecraft, according to William Hines, in the Washington Evening Star. He was also reported to have inquired about a remark attributed to Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc, that industrial shortcomings included outright falsification, citing an instance where a component used “ ‘black iron where there Should have been stainless steel.’ ” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/63) October 4: Atlas F icbm was launched by usaf from Vandenberg afb, but blew up during liftoff, (upi, PfYT, 10/8/63, 28)
Addressing National Conference on Citizenship in Washington, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said: “No one can foretell with certainty the tremendous import this broad technological revolution may have. But its implication is really much more broad and deep than a single reference to space, for space accomplishments are but one fruit of a greater advancement. There have been matching broad advances in many technical fields that have affected, and will continue to affect every facet of life from our homes, to automobiles, to medicine, to buildings, to roads, and to education. History has shown that such surges of advancement are times of greater opportunity to mold the future . . . .” (Text, CR, 9/16/63, A5799)
Administration reactions to Premier Khrushchev’s statement that Russia would not attempt to land a man on the moon indicated strong reservations on Russian motivations. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Russian withdrawal announcement was “a very wise pronouncement. "Whether they planned to go to the moon or not, they have sensed some slackening of support for the moon program here and have made a strategic move to capitalize on this situation.” Another official said: “All during the moratorium on nuclear testing the Soviets secretly prepared for an intensive series of tests. How can we be certain that they won’t do the same thing in space?” (Wash. Post, 10/27/63)
X—15 No. 1 flown by Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) to 101,000-ft. altitude and 4,018 mph speed (mach 6.06), just 86 mph slower than record speed of 4,104 reached in June 1962 flight by Joseph Walker (nasa). Today’s flight was scheduled to reach 3,900 mph, but an extra burst of power from the rocket engine propelled the aircraft close to the record speed. Purpose of flight was to test new navigation instrument, cross-ranger indicator, and to measure effects of high speed flight on photographic techniques. Photographs taken by the X-15's camera were compared with those taken by camera in U-2 aircraft, piloted by Lt. Col. Harry Andonian at the same time as the X-15 flight and along the same route—Edwards afb to Delamar Lake, Nev. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/6/63; upi, Chic. Trib., 12/6/63)
Yuri Marinin, Soviet space writer, wrote in article translated by U.S. Dept, of Commerce’s Office of Technical Services that “earth-orbit rendezvous” method of manned lunar flight “is regarded as the most practical.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/63, A5)
Project Mercury officially ended. Initiated in autumn of 1958, Mercury had achieved its goal of placing manned spacecraft, in orbital flight around earth, investigating man’s survival ability and performance capabilities in space, and recovering man and spacecraft. Mercury-Redstone suborbital flights paved the way toward ultimate goal, with Astronaut Alan B. Shepard becoming first U.S. man in space in freedom 7 (May 5, 1961), followed by Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom in liberty bell 7 (July 21,1961). First U.S. manned orbital space flight was achieved with Mercury-Atlas MA-6 flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn in friendship 7 (Feb. 20, 1962). This three-orbit space flight was followed by: MA-7, three-orbit flight of Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter in aurora 7 (May 24, 1962); MA-8, six-orbit flight of Astronaut Walter Schirra in sigma 7 (Oct. 3, 1962); and MA-9, 22-orbit space flight of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper in faith 7 (May 15-16, 1963). Project Mercuiy logged 34 orbits of manned space flight with 52 hrs. 23 min. of flight tune. Jwne 12: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of six-month study contract to Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for establishment of environmental control and life support requirements for manned earth-orbiting space station. Duration of 24-man station would be from one to five years, (msc Release 63-100)
British scientist Dr. John F. Kerridge of Univ. of London reported at the cosmic dust conference in New York sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences that he had found material in meteorites that closely resembled the kinds of clays formed by water action on earth. This would argue that the meteorites were once part of a body large enough to have its own atmosphere and hence its own weather. This supported previous findings by Dr. Bartholomew Nagy of Fordham Univ., who also claims to have found fossil-like objects in meteorites. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/22/63, 32)
Dr. Eugene Fubini succeeded John H. Rubel as Deputy Director, dod Research and Engineering. Rubel resigned to return to private industry. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,25)
At aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting, Dallas, presentation by Warren J. North of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and William B. Cassidy of Ling-Temco-Vought described Gemini launch escape system, and said: “A manual abort system will provide added operational flexibility by enabling the flight crew to choose an abort time which may reduce the possibility of aborts at high dynamic pressure; to choose optimum abort times compatible with contingency recovery areas; and to reduce the probability and the risk involved with an inadvertent abort . . . .” (Text)
Selection of two new X-15 pilots, Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf) and Milton O. Thompson (nasa) was announced by Paul F. Bikle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center, and Brig. Gen. Irving L. Branch (usaf) , Commander of AF Flight Test Center. Pilots would fill vacancies left by nasa research pilot Neil Armstrong, now a nasa astronaut, and Maj. Robert White (usaf), recently assigned other usaf duties, (nasa Release 63-127; frc Release 12-63)
William G. Bade, associate mathematics prof, at Univ. of Calif., said at meeting preceding joint convention of American Mathe-rnatical Society * Mathematical Association of America, and Association of Symbolic Logic in Berkeley, Calif., that U.S. needs “perhaps three times as many [mathematics] graduates as the 250 now being produced each year.” (Oakland, Calif., Tnb., 1/24/63)
X-15 No. 1 flown by pilot John McKay to 105,500-ft. altiude at maximum speed of 3,654 (mach 5.32) mph in test to measure distortion of photographs at extreme speeds. Camera was recessed in underside of aircraft’s nose. (AP, Chic. Trib., 4/26/63)
Britain’s Postmaster General, John Bevins, dismissed as unrealistic the idea of his country’s going it alone in putting communications satellites into orbit. He aid not say which course the Government would choose, except that he ruled out an all-British system. A satellite system, he said, cannot be established unless other countries are willing to put ground stations on their own territories and unless they are willing to put traffic over the system. (NYT, Western Edition, 3/27/63)
nasa Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, Julian Scheer, said Lt. Col. John A. Powers, former Public Affairs Officer at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, would become technical consultant to nasa’s exhibits program at Hq., effective Sept. 1. Colonel Powers would supervise construction of spacecraft models used in nasa exhibits. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/18/63)
In the wake of Washington reports that Lt. Col. John H. Glenn might be candidate for U.S. Senate from Ohio, the nasa astronaut said in Houston Post interview that his plans were to remain with nasa and that he had given no thought to a political career. {Houston Post, 7/7/63)
Patent to Boeing Co. engineers Joseph H. Doss and Gary A. Graham for method of suspending astronaut in his spacecraft with netting and cables was reported in New York Times. Inventors claimed system would give astronaut more mobility than couches used in Mercury spacecraft. (Jones, NYT, 8/3/63, 21)
nasa announced Albert F. Siepert, Director of Administration since formation of nasa in October 1958, had been appointed to new post of Deputy Director, nasa Launch Operations Center, effective about April 1. He would be succeeded by John D. Young, nasa Deputy Director of Administration since 1961. Don D. Cadle, Director of Resource Programming in nasa Office of Programs since 1961, was appointed Deputy Director of Administration to succeed John D. Young, (nasa Release 63-33)
Discovery of new atomic particle, Phi-meson, was reported in Physical Review Letters by the two groups of researchers— Brookhaven National Laboratory, Long Island, and Univ. of California’s Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Berkeley. New particle had been predicted by Dr. Jim John Sakurai last December, based on research by team from these two institutions and on speculation by nuclear theorist Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, Prof, of Physics at CalTech. (NYT, 4/15/63,1,14)
itu conference on communications frequency allocation concluded in Geneva on a successful note. Joseph McConnell, president of the Reynolds Metal Co. and head of the U.S. delegation, talked from Geneva via syncom n communications satellite about the results of the conference. Final agreement had set aside some 2,800 megacycles of the spectrum for use of space communications. This was somewhat more than the U.S. had requested, although not all of it in the portions of the spectrum that the U.S. had wanted, (nasa Press Conference Transcript; Wash. Post, 11/9/63)
Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream, nasa Langley research {illots, reported to ias meeting on research results of simulated unar spacecraft landing, lunar orbit rendezvous, and atmospheric re-entry made in simulated three-man spacecraft. Realistic tests demonstrated ability of research pilots to complete precise maneuvers of flight, despite necessarily cramped quarters and seven-day duration. Lane aerospace scientists Jack E. Pennington and Roy F. Bris-senden reported on experiments to investigate astronauts’ ability to rendezvous in space by visual means. Pennington and Bris-senden concluded that pilot could sight target vehicle from perhaps as much as 200 mi. away if it is lighted by sun or bright beacon; he could then successfully brake his own spacecraft along an intersecting path. Dr. Leonard Roberts, LaRc physicist, reported to ias on implications of lunar landing if moon has, as many scientists believe, dust layer on surface. Dr. Roberts concluded that spacecraft descending to moon would erode a crater by action of its rocket exhaust. If dust exists on lunar surface, it would be blown outward and away from descending vehicle; air would not be present to recirculate dust in envelnnimr cloud so astronaut’s visibilitv '	...... ... ... .. IT-----Q -----7	—	----------- should not be reduced by lunar dust. Other Lane scientists presented research reports covering instruments for satellites, supersonic aircraft flutter problems, and wind tunnel experiments on helicopter rotors. (Langley Release)
X-15 No. 1 was flown to 3,286 mph (mach 4.75) and 90,800-ft. altitude by Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), his second X-15 flight. The X-15 was put through two sharp rolling turns to test aircraft stability at high speeds and as part of the pilot’s familiarization training. (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 11/15/63; X-15 Project Office)
Conclusions on where the armed forces “are going” in the rest of this decade were outlined recently by Gen. William F. McKee, usaf Vice Chief of Staff. “. . . we must watch our own and the Soviet’s space programs carefully. This is probably the area of greatest demand on our vision as a nation. For it is here that one of us, probably, will find the key to the strategic superiority of the 1970’s. Secretary McNamara says, ‘I think there is no clear requirement for military purposes for manned operations in space as we look at the future today.’ However, Mr. McNamara said more: ‘. . . But, should one develop it could come so suddenly in a field in which the leadtime for the developmental technology is so long that I believe we must anticipate that possibility today . . .’. “I, too, think we must anticipate that today. While this is a national effort, it is also an absolute obligation of those of us responsible for our national security.” {Air Force Information Policy Letter, June 1963)
In March issue of Physical Review, John Linsley of mit’s Laboratory for Nuclear Science reported that an atom of high energy, presumably from some galaxy outside our own Milky Way, penetrated our solar system and crashed into the earth’s atmosphere, setting off a cosmic-ray shower over New Mexico during February. Source of the atomic nucleus was reasoned because of its enormous power as the resultant cosmic-ray shower covered an area of several square miles. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63)
Reported that Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, commander of Moscow military district, had been appointed Chief of Soviet Rocket Forces, replacing Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, recently named Chief of Staff of the Soviet Armed Forces. (AP, NYT, 4/16/63)
usaf announced it was establishing three-man Gemini liaison and support office at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Under Col. William A. Stellenwerf, office would deal primarily with Titan II launch vehicle for Gemini and recovery requirements. (Av. Wk., 7/15/63, 31; A-N-AF Journ. <& Reg., 7/13/63, 16)
Senator John L. McClellan (D.-Ark.) introduced in the Senate a bill (S. 1290) to establish a uniform national policy concerning proprietary rights in inventions made through expenditure of public funds. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary. (CR,4/9/63,5609)
Adm. Sergei Gorshkov, Commander-in-Chief of Soviet Navy, wrote in Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) that US.S.R. had successfully fired missiles from underwater submarines during training exercises last year. He said “radical re-equipment” had provided Soviet navy with submarines and surface vessels armed with missiles capable of striking anywhere in the world. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/6/63, A15)	_ February 5:	System to determine composition of moon’s crust by explosions on lunar surface was described by Francis E. Lehner, senior project engineer on lunar seismology, Cal Tech. Under development for nasa by Lehner and Dr. Robert L. Kovach, geophysicist at jpl, system was designed to be sent to moon in “unmanned instrument package weighing about 50 pounds .... “We propose to obtain subsurface information about the moon by touching off a series of small explosive charges and then with one or more geophones placed at some distance from the explosives detect the resulting waves that have penetrated into the crust and have been refracted again to the surface. “A geophone converts a mechanical wave into an electrical one that may be amplified and recorded. Different kinds of rock formation, and cracks and layers of material will affect the wave patterns, which can be amplified and radioed back to earth.” (ctps, Chicago Trib., 2/6/63) February 5-6:	First intra-agency technical conference on optical communications and tracking held at gsfc with representatives of nasa’s field centers and installations attending. Purpose of the conference was to provide for an exchange of technical information on laser optical and tracking programs at each of the centers. (Goddard News, 2/25/63,2) February 6:	nasa announced it would use TV to monitor Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper during his Project Mercury space flight MA-9. Slow-soan television monitoring equipment had been installed at Cape Canaveral and aboard tracking ship to be stationed in South Pacific; third monitor might be established in Canary Islands. Television pictures received at Cape Canaveral could later be fed into U.S. networks, it was reported, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/7/63, A4)	_	_
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, msc, spoke before the National Rocket Club in Washington. He explained the philosophy behind the recent changes in the Apollo flight-test program, when Saturn I launch vehicles were replaced by Saturn IB’s and the first manned flight thereby delayed for some nine months. Dr. Shea pointed out that the space age had advanced to the point that the space environment is understood well enough so that components can be designed, built, and ground-tested with confidence that they can perform well in space. The flight test program has become “the relatively small portion of the development iceberg which is clearly visible to the public.” This had led to a desire to flight-test the entire spacecraft configuration from the outset, rather than the previous method of adding additional systems flight by flight, when “every spacecraft is a somewhat different design containing the potential of new problems. “The discipline of a single configuration—configuration control, if you will—not only increases the carry over from test to test so necessary for establishing design confidence, but also provides repeated opportunities for early spacecraft tests of substantial scope.” (Text)
Study on possibility of polluting outer space with rocket exhaust gases, made by Geophysics Corp. of America for arpa, was reported by John W. Finney of New York Times. Principal conclusion of study was that there is “strong probability that the accelerated rocket program with enormously large missiles in prospect in the near future may cause modifications over large local areas or on a worldwide basis in the upper atmosphere.” Modifications could include marked changes in composition, structure, and temperature of upper atmosphere and changes in electron density of the ionosphere. For example, large amounts of hydrogen could absorb ultraviolet radiation from sun and thus decrease electron density in D region of the ionosphere. (nytCo., Atlanta Constitution, 1/21/63) ■January 21: Reported that Russia's Aeroflot had increased its student fare discount from 25% to 50%, discount applicable to all college students, including those taking evening and correspondence courses, high school students, ana persons enrolled at military or naval institutes. (Av. Wk., 1/21/63,52)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, told National Rocket Club in Washington: “From time to time, major public attention shifts from one space project to another. ... It would be incorrect to conclude, however, that any one of these projects or any other specific project encompasses the whole job of implementing our space policy. Rather, all of them, plus many projects not yet conceived, combined to make the national program viable, energetic and selectively expanding. . . . “. . . Our military space activities are just as peaceful as our non-military ones. Indeed, our space legislation labels both as ‘peaceful.’ Both, incidentally, are also scientific, so one cannot make the further distinction that nasa’s and aec’s projects are scientific and the Defense Department’s are something otner than that, or vice versa. ... “Whether or not enough is being done in either the military or non-military space field—and I am never satisfied—I would suggest that before one comes to a firm conclusion on such a question, he should examine in considerable detail just how much has been accomplished during the past 12 months. It is an impressive record and one need not skip over the failures or the delays in specific projects in order to develop a balance sheet which shows a remarkable degree of progress in a field in which we started late and moved slowly too long. . . . “In concluding . . , I would emphasize several points: (1) It is in this nation’s interest—economically, technologically, scientifically, militarily, and internationally—to carry out an accelerating space program; (2) to maintain our position of leadership in the free world we cannot afford anything less than first place in space accomplishment and there is no sound basis for complacency regarding our present position; (3) we must take risks and overcome failures in this complex endeavor and we dare not let the risks or the failures slow our momentum; and (4) in spite of all the excitement and glamor of the space program, it must be managed and operated in a tough-minded fashion so that we will get every one of its many benefits as soon and as efficiently as possible.” (Text)
Reported that usaf Vice c/s General William F. McKee had dispatched message to usaf commanders urging “personnel attention and active support” in recruiting volunteers for forthcoming nasa astronaut selections. (A-N-AF Jonm. & Reg., 6/15/63, 4)
In lecture on “The Practical and Impractical Uses of Space” at Catholic University, Dr. Edward Teller supported the U.S. lunar program but parried questions on the reasons. “I just don’t know why ... I wanted to go to the moon before Sputnik.” Teller stated that he believed that water could be drawn from lunar rocks by underground nuclear explosions: “One hundred tons of water on the moon would be the equivalent of 100 tons of gold here.” He said that contamination of the water would not be a problem as the U.S. had already developed “clean” bombs and that even cleaner bombs are possible. (Ayres, Wash. Post, 11/9/63, C14) 741-023 O—64-28
President John F. Kennedy wrote a letter to Rep. Albert Thomas “I am very glad to respond to your letter of September 21 and to state my position on the relation between our great current space effort and my proposal at the United Nations for increased cooperation with the Russians in this field. In my view an energetic continuation of our strong space effort is essential, and the need for this effort is, if anything, increased by our intent to work for increasing cooperation if the Soviet Government proves willing. “As you know, the idea of cooperation in space is not new. My statement of our willingness to cooperate in a moon shot was an extension of a policy developed as long ago as 1958 on a bipartisan basis, with particular leadership from Vice President Johnson, who was then the Senate Majority Leader .... Our specific interest in cooperation with the Soviet Union, as the other nation with a major present capability in space, was indicated by me to Chairman Khrushchev in Vienna in the middle of 1961, and reaffirmed in my letter to him of March 7,1962 .... So my statement in the United Nations is a direct development of a policy long held by the United States Government. “Our repeated offers of cooperation with the Soviet Union have so far produced only limited responses and results .... But as I said in July of this year, there are a good many barriers of suspicion and fear to be broken down before we can have major progress in this field. Yet our intent remains: to do our part to bring those barriers down. “At the same time, as no one knows better than you, the United • States in the last five years has made a steadily growing national effort in space .... “This great national effort and this steadily stated readiness to cooperate with others are not in conflict. They are mutually supporting elements of a single policy. We do not make our space effort with the narrow purpose of national aggrandizement. We make it so that the United States may have a leading and honorable role in mankind’s peaceful conquest of space. It is this great effort which permits us now to offer increased cooperation with no suspicion anywhere that we speak from weakness. And in the same way, our readiness to cooperate with others enlarges the international meaning of our own peaceful American program in space. “In my judgment, therefore, our renewed and extended purpose of cooperation, so far from offering any excuse for slackening or weakness in our space effort, is one reason the more for moving ahead with the great program to which we have been committed as a country for more than two years. “So tne position of the United States is clear. If cooperation is possible, we mean to cooperate, and we shall do so from a position made strong and solid by our national effort in space. If cooperation is not possible—and as realists we must plan for this contingency too—then the same strong national effort will serve all free men’s interest in space, and protect us also against possible hazards to our national security. So let us press on . . . .” (Letter, 9/23/63) “The climate has changed. It is somewhat more favorable.” {M&R, 9/23/63, 14)
$9,847,000 contract for electrical and mechanical equipment for three launcher umbilical towers for Saturn V launch vehicle was awarded by John F. Kennedy Space Center, nasa, to two-company team of Paul Smith Construction Co. and E. C. Ernst Co., Inc. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/20/63, 432)
Recently approved program by nasa-usaf Project Gemini Program Planning Board called for about 12 usaf experiments to be included in later Gemini flights, John Finney reported in New York Times. Board was reported to have concluded it could make no recommendations on usaf pilots participating in Gemini until dod clarified its position on military requirements for a manned space flight program. (Finney, NYT, 9/3/63,1,15)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Titan III program director, quoted as saying usaf planned to fly at least 10 X-20 (Dyna Soar) spacecraft, the first two to be unmanned and remaining eight carrying astronauts. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/14/63, 238)
fcc Chairman E. William Henry said in year-end statement: “Continued experiments with ‘Telstar’, ‘Relay’ and ‘Syncom’ hold forth the promise that space satellites, in the next few years, can provide reliable and economic communications.” (tjpi, Wash. Post, 12/30/63)
President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Dr. Edward C. Welsh “acting temporary chairman” of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. As Vice President, Johnson had served as nasc Chairman. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/10/63,370)
Address on Research and Development and the Federal Budget, by bob Executive Assistant Director William D. Carey, inserted in Congressional Record by Rep. John W. McCormack. Carey said:
Department of Labor’s second annual William F. Patterson Memorial Award presented to nasa Langley Research Center “in recognition of apprenticeship program excellence.” (Newport News Daily Press, 9/12/63)
Addressing the Southwest Conference on Arms Control at the University of Oklahoma, William C. Foster, Director, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, discussed the complex relationship between national strategy, military security, and arms control in a thermonuclear world.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., repeated in Washington press conference that he was not planning a career in politics. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/63)
During prelaunch preparations at Holloman afb, N.M., Project Stargazer balloon broke loose and soared away, finally landing 120-mi. east of Holloman. Balloon was to have carried gondola with two men, Capt. Joseph Kittinger (usaf) and astronomer William White, and their 12.5-in. telescope to study stars from above most of earth’s atmosphere, usaf spokesman said sudden wind blew the moored balloon from side to side, creating static electricity which triggered a safety mechanism to release the balloon. Damaged balloon would require repairs by manufacturer before it could be re-used. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
Sen. Edward V. Long (D.-Mo.) and 13 other Senators proposed “freedom of information” bill to require Government agencies to publish in Federal Register all policy statements, rules, and procedures, and to make available for inspection all final opinions, statements, and interpretations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/63)
John W. Stone, Advanced Studies Manager of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion Directorate, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said at aiaa Manned Space Flight Meeting that projected Nova launch vehicle would be so costly that it would require national policy ruling—such as President Kennedy’s decision to award high priority to manned lunar landing program. There would be no need for such a decision on Nova until 1968 at the earliest, he said. (M<&R, 4/29/63,16)
At Wright Brothers Memorial Banquet in Hollywood, Calif., the Timers Aero Club of naa awarded “Elder Statesmen of Aviation” awards to John K. Northrop, Floyd B. Odium, and (posthumously) James Kindelberger. Also fai medals were presented to Paul F. Bikle, glider pilot and Director of nasa’s Flight Research Center, and Joseph A. Walker, nasa X-15 pilot. General Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, said in address to Wright Memorial Dinner: “. . . When Orville and Wilbur Wright made their historic flights, 60 years ago, little did they know that their effort would have such an impact on the nation’s strategy and on its military forces. “We should learn a lesson from this. “We cannot in today’s world stop our search for new sources of national strength. Further, if this Nation ever finds itself falling behind in the technological race—and lacking men possessing the vision and courage of the Wright Brothers, and the great Aerospace flyers who followed them, then in my opinion our days at a great Nation will be numbered and so will the days of freedom.” (Air Force and Space Digest, 1/64, 84; Text, dod Release 1572-63)
Donald Wills Douglas, founder, board chairman, and chief executive officer of Douglas Aircraft Co., was presented 1963 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at Aero Club of Washington’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Banquet, (naa Release)
In letter to fcc Chairman E. William Henry, ComSatCorp Chairman Leo D. Welch said ComSat directors agreed that stock be issued to the public “at the earliest practicable date” and were planning stock issuance not later than early 1964. Replying to fco contention that stockholders should have voice in ComSat policy making (see July 26), Welch asserted that fcc was invading management functions of the directors and argued that the corporation’s initial studies were necessary to give potential investors “a responsible presentation of material facts in compliance with the applicable Federal and state securities laws.” (N. Y. Herald Tnb., 8/8/63; Clayton, Wash. Post, 8/8/63)
A. Adzhubey, Chief Editor of Izvestia, wrote an open letter to William R. Hearst, Jr., publisher and owner of the New York Jour-nal-American, denying the New York newspaper’s report that several cosmonauts had died in space flight. One of the cosmonauts reported dead, Petr Ivanovich Dolgov, “actually did die but not in 1960 as the newspaper claims, but in 1962, . . . when together with Major Yvgemy Andreyev, he made an unprecedented parachute jump from the stratosphere.” Col. Dolgov and Maj. Andreyev received the title “Hero of the Soviet Union” for their test jump from the stratosphere balloon “Volga.” The other “Soviet cosmonauts” reported missing by the Jowr-nal-Americam were: A. Belokonev, I. Kachur, A. Grachev, and G. Mikhaylov. These men were not cosmonauts, said Adzhubey, but instead technical workers “who test various kinds of equipment, instruments, and clothing used both in space flight and in high-altitude aviation.” None of them made space flights and they are all alive and well. (Izvestia, 5/28/63, 2, atss-t Trans.)
Choice of 5-psi, 100% oxygen environment for Apollo spacecraft was documented in Journal of Aerospace Medicine by Edward L. Michel, George B. Smith, Jr., and Richard S. Johnston of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. They said it ranks higher than 7-psi, 50/50 oxygen-nitrogen environment in weight, leakage rates, system simplicity, reliability, and decompression protection, lower in fire dysbarism and atelectasis protection. (M&R, 1/27/64, 27)
Marcel Nicolet of the Belgium National Space Research Committee was the winner of the Guggenheim International Astronautics Award at the banquet of the International Astronautics Federation in Paris. Nicolet had, in early 1961, suggested the existence of the helium layer between the oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere and the hydrogen upper atmosphere, later confirmed independently by R. E. Bourdeau, E. C. Whipple, P. C. Donnelly, and S. J. Bauer, using explorer vm ion trap data. Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin attended the XIVth iaf banquet dressed in civilian domes. (Cf. R. Jastrow, “Results . . . ,”
lunik iv was Soviet Union’s third attempt in 1963 to send instrumented payload to the moon, William Hines reported in Washington Evening Star, He quoted a Government official— outside of nasa and dod—as saying: “We are trying to make a record to place before the world. The preparation of this record is now in progress. There has been no official statement to date regarding things that are up there which we know about and don’t belong to us. But there are such things, and they should be made public—by us, if the Soviets refuse.” nasa and dod had no comment on any unannounced Soviet space launchings. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/9/63, Al)
Promotion of Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, commander of Soviet rocket forces, to Chief of the General Staff was reported in Soviet militaiy newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/29/63)
usn launched Polaris A-3 test missile from surface test ship U.S.S. Observation Island using completely new eject launch system. (dod Release 1301-63) September 26-0ct6ber 1: xivth International Astronautical Congress held in Paris, with more than 1,000 delegates from 34 countries attending. 80 papers covering wide range of scientific and technical subjects were presented. (Program) Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, and Chairman of iaf Bioastronautics Committee, presented his “Bioastronautics Review.” Dr. Konecci discussed U.S. bioastronautics programs, results, and plans, and compared U.S. program with that of U.S.S.R. Summing up Project Mercury MA-9 flight, he said: “Hie performance of Gordon Cooper proved in detail man’s integration with the operation of the spacecraft systems. This accomplishment of the Mercury program is of major significance as it does indicate that much more dependence can be placed on man as a reliable operating portion of the man-spacecraft combination .... Once agam, the recent flight of MA-9 has proved that man can adapt very rapidly to a 35-hour period in a new environment. His senses and capabilities are little changed in space. At least for the duration of Cooper’s mission (a total of 34+ hours) weightlessness affecting the normality of his judgment, orientation and other human functions in space was no problem . . . .” (Text) Dr. Konecci also reviewed Russian progress in biotechnology. He said the Soviets had demonstrated the reliability of their spacecraft and their “high regard for life of the cosmonauts, since, to our knowledge, ‘not a single life has been lost in the U.S.S.R. space effort.’ The Soviets concede that, in the long run, human intellect and sensations are the only forces capable of learning the secrets of the universe.” (Text) Four papers by Soviet scientists presented at iaf Congress indicated biological effects of cosmic radiation were one of the most complex and most urgent problems of bioastronautics. Papers reported on radiation effects on seeds, fruit flies, animal tissue, and bacteria as well as on cosmonauts Gagarin, Titov, Nikolayev, and Popovich, who experienced no harmful effects. (Abstracts) At iaf Congress in Paris, Dr. Charles Draper of hit told Missiles and Rochets that joint lunar landing was possible within five years if progress continued at present rate and if U.S. guidance were used with a Soviet rocket. {M&R, 9/30/63,26) Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin said in address Sept. 28 that Soviet scientists were working on problems of rendezvous and coupling of at least two spacecraft in orbit. Cosmonaut Gagarin acknowledged that rendezvous technique was “extremely complex” and that a number of problems remain in areas of “communications, optics and maneuvers.” He said Soviets would dock several individual vehicles in earth orbit to construct space platform from which man would be sent on flight trajectory toward the moon. Le Journal du Dimanche reported Cosmonaut Gagarin’s prediction that U.S.S.R. would land a man on the moon before the U.S. {Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 30; Le Journal dv Dima/nrhs,. 9/29/63. 22) . Soviet General Nicolai Petrovich Kamanin, Deputy Chief of Staff of Soviet Air Force and head of cosmonaut group, said at iaf luncheon that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program would achieve a manned lunar landing more quickly and cheaply than separate efforts by the two countries. After the luncheon he told newsmen that a “more favorable political evolution” was necessary before a joint lunar expedition could be planned. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/30/63) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, said in iaf address: “One of the most exciting technological aspects of space exploration has been the development of automated spacecraft. Most of the scientific exploration of space and the useful applications of space flight thus far have been made possible by automated spacecraft. Development of these spacecraft and their many complex subsystems is setting the pace today for many branches of science and technology. Guidance, computer, attitude control, power, telecommunication, instrumentation, and structural subsystems are being subjected to new standards of light weight, high efficiency, extreme accuracy, and unsurpassed reliability and quality . . . .” He then reviewed automated spacecraft already flown or currently under development by nasa. (Text)
Cosmic-ray shower caused by atomic nucleus so powerful that it must have come from another galaxy was reported in Physical Review Letters. Cosmic-ray shower was detected at Volcano Ranch recording station near Albuquerque by John Linsley of mit Laboratory for Nuclear Science. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63, A2)
Senator John O. Pastore (D.-R.I.), chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee’s Communications Subcommittee, questioned the wisdom of continued Government financing of experimental communications .satellites: “We were led to believe that practically all this work would be done by the private [communications satellite] corporation.” {Wash. Post, 2/20/63, A8)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.), forwarded to President Johnson an appeal to preserve the name of Cape Canaveral, asking the President to clarify his executive order and make it clear that it applied only to the launch operations center and missile range station. Residents of nearby Florida communities writing to their Congressional delegation largely favored naming the John F. Kennedy Space Center as a tribute to the late President but preferred retaining 400-year-old name of Cape Canaveral. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/9/63; Av. Wk., 12/9/63, 25)
X-15 No. 3, piloted by Joseph A. Walker (nasa), reached 27l,000-ft. altitude and 3,677-mph speed (mach 5.47) in flight near nasa Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Flight was second highest altitude achieved with rocket-powered X-15 and fourth to reach or exceed altitude for which aircraft was designed; it was X-15’s highest altitude without ventral tail fin. (nasa Release 63-8)
X-15 pilot Joseph A. Walker (nasa) was presented 1963 Pilot of the Year award by National Pilots Association in Miami. Award was made in recognition of Walker’s contribution to aeronautical research and the general advancement of aviation. Participating in the X-15 program since its inception, Walker has flown the X-15 25 times, more than any other man; he has flown it to record speed of 4,104 mph and has attained record altitude, 354,200 ft. (frc Release 36-63)
Gen. Lucius D. Clay (usa, Ret.) named recipient of 1964 John Fritz Medal, citing him for “his distinguished service to the engineering profession, the nation, and to the world.” {NYT, 7/19/63)
Experiments to determine behavior of dust on moon’s surface described by Dr. John W. Salisbury of afcrl Space Physics Laboratory in OAR Research Review. Conducted in lunar simulation chamber in which effects of low pressure, radiation, and temperature on physical properties of probable lunar surface materials were studied, experiment demonstrated for first time that silicate powders, like metals, adhere to one another in ultrahigh vacuums. Particles also adhere to glass and metal surfaces. Experiment director Salisbury concluded “properly designed vehicles will not sink away into a sea of lunar dust, should one exist. The tendency of dust particles to stick to all metal and glass surfaces will, however, provide an unusual difficulty in the operation of camera lenses, portholes and mirrors.” (OAR Research Review, 8/12/63, 3-4)
House passed bill to authorize $5,203,719,400 for nasa in FY 1964 (334-57). House bill would authorize $4,013,175,000 for research and development; $508,185,000 for administrative operations; and $682,359,400 for construction of facilities. House cut $34.4 million from the bill as reported from Committee on Science and Astronautics: Amendment introduced by Rep. Richard L. Roudebush (R.-Ind.) cut $24.4 million from Committee’s recommendation for facility, training, and research grants, the amendment intended “to stabilize” nasa’s university program at FY 1963 level. Another amendment cut $10 million from advanced design development. Amendment offered by Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.) to cut $3.9 million authorization for electronics research center was defeated (111-04). (CR, 8/1/63, 1307013129) . ... August 1—November 1: Project Stormfury, experiment to investigate ways of reducing destructive force of hurricanes, conducted jointly by Weather Bureau and Naval Weather Service. Experiment involved seeding hurricane clouds and cumulonimbus clouds (not associated with hurricane winds) with silver iodide to learn if energy patterns can be changed. Results would be compared with similar experiment conducted during 1961 Hurricane Esther, (dod Release 1077-63)
President of Boeing Co. William M. Allen testified in closed hearings before Senate Investigations Subcommittee that Boeing’s bid to build 23 tfx aircraft was $148,000,000 less than that of General Dynamics Corp., “yet we were downgraded by reason of our lower price. It was most disillusioning and discouraging to discover that one of the principal reasons Boeing lost the award was because our fixed-price bid was too low .... It has been stated that our cost estimates were unrealistic, demonstrating that we did not appreciate the complexities of developing the tfx . . . .” He said Boeing developed its bid on basis of careful calculations and was fully prepared to fulfill contract commitments at quoted price of $482,000,000. (AP, NYT, 5/3/63,1,14)
dod Distinguished Public Service Medal presented by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara to John H. Rubel, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, (dod Release 824r-63) During First Week of June: Technical progress reports on supersonic transport study contracts were made by Boeing Co’s Transport Div. and Lockheed-Califomia Co. to nasa Langley Research Center. Final reports on the nine-month contracts would be made in November, (nasa Release 63-129; Langley Release) First Week in June; Dr. Barry Commoner, biology processor of Washington Univ., St. Louis, referred to conclusion of Space Science Summer Group that search for extraterrestrial life “should be acclaimed as the top-priority scientific goal of our space program,” and charged that chances of finding extraterrestrial life were so small that they did not justify multibillion dollar cost. Dr. Commoner’s criticism came in commencement address before Hahnemann Medical College in Philadelphia. (Finney, NYT, 6/9/63)
A second disturbance on the moon has been observed by usaf lunar mappers at Lowell Observatory, usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center announced. Sighting was made by Observatory Director Dr. John A. Hall aim four other observers Nov. 27 and lasted an hour and a half (first sighting Oct. 29 lasted 20 min.). Both sightings were near crater Aristarchus, both were ruby red, and both were seen when moon was in the same phase (sunlight returning to this surface area). Previous sighting was of three red spots, but this sighting was of single red area 12 mi. long and 1V2 mi- wide, inside crater’s rim where one of first spots had been seen. Observation was confirmed by astronomy graduate student Peter A. Boyce, at Ohio State Univ.'o Perkins Observatory. Dr. Hall believed spots may be gases released from lunar interior by intense heat of the returning sunlight. (AP, San Diego Union, 12/4/63; Time, 12/27/63, 54-55)	_
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) officially came into existence, a merger, after more than a year of study and debate, of the American Rocket Society (ars) and of the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias). aiaa is thus the leading technical society keyed to the dynamic developments of the space age. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, became the aiaa’s first President. {Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, February 1963,19)
At gsfc Colloquium, John A. O’Keefe discussed the origin and evolution of the moon, submitting his theory that billions of years ago the moon separated from the still “undifferentiated earth,” thereafter was subjected to volcanic eruptions, meteorite bombardment, and ultimate cooling and transformed into a hard cinder-like material. The volcanic dust produced the comparatively smooth lunar maria. If theory is correct, O’Keefe said, the original dust has long since become firm and constitutes “no hazard” for landings of space vehicles. O’Keefe supported his theory with available evidence on tektites. (Text; Wash. Post, 3/23/63,1)
msc announced a reorganization designed to strengthen Apollo and Gemini management structure and to assimilate Project Mercury personnel into these programs. Under Dr. Robert R. Gilruth as Director and James C. Elms as Deputy Director would be four assistant directors, managers of major programs, and manager of msc Florida Operations. The four assistant directors: Assistant Director for Engineering and Development (Maxime A. Faget), Assistant Director for Flight Operations (Christopher C. Kraft, Jr.), Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations (Donald K. Slayton), and Assistant Director for Administration (Wesley L. Hjomevik). Major program managers: Apollo Spacecraft Program Office (Dr. Joseph F. Shea) and Gemini Program Manager (Charles W. Mathews), (msc Release)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), in Missiles and Rockets interview, advocated selling space boosters to foreign countries. Noting Scout and Thor boosters already were available to European countries, he said Atlas also should be made available, under these conditions: “One, that they pay for the vehicle—I don’t think we should give it away. “Two, we would need to launch it for them. . . . Third, whatever secrecies surround the launch vehicle and/or other devices, all of this would be handled by U.S. personnel .... “In my opinion, other nations are not as interested in advancing scientific exploration as they are in embarking on programs to advance their own economic position. And in this instance I say it’s fine for us to cooperate by selling to them a booster or whatever other paraphernalia they need. “As these countries become more involved in space programs, it may be they will be desirous of buying Saturns or Centaurs. We don’t necessarily need to stop at Atlas. I think the whole high-thrust field of boosters is a tremendous market with great potential. “. . . we should do this through an agency of the U.S. government, probably through the Defense Department or nasa. Whatever profit might be involved does not go to nasa, does not go to dod—it goes to private industry, to those who make the Atlas or the Saturn or Centaur. This money gets back into the economy. It provides jobs. It stimulates the U.S.’s gross national product, causing our overall economy to grow and expand . . . .”	(M&R.
Dr. Donald E. Gault of nasa Ames Research Center told American Geophysical Union that moon dust, from one to 10 tons a day, was falling on earth. Dr. Gault estimated that 54 per cent of dust sprayed off moon (by impact of meteoroids) enters solar orbit; 40 per cent enters earth orbit; 3 per cent impacts earth directly soon after leaving moon; and 3 per cent hits earth after a month or more. He suggested methods of finding moon dust for analysis: launching rocket to collect sample particles from upper atmosphere; and obtaining samples of sea sediment in polar regions where, he said, layers of moon dust must have been deposited and trapped. (NYT, 4/18/63; Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
Joseph A. Walker, nasa’s senior X-15 pilot and holder of the world altitude and speed records for research aircraft, was awarded the Christopher Columbus International Prize for Communication. The award is made by the city of Genoa, Italy, each year on Columbus Day. U.S. Ambassador G. Frederick Reinhardt accepted the award on behalf of Mr. Walker, (nasa Release 63-229; AP, NTT, 10/14/63, 9)
At the White House, President Kennedy was presented with oneeighth scale model of mariner ii Venus probe by nasa Administrator James E. Webb, jpl Director William H. Pickering, and other officials. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/19/63; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/18/63)
Award of patent for manned orbital spacecraft designed to glide into land or water landing wa9 reported in New York Times. Patent was obtained for nasa by Alan B. Kehlet, Dennis F. Hasson, and William W. Petynia. (NYT, 5/25/63,13,18)
Soviet Cosmonauts Lt. Col. Yuri A. Gagarin and Junior Lt. Valentina Tereshkova visited the U.N. in New York. After a standing ovation by the General Assembly, Col. Gagarin listed five areas in which U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation was possible: exchange of scientific knowledge, tracking, rescue of downed spacemen, global weather study, and an international radio communications system. Manned space flight cooperation required “certain clarification,” he said. (NYT, 10/17/63)
Frederick R. Kappel, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of at&t, was cited by Saturday Review as “Businessman of the Year” (1962). Mr. Kappel spearheaded at&t’s $50-million commitment to Telstar ever since it was envisioned by Bell Labs scientist, Dr. John R. Pierce, in 1954. Saturday Review called Telstar “more than a triumph of the modem technology of space communications. It was also a symbol wise men could approve, of a new era in human communications, a work of peace that sought only to bring men together, not to destroy them. Finally, it was the product of a promising new teamwork in space between government and industry, in this case the largest private enterprise venture in the world . . . .” (Sat. Review, 1/12/63, 46)
Representative George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) submitted article by A. A. Mikhailov, Director of the U.S.S.R.’s Pulkovo Observatory on the American astronomer, William Wallace Campbell (18621938) in the Congressional Record. Appearing in Soviet journal called Nature, article reviewed work of Dr. Campbell at the Lick Observatory in San Francisco, where he pioneered in stellar photography and the determination of stellar motions (18901923). (CR, 3/1/63,1086-87)
B-58 with usaf crew flew nonstop from Tokyo to London, completing the 8,028-mi. flight in 8 hrs. 35 min. for an average speed of 938 mph. The B-58 was refueled in midair five times. Previous record of 17 hrs. 42 min. was set in 1957 by U.K.’s W. Hoy, who flew a Canberra at an average speed of 335.7 mph. Crew members on the B-58 were Mai. Sidney G. Kubesch, Capt. Gerald R. Williamson, and Maj. John O. Barrett. (Av. TF&., 10/21/63; _ NYTX10/22/63,8) p ^ ^
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition resumed hearings on nasa FY 1964 budget authorization, with testimony by Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, President of Communications Satellite Corp., and Leo D. Welch, Chairman. Asked whether ComSat Corp. would conduct its own r&d or depend upon NASA-sponsored research, Mr. Welch said, “We plan to do both. We plan to contract for design studies, [and] we obviously plan to take advantage of the work done by nasa.” Mr. Welch said space communications system may link U.S., Europe, Japan, and Latin America by 1967. Dr. Charyk said ComSatCorp. expected initial planning to take about a year and development of hardware about another three years, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/1/63) 741-603 0—64-----12 April30: dod announced U.S. would deploy icbm’s at rate of one a day during rest of 1963. Announcement came as 100th Minuteman site was turned over to sac at Malmstrom afb, Mont, (dod Release 612-63)
nasa Flight Research Center announced refinement of tracking data showed Joseph A. Walker reached record altitude of 354,200 ft. in his X-15 flight of Aug. 22, 3,200 ft. higher than preliminary figure previously announced, (nasa Release 63-219)
Editorial in New York Times (Western Edition), inserted in Congressional Record by Senator William Proxmire (R.-Wis.), said: “. . . Energetic research and development efforts in space are vital, as a report just issued by the President makes clear, but intensive work (and expenditures) in the vast expanse of space studies is far different from—and far more important than—a mere race with the Russians. Whether the $20 billion (or $40 billion) race to the moon is justified on scientific, political, or military grounds, we do not think the matter has been sufficiently explained or sufficiently debated. We hope it will be in the present Congress.” (CR, 2/11/63,1989)
X-15 No. 1 was flown by nasa pilot Joseph Walker to 3,911 mph (mach 5.51) and 111,800 ft. at Edwards afb, Calif. During the flight a new measuring instrument, the traversing probe, popped in and out of the wing, measuring the whole profile of boundary layer over surface of the X-15. Surface temperature rose to 1,000° during the flight, the 86th for the X-15. (upi, Chic. Tnb., 6/26/63; nasa Hq.)
Maj. Robert S. Sowers (usaf), Capt. Robert MacDonald (usaf), and Capt. John T. Walton (usaf) named by General Curtis E. LeMay (usaf) as recipients of 1962 MacKay Trophy “for the most meritorious flight of the year.” The fliers established new transcontinental speed records on March 5, 1962, in B-58 Hustler, (dod Release 724^63)
President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Tex. Within two hours of the President’s death, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson had taken the oath as the 36th President of the U.S., aboard Air Force No. 1, the Presidential jet aircraft. (NYT, 11/24/63, El)
John L. Sloop, Director of nasa Propulsion and Power Generation in Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Advanced Research and Technology: “Propulsion is the key to space exploration and our push to the moon in this decade will depend completely on chemical propulsion. We see a large and continuing role for chemical propulsion in the next decade. The advent of nuclear and electrical propulsion will greatly increase our capability and enable us to use each type in the application best suited to its characteristics. We see much larger chemical propulsion systems than we have today. Some of these may use air augmentation and will be capable of ferrying large payloads economically from earth to manned satellites and between distant points on the earth. We see chemical propulsion packages carried dormant for months on long space missions but ready at the touch of a button or a signal from earth to perform their task. We see chemical propulsion systems for landing and take-off from the moon, Mars, and Venus where compact systems of high thrust per pound of weight are needed. Some may be carried as extra stored energy sources for emergency use . . . .” (Testimony)
nasa testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Appropriations on Aug. 19,1963, indicated that at that time nasa officials saw little prospect for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration, William Hines, of the Washington Evening Star, quoted from testimony released today. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator and chief U.S. space negotiator, said: “In my discussions with Blagonravov, the question of cooperation in manned space flights was mentioned in the early part, but was pretty well dropped as something that was not practical . . .” because among other reasons, of “the very high degree of classification the Russians attached to their space program. . . .” Summing up, Dr. Dryden said: “I do not foresee in the near future any prospects that the Russians, any more than ourselves, will see a clear way to co-operate in a manned lunar landing.” nasa Administrator James E. Webb agreed: “Up to now, there has been no evidence whatever that we will gain anything significant from it.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.) announced renaming of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy “will not be official unless it is acted on by the Florida Legislature.” Gurney quoted Arthur Baker, Chairman of Board of Geographic Names, as saying name change will apply only to federal maps and documents, is not compulsory for the people of Florida. (AP, Kansas City Times, 12/13/63)
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) reported that Soviet cosmonauts are undergoing intensive training for “more complicated tasks.” Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, promoted to full colonel, is directingnew program of training the other veteran space flyers. ( upi, Wash. Post, 12/9/63)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, compared U.S. and U.S.S.R. space achievements in General'Electric Forum: “1. U.S. has put about 4 times as many payloads into earth orbit (approximately 130). “2. U.S.S.R. has put substantially more weight into earth orbit with its smaller number of payloads. “3. U.S. space applications in weather, communications, and navigation have been impressive. U.S.S.R. has potential in these fields but not accomplishments. “4. Both nations have obtained remarkable amounts of scientific data, with no measurable advantage to either country. “5. U.S.S.R. has operational more powerful rockets than U.S., while the U.S. is developing more powerful ones than any known to be in U.S.S.R. “6. U.S.S.R. is ahead in manned space flight. “7. Since the race began, ratio of successes to failures has been comparable. In 1962, U.S. had one payload launching failure for each five successes.” {GE Forum, 7-9/63,23) During September: nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Diyden said in General Electric Forum interview: “. . . There is no question that setting definite technical tasks before people does motivate them. For instance, war efforts generally provide goals and accelerate progress—jet propulsion, electronics, miniaturization, and other technological advances. Along the same line, one of the major byproducts of space research has been a revitalization of education, getting people interested in scientific knowledge again—and particularly important, getting young people interested in science and technology.” {GE Forum, 7-9/63,20)
Dr. John V. Harrington of mit Lincoln Laboratory was selected to direct new mit space research center, to be completed in 1965. Dr. Harrington was also named professor in departments of electrical engineering and aeronautics and astronautics. (Boston Eve. Globe, 4/23/63)
John Hawkinson, president of Television Shares Management Corp., said in St. Louis that electronics and aerospace industries provided more favorable investment prospects than any segment of U.S. business, (upi, Chic. Trib., 2/20/63)
Senator J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) said in Tufts Univ. William L. Clayton Lecture that Project Apollo should be abandoned and money thus saved spent on down-to-earth causes such as education: “This allocation of priorities is a recipe for disaster, an unrecognized and powerful endorsement of the wrong side of the race between education and catastrophe (Boston Globe, 5/3/63,18)	'
At annual dinner in New York, American Meteorological Society presented posthumously the Carl-Gustaf Rossby Award for Extraordinary Scientific Achievement to the late Dr. Harry Wex-ler, who had been head of U.S. Weather Bureau’s Office of Research ; Dr. Wexler was cited “for his contributions to knowledge of the atmospheric heat balance and dynamic anticyclogenesis, for his interdisciplinary studies in meteorology, oceanography, and glaciology, and for his outstanding leadership in international programs in the atmospheric sciences.” Other awards: Charles Franklin Brooks Award for Outstanding Service to the Society, presented to Dr. David M. Ludlum “for his continuing effort, on behalf of the Society, to popularize meteorology and to stimulate the interest of young people in the field, for establishing Weather-wise, and for his effective participation in Society affairs over many years”; Cleveland Abbe Award for Distinguished Service to Atmospheric Sciences by an Individual presented to Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center, Dallas, Tex., for “his scientific work on the upper atmosphere and for the stimulation he provided to the field of meteorology by his work as Chairman of the Committee on Meteorology of the National Academy of Sciences”; the Meisinger Award, presented to Prof. Edward N. Lorenz of mit “for his introduction of concepts leading to a better understanding of the energetics of the general circulation, and for his recent work on low order systems indicating aperiodic vacillations from one regime of motion to another”; Award for Outstanding Services to Meteorology by a Corporation, presented to rca Astro-Electronics Div., “for contributions to meteorology through its role in producing the successful Tiros meteorological satellites”; ams Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Advance of Applied Meteorology, presented to Herbert C. S. Thom, Chief Climatologist, U.S. Weather Bureau, “for a quarter century of contributions to applied meteorology, including furnished climatological estimates to the armed forces during World War II, major contributions to the problems of statistical analysis of climatological data, development of wind design data, and development of a much improved formula for calculating annual and seasonal energy use for domestic heating”; Award for Outstanding Achievement in Bioclimatology, presented to Prof. Konrad J. K. Buettner, Dept, of Atmospheric Sciences, Univ. of Washington, “for his distinguished and continuing studies on the influence of the atmospheric environment on man.” (ams Release)
msc is experiencing an. increasing manpower shortage as it moves into high gear on Project Apollo, John Finney of the New York Times reported. Particularly scarce are top-flight engineers needed to oversee large systems and subsystems, msc hopes that its manpower ceiling will be raised this year from the present 3,500 to around 5,500. (Finney, NYT, 10/6/63, 71)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received 1962 Gold Medal of French Association Pour l’Etude et la Recherche Astronautique. Colonel Glenn accepted the award “on behalf of myself and the thousands of persons here and abroad who have made these space flights possible.” {Av. Wk., 8/12/63,109)
Rescheduling of first manned Apollo flight—a three-man earthorbiting flight—from early 1965 to late 1965 or early 1966 reported by John W. Finney of New York Times. Unnamed nasa official attributed 9- to 11-month delay to technological difficulties inevitable in such a complex undertaking. (Finney, NYT. 9/1/63,1,27)
New nasa-dod Contractor Performance Rating System would be “just like pulling a Dun and Bradstreet report on a contractor’s performance,” nasa Director of Procurement and Supply, Ernest Brackett, said in Missiles and Rockets. System would provide central file of past contractor performance evaluations which dod and nasa would be required to consult before awarding future contracts. It would apply only to engineering and systems research and development contractors—not to small study contracts. Bracket disclosed the plan was first considered by committee in office of John Rubel, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering. “We joined the effort later,” he said. (M&R, 2/11/63,14)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) refuted charges of waste and inefficiency in the space program, reminded members of a time three years before when similar statements were being made about the Mercury program. As evidence, he read into the record an article by James Baar in Missiles and Rockets of Aug. 15, 1960, entitled “Is Mercury Program Headed for Disaster F”: “nasa’s Mercury manned satellite program appears to be plummeting the United States toward a new humiliating disaster in the East-West space race. “This is the stark conclusion that looms in the minds of a growing number of eminent rocket scientists and engineers as the Mercury program continues to slip backward.” {OR, 10/21/63, A6547-48)
Aviation executives criticized Government plans for the supersonic transport in testimony before the Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation. C. R. Smith, president of American Airlines, objected to the provision that industry pay one quarter of the development costs, wanted Government to pay all the costs and defer decision on how to recapture some of the costs until after the prototype had flown. John Stack, vice president and director of engineering of Republic Aviation Corp. and former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, complained that competition with the British-French Concorde would force U.S. industry to set up management and assembly lines prematurely. Stack urged that a manufacturer be chosen to begin work on a prototype next spring and that the one-year-long second design phase be eliminated. He also supported the steel-and-titanium mach 3 concept as more efficient than an aluminum mach 2 + aircraft presently favored by faa. (Clark, NYT, 10/23/63, 9)
The concensus of a number of visual experts consulted by nasa is that Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper did in fact see houses, roads, and vehicles from his orbiting faith 7 capsule. Dr. John A. O’Keefe of gsfc dismissed the theory that the atmosphere had acted as a magnifier of the objects. Maximum atmospheric magnification would be 1.00002, or a rise of 8.5 ft. Normal human visual acuity is normally considered to be one minute of arc, but under good combinations of illumination and contrast objects of minute of arc or even smaller can be seen. From 100 miles altitude, this would work out at 30 ft. on the ground. Line or ribbon objects can be seen much more easily, down to one-sixth or less the diameter of circular objects. (M&R, 10/14/63, 14)
Details of plan for $250,000,000 research center near Pittsburgh disclosed by Dr. Edward Litchfield, Univ. of Pittsburgh chancellor and Oakland Corp. board chairman. Oakland Corp. was specially formed to undertake development of center, which would include nuclear reactor and instrumentation complex, computer center, and data bank, in addition to theaters, school, restaurant, and Carnegie Museum. {NYT, 6/23/63, 39)
Univ. of Pittsburgh’s Chancellor Edward H. Litchfield announced plans for $30-million space research and coordination center. Center would be used for study in natural and social sciences and engineering and health areas connected with aerospace activities. (upi, Wash. Post, 1/12/63,1)
Mining of water on the moon could provide rocket fuel for interplanetary spacecraft, thus eliminating need for more advanced rockets, John W. Salisbury of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories said. Converting water to its components oxygen and hydrogen would provide the two fuel elements of Saturn V’s upper stage. Salisbury said lunar water would be present either as subsurface ice or as* one-eighth of silicate rock formations known as olivine, usaf was conducting studies to determine most efficient way of mining water thus trapped in the moon, (nytns, Wash. Post, 4/7/63, A7)
Concluding its two-week meeting at Berkeley, Calif., International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics elected as president Joseph Kaplan, physicist of ucj,a, to succeed Vladimir V. Beloussov, Soviet seismologist. During the meeting, the 3,000 delegates laid plans for Upper Mantle Project to explore rock layer of the earth and for International Hydrological Decade (1965-1975) to study earth’s water resources and for projects during International Quiet Sun Year. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/2/63) During August:	Mockup model of Gemini two-man spacecraft shipped from McDonnell Aircraft Corp. to nasa Launch Operations Center, Cape Canaveral, for tests of ground support equipment at the launch complex. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/22/63)
Boyden Observatory near Bloemfontein, South Africa, had confirmed location of stncom i communications satellite, Harvard Univ. Observatory Director Donald H. Menzel announced. stncom i was tumbling end over end in its orbital path about 19,000 n. mi. high. Boyden’s unconfirmed photographs of the satellite, missing since Feb. 14, were reported Feb. 28, and nasa requested that the findings be confirmed by further observation. “Since then it has been cloudy over the Boyden Observatory until last night, when it cleared and we obtained two good plates showing images in the expected position. With this final confirmation, we have no doubt whatever of the location of the satellite. It behaved approximately as expected.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/3/63) March, 3: Whilden P. Breen, Jr., 35-year-old research assistant, spent his 106th consecutive day living in specially constructed isolation chamber in Univ. of Maryland’s Space Laboratory building, in NASA-sponsored experiment to “obtain basic information on how man perform under certain conditions of stress, and methods to deal with such problems so that astronauts of the future [confined for prolonged periods within interplanetary spacecraft, orbiting space stations, or extraterrestrial bases] will be able to perform their duties at highest efficiency.” With no direct view of outside world nor of any other person, volunteer Breen was under constant surveillance by experimenters outside and did communicate with them by teletype and voice. Subject’s activities were programed automatically, with panel of illuminated pushbuttons identifying each activity for him. Experimenters said he had “responded well in the performance of his tasks . . . [and had] displayed heightened capability and richness in those creative activities which are available to him (e.g., writing and painting). He appears to be in good physical and mental condition and is eager to continue the study.” (nasa Release 63-45; nasa Fact Sheet)
nasa announced at msc the selection of 14 astronauts for the Gemini and Apollo projects, bringing the total number of NASA astronauts to 30. New astronauts were: Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt. William A. Anders, Capt. Charles A. Bassett II, Capt. Michael Collins, Capt. Donn F. Eisele, Capt. Theodore C. Freeman, and Capt. David R. Scott, all usaf; Lt. Alan L. Bean, Lt. Eugene A. Ceman, Lt. Roger B. Chaffee, Lt. Cdr. Richard F. Gordon, Jr., all usn; Capt. Clifton C. Williams, Jr., usmc ; and R. Walter Cunningham and Russell L. Schweickart, civilians. nasa announced another contingent of astronauts would be named in the fall of 1965. (NYT, 10/19/63,9)
U.S.S.R. celebrated the 46th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution with a Moscow parade that featured the first public display of its antimissile missile. Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, Chief of the Soviet General Staff, hailed the weapon on a radio broadcast as capable of destroying “the enemy in the air.” At a reception Premier Khrushchev said: “Before the Revolution Russia was a beggar. Now she has become the Soviet Union and is a king in the land. From the lowest she has become the second country in the world, and in a maximum of seven years we will be first.” (Tanner, NYT, 11/8/63,1)
Reacting to President Johnson’s Thanksgiving Day message announcing he had “acted ... to change the name of Cape Canaveral . . . [to] Cape Kennedy,” the City Council of Cape Canaveral and the Cocoa Chamber of Commerce adopted resolutions opposing changing the name of Cape Canaveral. Florida’s Governor Farris Bryant defended President Johnson’s decision, in a Tallahassee press conference: “. . . the people of Florida, in the year 2063, will look back and understand what President Johnson has done and will approve.” Arthur A. Baker, chairman of the Domestic Names Committee of the U.S. Board of Geographic Names, said he regarded the name change as an accomplished fact. Edward P. Cliff, chairman of the Board, also said he regarded the change as fact. Official name changing awaited action by the Board, which was scheduled to meet next Jan. 21. (AP, Was A Post, 12/6/63; un, N.Y. Herald Trib., 12/6/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/5/63)
Memorandum titled “Space Race with U.S.S.R.” from Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, was made public. Dr. Welsh said U.S. space program was in the building stage this year and few space spectaculars could be expected in 1963; U.S.S.R. may attempt the following in 1963: manned orbital mission of eight days, manned orbital rendezvous mission, close-up photographs of planet Mars (with mars i probe), and several unmanned lunar soft-landing probes. Memorandum had been written before launching of Soviet probe lunik, iv, believed by many scientists to have been an unsuccessful attempt to soft-land on the moon. (Text; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.), speaking on the Senate floor with regard to various aid-to-education bills before the Senate, asserted a connection between excellence of education and loss of jobs to automation. As a case in point he inserted in the Congressional Record two New York Times articles on nasa’s findings of careless or inadequate workmanship in Project Mercury. “In both articles,” the Senator said, “the point is made that workmen on the projects do not have the necessary technical skill to complete them, in many instances, without the defects which resulted not only in serious failures of the end product but also in running up a substantial expense to the Government.” (CR, 10/7/63, 17847)
Proposal by nbc to television industry to televise Astronaut Gordon Cooper’s Mercury flight MA-9 in color would not be adopted, Executive Vice President of nbc News William R. MeAndrew acknowledged. Proposal had been rejected, science reporter William Hines said, in February by officials of abc and cbs networks, but nasa had been quietly trying to persuade them to accept the proposal. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
In news interview, John W. Locke, aerospace engineer for Booz, Allen Applied Research, Inc., reported on conclusion of six-month study of feasibility of launching rockets from aircraft, study conducted for usaf Special Weapons Center with cooperation of usaf Office of Aerospace Research. Suggesting that cost of U.S. space launchings could be reduced 40 per cent by employing aircraft instead of launching pads, Locke said: “Results from the study indicate the B-58 can be used as the prime launch vehicle. A four-stage rocket like the small version of the Scout missile, weighing 14,000 pounds, will provide the desired performance with minimum development effort. “The air launching of even larger space vehicles is both feasible and acceptable and may be done economically.” (Copley News Service, N.O. Times-Picaywne, 9/8/63)
nasa announced Paul Haney, Public Affairs Officer for nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, would replace Lt. Col. John A. Powers, msc Public Affairs Officer, effective Sept. 1. Colonel Powers would become special assistant to Dr. Gilruth. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/31/63; nasa Release 63-167)
Study by Comptroller General Joseph Campbell reported that lack of “timely guidance” by dod was largely responsible for failure of nuclear-powered aircraft project. Conceived in 1946 and declared technically feasible in 1951, project was canceled by President Kennedy in 1961 after dod and aec had spent more than $1 billion on the project, which did not reach the prototype stage. gao’s report said that dod “agrees that the program suffered considerably from lack of prompt decisions and from frequent changes in emphasis and goals.” (Wash. Post, 3/9/63; Av. Wk., 3/18/63, 25)
At nasa Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony, held at Smithsonian Institution, 23 individuals were singled out for outstanding contributions to the civilian space program. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated that U.S. space policy was clear: “With or without cooperation from any other country, we are going to the moon, and we are going to make that trip as soon as we can. . . . We would like to do this through international cooperation. Leaders of both parties have sought cooperation under two administrations. The moon represents our major space goal for this decade, and if cooperation is possible we are willing to share this goal as well as others.” nasa Administrator James E. Webb summarized the five years of space achievements and looked ahead: “From the first two United States satellites, Explorer I and Vanguard I, launched early in 1958, we learned that the earth was slightly pear-shaped rather than being the sphere it had been thought to be. We also learned that the earth was surrounded by a zone of radiation, called the Van Allen Belt after its discoverer Dr. James Van Allen. “In addition to these first satellites of scientific significance, we have orbited highly successful weather and communication satellites, probed the area of Venus, put men into orbit and brought them safely back to earth, and sent thousands of sounding rockets into space to study the earth’s environment. From these and other experiments installed in more than 100 satellites and deep space probes, we have succeeded in vastly expanding knowledge and understanding of our own planet earth and of the solar system of which it is a part .... “Looking ahead through the remainder of this decade, we have set our sights on a truly global weather satellite system, advanced communications and navigation satellites, space observatories for astronomical and solar studies, and a manned expedition to explore the moon . . . .” Awards were presented by Mr. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, and Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Eight cash awards totaling $12,200 were divided among 14 nasa employees for inventions and scientific and technical contributions: Robert L. Trimpi, ialrc, $3,000; Charles H. McLellan, lorc, $2,000; James H. Schrader, Lane, $1,500; Jesse M. Madey and Xopher W. Moyer, gsfc, $1,500 shared; James B. Newman, frc, $1,200; Hershel M. Nance, msfc, $1,000; Lee B. Malone, Charles E. David, and Harold R. Lowery, msfc, $1,000 shared; and Frank L. Clark, Charles B. Johnson, Wayne D. Erickson, and Roger I. Buchanan, iaRC, $1,000 shared. The nasa Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement went to Dr. Dean R. Chapman, arc, for his research on tektites; to Dr. Ernst D. Geissler, msfc, for contributions to Mercury-Redstone, Saturn, and Nova boosters; and to Dr. John C. Houbolt, formerly of LaRC, for work on lunar orbit rendezvous. The nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership was presented to Charles J. Donlan, nanc; and Dr. Walter TTaenssensann and Dr. William A. Mrazek, msfc. The new nasa Public Service Award, given to persons not employed by the Government, was presented to Jack N. James and Robert J. Parks, jfl, and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Cape Canaveral, (nasa Releases 63^-217,215; Wash. Post, 10/2/63; Webb, Text; Program, Honor Awards Ceremony) October 1: nasa Administrator James E. Webb appeared on Voice of America, “Press Conference usa.” Speaking pf President Kennedy’s proposal for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar program, Mr. Webb said: “. . . after the ratification of the test ban and one day after Mr. Gromyko proposed that we agree not to put into orbit multi-megaton weapons, the President followed with a suggestion that had five elements. Most people have centered on only one of them.” The five elements were (1) measures against war by accident or miscalculation; (2) measures against surprise attack; (3) measures to curb the nuclear arms race; (4) exchange of information and persons; (5) U.S. consent to Gromyko’s proposal to negotiate an agreement not to orbit large nuclear weapons. “And then he added as a sixth item, we should also explore, now mark you, he said explore, possibilities for cooperation in manned space flight and then set a clear indication that he was not thinking of a limited exploration, that rather he was thinking of a broad exploration . . ., that we could even go step by step to the planning of a joint expedition.” Speaking of the preparations for the President’s U.N. speech, Mr. Webb said: “. . . I myself personally attended a meeting in the White House called by Mr. Arthur Schlesinger, perhaps a month ago, to consider things that the President might want to discuss at the United Nations. And I did myself on the day before Mr. Gromyko’s speech have a long talk with the President, maybe 35 or 40 minutes, about the whole space program in which we discussed this. And I think I should say that he had his office phone me in St. Louis on Thursday afternoon after Mr. Gromyko made his speech to read me the language that he then decided he would use, because it seemed such a natural follow-on to Mr. Gromyko’s proposal.” (Text)
Sir Charles (C.P.) Snow, British scientist and author, said in New York interview that pace of U.S. lunar program was “probably a mistake,” an “all-out” effort in race with U.S.S.R. Most dramatic scientific achievements of next decade, he said, would be in molecular biology. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/21/63,11) Jv/ne 20-21; In hearings conducted by House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby outlined details of proposed Government-industry project to develop supersonic transport, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpts. 11/93 and 11/94) June 21: Addressing Conference of National Organizations in Atlantic City, nasa Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Dr. Joseph F. Shea said that “now that the costs are rising as predicted, the country is reappraising the commitment [to land men on the moon in this decade]. Such discussions are entirely proper. Indeed, the resolve with which we carry out our national activities is frequently strengthened [by the] tempering in the heat of debate . . . .” (Text)
nasa announced it would negotiate extension to existing contract with Control Data Corp. for procurement of computers and associated equipment for Apollo spacecraft Pre-Flight Acceptance Checkout Equipment (pace) stations. Cost of the equipment for the nine stations was expected to exceed $25 million. General Electric Co. would receive the equipment as government-furnished equipment, would deliver first two pace systems to North American Aviation, Inc., for checkout of Apollo command and service modules. Four systems would be delivered to John F. Kennedy Space Center, two to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., and one to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, (nasa Release 63-286) ....	.
J. A. MacTaggart, managing director of Niagara Falls, Ontario, wax museum, said wax image of Astronaut John Glenn was not on display because of “astronomical” $3,000 it would cost to purchase space suit from American manufacturer. Wax figure of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was on display, Soviet Government having supplied copy of his space suit after request through British Aeronautical Board. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63)
Weather conditions forced postponement of nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker’s 68-mi. altitude flight in X-15. Flight was made Aug. 22. (upi, ATT7,8/7/63)
ComSatCorp announced that John A. Johnson, nasa General Counsel since nasa was formed in 1958, would become its Director of International Arrangements, nasa in turn announced that Mr. Johnson would be succeeded as General Counsel by Walter D. Sohier, Deputy General Counsel. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/63; ComSatCorp Release; nasa Release 63-259)
In Washington ceremony, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., tjsmc) presented U.S. flag he carried during orbital space flight in friendship 7 to Marine Corps Assistant Commandant Lt. Gen. Charles H. Hayes. Flag would be placed in Marine Corps Museum. (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/28/63, 8)
Marshal Sergei S. Biryusov, Soviet Commander of the Strategic Rocket Force, said in article published for Soviet Armed Forces Day: “The problem of destruction of hostile rockets in flight was successfully solved in the Soviet Union .... It has now [also] become possible at a command from earth to launch rockets from satellites at any desirable time and at any point of the satellite’s trajectory.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/63, A3; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A16) February 22:	In ceremony on the 45th anniversary of the Soviet Armed Forces, Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky said: “I maintain emphatically that in retaliation to the 344 missiles with which Mr. McNamara is threatening us, we shall deal a simultaneous blow of several times more missiles and such a tremendous nuclear yield that it will wipe off the earth all targets, industrial and administrative-political centers of the United States, will destroy completely the countries which have made available their territories for American war bases . . . .” Marshal Malinovsky said that Soviet rocket crews are required to show 95 per cent proficiency and that there are no Soviet planes equipped to drop bombs, only those equipped to fire rockets. Premier Khrushchev attended the Kremlin ceremony wearing the uniform of a lieutenant general. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/63, 1)
Sen. Mike Mansfield (D.-Mont.) paid tribute to X-15 pilot Joseph A. Walker and his record flight of July 19, and said that “there can be no question that Mr. Walker and all the members of the X-15 team are pioneers of the space age. The solid contributions of the X-15 program have been many and valuable. They include information on aerodynamic heating, the behavior of the boundary layer, the effect of noise levels on aircraft structures, measurement of friction drag on aircraft skin, new control systems, new piloting techniques, new landing gear designs and new ways of measuring landing gear loads, better instrument displays, and many other improvements to ‘performance, efficiency, or safety of air and space vehicles.’ In addition, during the current series of tests, the X-15 is being used to carry scientific experiments into space. One of these experiments will use a camera which may give us the first meaningful photographs of stars taken from outside the earth’s atmosphere. Speed and altitude records may be the incidental contributions of the remarkable X-15 program. More significant in the long run is the information and experience it has provided and continues to provide about this strange new sea of space upon which man has embarked . . . .” (CA, 7/22/63,12354)
Edward Z. Gray was appointed Director of Advanced Studies, Office of Manned Space Flight, nasa Kq., suceeedmgDr. WTilliam A. Lee, who was joining the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, msc. Mr. Gray had been with Boeing Aircraft Co. for 24 years, most recently as Development Program Manager of Advanced Space Systems, Aero-Space Div. (nasa Release 63-228)
A number of unofficial reports from Moscow have identified two key figures in the Soviet space program, according to Theodore Shabad, the New York Times Moscow correspondent. One of the men was Valentin P. Glushko, known as a rocket propulsion expert who worked with Friedrich Zander in the first Soviet research in liquid fuel rockets in the early 1930’s. The other was Sergei P. Korolov, a mechanical engineer long associated with mechanics and structural problems of flight. Both are full academicians in the Soviet Academy of Sciences. (Shabad, NYT, 11/12/63, 2)
Edward M. Shafer, nasa Attorney-Adviser since September 1959, was appointed nasa Assistant General Counsel. (nasa Announcement 63-275)
Donald L. Nored, Lewis engineer, described nasa contract with Stanford Research Institute to study one of the most complex problems in high-energy rocketry—simple ignition. Preliminary results offer promise that a tiny quantity of ozone difluoride mixed with liquid oxygen will cause the lox to ignite immediately on contacting liquid hydrogen, (lrc Release 63-15; Lewis Chronology, 3)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., officially opened Chicago and Midwest Space Month with his televised dinner address in the Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago. Dinner marked the opening of “America in Space” exhibit in the museum, largest space display ever made available by nasa in the midwest. Space Month activities would be climaxed by third national conference on the peaceful uses of space in Chicago, May 1-9. {Chicago Trib., 4/9/63)
Establishment of Div. of Space Sciences and Applied Physics in Catholic University’s School of Engineering and Architecture was announced by Rt. Rev. William J. McDonald, Rector of the Univ. {Wash. Post, 5/11/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced assignment of areas of specialization for nasa astronauts. Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, flight MA-9 pilot, and Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., flight MA-9 back-up pilot, would be responsible for pilot phases of Project Mercuiy; Maj. Virgil I. Grissom’s area of specialization would be Project Gemini; Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., would concentrate on Project Apollo; LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter’s duties would cover lunar excursion training; Cdr. Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would be responsible for Gemini and Apollo operations and training. As Coordinator for Astronaut Activities for msc, Maj. Donald K. Slayton would maintain overall supervision of astronaut duties. Specialty areas of the 9 new flight-crew personnel: trainers and simulators, Neil A. Armstrong; boosters, Maj. Frank Borman; cockpit layout and systems integration, Lt. Charles Conrad, Jr.; recovery systems, LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr.; guidance and navigation, Capt. James A. McDivitt; electrical, sequential, and mission planning, Elliott M. See, Jr.; communications, instrumentation, and range integration, Capt. Thomas E. Stafford; flight control systems, Edward H. White II; environmental control systems, personal and survival equipment, LCdr. John W. Young, (msc Release 63-11; M&R, 2/4/63, 36)
Speaking on Cuban television from Havana, Soviet Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova said that she was a member of the team of Russian cosmonauts chosen to make the trip to the moon and that Yuri Gagarin headed the team. She said she would propose that a Cuban woman be included on the team. The Russian plan for a moon flight was described by Miss Tereshkova: the manned capsule would be launched into earth orbit, where it would rendezvous with an unmanned tanker spaceship; then another rocket would be launched from earth and tow the manned-vehicle-tanker combination to the moon. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/63)
Donald K. Slayton was sworn into his Civil Service appointment as Assistant Director for Flight Crew operations, msc. His resignation from the usaf had become effective the previous day. (msc Release 63-242)
With President Kennedy^ return to Washington from Europe, nasa communications satellite relay i marked end of its busiest programing period, relay was “booked solid” during past weeks to cover President’s trip, death of Pope John XXIII, and election of Pope Paul VI. During its six months of operation, relay i had been used for 85 public communications demonstrations, including transmission of television, voice, radio-photo, and teletype, (nasa Release 63-144)
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker attained record altitude of 347,800 ft. (65.9 mi.) and speed of 3,710 mph (mach 5.50). Flight was planned as 315,000-ft. altitude build-up for pilot Walker in preparation for later 350,000-ft. attempt, but X-15’s engine burned 85 sec. instead of planned 83 sec. Nitrogen-filled balloon was to have ejected from X-15’s tail during ascent to obtain altitude density measurements, but electrical ejection signal did not function properly. This was 90th flight of X-15. (frc Release 25-63; frc X-15 Flight Log; nasa Hq. X-15 Proj. Off.; nasa Release 63-160)
New members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics of the 88th Congress: Democrats—Richard J. Patten (N.J.), Richard Fulton (Tenn.), Don Fuqua (Fla.), Neil Staebler (Mich.), and Carl Albert (Majority Leader-Okla.); Republicans—Donald Rumsfeld (III.), James D. Weaver (Pa.), Edward J. Gurney (Fla.), and John W. Wydler (N.Y.). (nasa AC; AP, Wash. Post, 1/25/63)	^
The space program would not change greatly under the new President, Lyndon B. Johnson, William Hines of the Washington Sunday Star predicted: “The reasons are twofold and simple. “First, Mr. Johnson is fully as enthusiastic about the space program as was Mr. Kennedy, if not more so. Second, the new President has been in on the space program from its start, and tVl W/M1 nrb + n	O A	*vi/\*.4V»n n-f *D wnr.1,/1 n«\ 4	U’	f nnimn w»An Lxiiuugu uiio	wt	mt/xiiiio vi x acoiuciii	ikcmicuV	o lcuuic nao	uxi • Space.’ ” Mr. Johnson was head of the Senate Preparedness subcommittee at the time the U.S.S.R. launched sputnik i, Hines pointed out. As Senate Majority Leader he caused the inquiry into U.S. space posture and sparked the special Senate committee that later became the standing Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “More than any other one man, President Johnson is personally responsible for the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and the sprawling agency which it created .... “With the advent of the Kennedy administration, the space program immediately grew in importance, largely through Mr. Johnson’s urging. The Space Act was amended to make the Vice President head of the [Space] council .... “Under then Vice President Johnson, the council took on real meaning. . . . “The Johnson-organized council staff prepared the studies which the Vice President used to persuade President Kennedy in the spring of 1961 that a manned lunar landing should be undertaken before the decade is out.’” (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/24/63)
In column discussing hostility of some leading U.S. scientists to the “rotarian character” of the space program, Joseph Kraft pointed out the inherent stimulation of science: “To be sure there is something seedy about using the space program as a cover for serious scientific inquiry. Still the atmosphere of the affluent society offers only rare openings to direct public energies and resources to purposes that are not vain. For the most eminent scientists to overlook the powerful grip of space on the public imagination would be to forego an almost unique opportunity for the advancement of science. Which of them would have forgiven Galileo had he turned his back on the heavens because a donor whose heart was impure held out the telescope?” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/10/63, A9)
Speaking at “ground making” ceremony for Titan III launch facilities, Cape Canaveral, Col. Joseph S. Bleymaier (afsc Titan III program manager) disclosed that 17 development tests were planned for Titan III launch vehicle, beginning autumn of 1964. Ceremony took place on dredge Pittsburgh anchored in Banana River, west of Cape Canaveral; dredge would move land from nearby swamps to form island in river for Titan III. (AP, Balt. Sun, 2/16/63)	....
fcc Chairman E. William Henry predicted in address to American Bar Association’s Committee on Communications, meeting in Chicago, that a single communications satellite eventually may equal carrying capacity of all telephone cable circuits between U.S. and rest of the world. Last year 5 million telephone calls were made from U.S. to 176 countries. Existing facilities probably will be used to capacity by 1965, he said, and $500-million international communications system will be in operation by 1970. New transistorized cable, with capacity of almost six times present capacity, will be available. (Wolters, Chic. Trib., 8/15/63) August 15: stncom ii communications satellite was successfully maneuvered into synchronous position 55° west longitude, over Brazil and South Atlantic Ocean. The satellite was slowed from westward drift speed of 1.2° per day to nearly zero drift by firing of onboard nitrogen jets. Previous firings of hydrogen peroxide jets occurred Aug. 11, when syncom ii was slowed from 7° drift per day to 2.7° drift per day, and Aug. 12. when satellite was reduced to 1.2° drift. Firings were directed by engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and actual command was executed from ground station at Lakehurst, N.J. stncom n was now stationed about 22,300-mi. altitude and traveling at speed of about 6,800 mph, matching earth’s rotation speed of 1,040 mph at equator to keep it on station. It was hovering in figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator, nasa Administrator James E. Webb called completion of the positioning maneuvers the culmination of “one of the outstanding feats in the history of space flight.” (nasa “stncom n Fact Sheet”; nasa Release 63-185)
Mrs. Sara Bartholomae disclosed plans for $1 million Mercury Space Capsule Chapel near Los Angeles in tribute to Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/8/63)
In realignment of nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, two new deputy directors were appointed: Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems, and George M. Low, Deputy Director for omsf Programs. All major omsf directorates had previously reported directly to D. Brainerd Holmes, Director, omsf. In realigned structure, reporting to Dr. Shea would be Director of Systems Studies, Dr. William A. Lee; Director of Systems Enginering, John A. Gautrand; and Director of Integration and Checkout, James E. Sloan. Reporting to Low would be Director of Launch Vehicles, Milton Rosen; Director of Space Medicine, Dr. Charles Roadman; and Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, presently vacant. Director of Administration, William E. Lilly, would provide administrative support in both major areas, (nasa Release 63-32)
Dr. William M. Helvey, Chief of Space Environment and Life Sciences Laboratory, Republic Aviation Corp., told American Medical Association in Los Angeles that test volunteers exposed to pure oxygen in altitude chamber during four two-week periods had developed anemia but remained otherwise healthy. ^Science Service, Wash. Daily News, 5/1/63)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director, nasa Lewis Research Center, expressed appreciation to John W. Macy, Jr., Chairman of the U.S. Civil Service Commission, for commission’s contributions to the Lewis recruiting program. During Fiscal Years 1962 and 1963, Lewis hired 1,280 engineers and scientists from all over the U.S. (lrc Release 63-9; Lewis Chronology, 2)
Arthur S. Flemming Awards for outstanding contributions to Federal Government were presented to five administrators and five scientists at D.C. Junior Chamber of Commerce luncheon. Among the scientists were nasa’s George M. Low, Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of Manned Space Flight, and Edgar M. Cortright, Jr., Deputy Director of Office of Space Sciences. Other three scientists were Joseph F. Saunders, head of nrl Medicine and Dentistry Branch; Norman J. Doctor, physicist at Army Diamond Ordnance Laboratories; and Charles M. Herzfeld, director of dod Ballistic Missile Defense. (Wa,sh. Post, 2/11/63, A8)
usaf Project Stargazer balloon flight from Alamogordo, N.M., canceled because of high surface winds. Balloon was equipped with small aluminum gondola for pilot, Capt. Joseph Kittinger, Jr. (usaf), and civilian astronomer, William C. White, for a 24-hour observation with 12.5-inch gyroscopic telescope above 90 per cent of the earth’s atmosphere, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 3/26/63)
nasa was tentatively planning to extend one-day MA-9 flight of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) from 18 to 22 orbits (27 to 34 hours), John Finney of New York Times reported. Scheduled for April 1963, MA-9 would be last flight in Project Mercury. (NYT Co., Atlanta Constitution, 1/3/63)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) spoke on the space race: “Mr. Speaker, the announcement that the Soviet Union is withdrawing from the race to the moon has produced some disturbing reactions here in the United States. Here we have a breakdown in the Communist system. Here we have an opportunity to exert real leadership and show what a free econ _ . d vA/in 4" t r> /v 4" L n I UU 1 OVtitlllg UlOrO we abandon our efforts to explore the universe. I am perturbed. Why must we do something just because the Soviet Union does it? Why should we refuse to do something just because the Soviet Union refuses to do it?” (OR, 10/29/63, 19384) Addressing the Joint Meeting of Service Clubs, Bozeman, Montana, nasa Administrator James E. "Webb said: “To take a clear lead in rocket power, or even to match the larger rockets the Russians may be building now, we must cariy on with the development of the Saturn V. This giant rocket is needed to do extensive maneuvering in space near the earth and has the power to send the Apollo spacecraft on its journey to the moon and on prolonged flights in earth orbit. “The United States will inevitably need space power of this order even if we had no plans for going to the moon. We do not know now what future military requirements for rocket power may arise.” (Text) Project Gemini was running into serious problems in its onboard power systems, according to John Finney of the New Tork Times. The new fuel cell source for electric power was to have provided power for up to two weeks at only 1/6 to 1/10 the weight of batteries required to produce equal wattage. But fuel cell development has run into problems of leakage, inadequate lifetime, and poor thermal control. While such problems could probably be engineered out by the time fuel cells were needed for Apollo, the Gemini timetable might require batteries to be substituted for the fuel cells. This in turn might cut Gemini missions down to two days, nasa’s new Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller was said to favor beginning development of backup systems in some of the areas of new technology such as fuel cells but to be hampered in this approach by lack of money. (Finney, NYT, 10/30/63, 26)
First award of the recently established Burroughs International Test Pilot Award was made to Joseph T. Tymczyszym, Chief of faa’s West Coast Supersonic Transport Office. The award presented by faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby at the Wings Club in New York was established by United Aircraft Corp. in honor of Richard H. Burroughs, Chance Vought test pilot who was killed when he stayed with his disabled experimental aircraft to guide it away from an inhabited area. Award would be administered by Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., of New York, (faa Release 63-96)
Perth, Australia, was ablaze with Christmas lights far into the night. Perth was celebrating its new tradition as “City of Lights” begun Feb. 20,1962, when its lights were a beacon for Astronaut John H. Glenn’s orbital Mercury space flight. (Lukas, NYT, 12/28/63,_6) _	_	__
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke before the Society of Experimental Test Pilots in Washington: “. . . it occurs to me that perhaps some of our best known astronauts took greater risks, with less thoroughly tested equipment, when they were, flying aircraft in the atmosphere than when they went into space .... I simply want to mention that our astronauts, just as all test pilots, had done many courageous things before the Space Age descended upon us and too few were recognized as heroes for those feats.” (Text)
